THE DISCOVERY OF THE Popish Plot, BEING The several Examinations of TITUS
OATS D. D.

Before the High Court OF PARLIAMENT, The Lord CHIEF JUSTICE, Sir EDMUND-BURY
GODFRY, And several other of His MAJESTY's JUSTICES of the PEACE.

London Printed, 1679.

Titus Oats D. D. his Journal and Affidavit of his Discovery of the
Conspiracy, before Sir Edmund-Bury Godfry, September. the 27th. 1678.
IMprimis, Richard Strange Provincial, John Keines, Bazil Longworth, John
Fenwick, and Mr. Hartcourt, Jesuits, did Write a Treasonable Letter to Father
Sinman an Irish Jesuit at Madrid, in the Kingdom of Spain, in which was
contained their Plotting and Contriving a Rebellion in Scotland, of the
Presbyterians against the Episcopal Government, in order to which, they have
employed one Matthew Wright, William Morgan, and Mr. Ireland, to go and Preach
under the Notion of Presbyterians, and give the disaffected Scots a true
understanding of their sad States and Conditions which they were in, by reason
of Episcopal Tyranny exercised against them; and withal to tell them, now they
had a fair opportunity to Vindicate their Liberty and Religion, and that it
could be done by no other way but the Sword, and that now the King was addicted
to his Pleasure, that he would and could take but little care of that Concern.
In the said Letter it was expressed, they had gotten an Interest in His Royal
Highness, but they deal with him as they think fit, and that they were resolved
by all means to weaken the King of England's Interest, by informing his Friends
of his intent to betray them into the Hands of Foreign Powers, (viz.) to send
them to fall by the Sword in the French King's Service against the Confederate
Princes, which Letter bares Date April 19/27 1677.

2. That the Persons abovementioned, gave the Deponent 10 l. to carry the said
Letter to Father Sinman into the Kingdom of Spain to Madrid, the said Sinman
being the Provincial General for the Kingdom of England, and Ireland; and in
order to which Message, the Deponent Embarked himself in the Ship called the
B^sca Merchant, whereof Luke Bath-Roch was then Master to go for B^lboa, and
there took Mules for Valladolydd, but staying a day at Burgos in Spain, the
Deponent broke open the said Letter, and found these Contents in the same.

3. That they of the Society of Jesus in the English Seminary at St. Omers,
sent a Mission of Twelve Students into the Kingdom of Spain, (viz.) Eight to
Valladolydd, and Four to Madrid, there being English Colleges in both places
in order to Study Philosophy, and Divinity, which Missioners were sent by
Richard Ashbey, Richard Peter, Nicholas Blundel, and Charles Peter, by the
Patents of the several Missioners, by which they had power to demand Admission
into the respective Colleges to which they were sent, which Missioners were
obliged by the Jesuits of the Colleges to renounce their Allegiance to His
Majesty of Great Britain, in the hearing of the Deponent, and those of
Valladolydd, were taught by Daniel Armestrong a Jesuit Minister of the English
there. That First the Oath of Allegiance is Heretical and Antichristian, and
Divellish, and that Charles Stuart King of England is no Lawful King, but comes
of aspurious Raze, and (...) his Father was a Black Scotch-man, and not King
Charles the First. This was delivered in a Sermon the 29th. of Sept. 1677. to
the Students there, which Sermon the Deponent did hear, and in this Sermon the
said Daniel Armestrong in plain words did say, that the King of England was a
Bastard; now that Daniel Armestrong goes in Spain by the Name of Joseph
Munford, in Spanish by John Montefortio.

4. That the said John Munford, alias Armestrong, did bring Letters from St.
Omers, to the English College at Valladolydd, to the Father there in Latin, by
reason they were Spaniards, in which was expressed and related from the Fathers
at St. Omers, that the Fathers of the Society of London, has procured one
Father Beningfield, to be Confessor to His Royal Highness, but if they saw that
His Royal Highness did not answer their expectation, they would dispose of him
as they did intend to dispose of His Brother the King, which they hoped to
effect within a year, which Letter bares Date, June 1677. and Subscribed by
Richard Ashbey, alias Shimbleby, Rector of the English Jesuits at St. Omers,
Richard Peter Minister, Edward Nevil Prefect of the Studies, Chapter Peter's Prefect
of Sodality, John Farmor Prefect of Manors, which Letters the Deponent saw in
the Month of September, 1677. at Valladolydd in the Kingdom of Spain.

5. That Father Sinman above mentioned, Writ to the English College, and the
Fathers there said, that the King of England was Poisoned to the great Joy of
the English Fathers, and that they would serve King James so, if he did not
give them a good assurance of bringing in the Catholic Religion, and of
rooting out the Protestant, this Letter bore Date July the And was seen and
read by the Deponent at Valladolydd, near the latter end of July, 1677.

6. That one Father John Blake, alias Cross, who went with the Four Students to
Madrid, did bring Letters from Richard Strange Provincial of the Jesuits, and
one Father Gray a Jesuit, and John Keines, to Father Sinman above mentioned, in
which was specifyed the great diligence was used by the said Richard Strange,
Father Gray, and John Keines, to procure such persons to dispatch the King, and
to put a period to his days, which Letter bore date June the 10. 1677. Stilo
Novo. And the Deponent being sent to Madrid in August, read it in Father
Sinmans Chamber, he showing it also at the same time to James Archbishop of
Tuam, of the Kingdom of Ireland.

7. That the said Father Sinman received another Letter, July the 20. 1677.
Stilo Novo, from Richard Strange, Father Gray, John Keines, Bazill Longworth,
John Fenwick, Father Ireland, and Father Hartcourt; in which they did manifest,
they were very sorry for informing him; that he might assure himself that the
business was done, there man William being faint hearted, could not then do it,
though he had 15000 l. promised for his pains, of which Letters the English
Missioners by one information, that at Madrid by John Cross, alias Blake, and
those of Valladolydd, by Daniel Armestrong Jesuit, which Letters the deponent
saw in the Chamber of Mr. Synman, at Madrid, at the same time that he saw the
Letters of the (...) June, mentioned in the foregoing paragraph or number.

8. That on the 3. of November Stilo Novo, Father Petro Jeronymo de Cordela
Provincial of the Jesuits in New Castle, did write to Richard Strange, and John
Keines, that if the business of dispatching of the King of England could be
effected, they should have 10000 l. which Letter the deponent brought from
Valladolydd to Bilboa, and embarked in a Ship within 5 days after his Arrival
thither, and in five days more arrived at a little Town near Exeter, and in
five days more at London, and delivered the Letter, to Richard Strange; and
when opened it was writ in Lattin, and read by the said Strange; and he said,
that all means should be used to answer Father Petro's expectation; and in the
Letter to Strange was one enclosed to this Keines, by the Name of John de
Neaporto de la Companey de Jesus, which Letter the said Keines offered the
Deponent to read, and because of the Spanish abbreviation, the Deponent did not
well understand the Letter, it being also in the Spanish Tongue; so that the
Deponent could but make little of it; therefore the said Strange did give the
Deponent the Letter directed to himself, saying that he thought the Deponent
understood the Letter better then Spanish, that the Deponent read the Letter,
and found in it the Contents above mentioned, and the said Keines being then
ill upon Stranges Bed, said, that he hoped that God would strengthen honest
Williams heart to do this work (now this honest William is a Servant of the
Society of London) this Strange did lie at Mr. Saunders his House, part of
Wild-house in Wild-street, where the Deponent heard this discourse, from
Strange and Keines.

9. That the said Richard Strange, Bazill Longworth, Father Hartcourt, John
Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Gray, Father Jenison, Father Saunders, and
Father Euliston did write a Letter, and subscribed it, and did send it to St.
Omers, to Richard Ashbey, Alias Thimbleby, Rector of the English Seminary,
there in which he, and the rest of the Fathers were given to understand, that
the King was as well given to Debauchery, as Whoreing, that they had an intent
to get one to stab him in his Court at Whitehall, and if that could not be
conveniently done, they would employ one of his Physicians to Poison him, and
for his work they had 10000 l. in the hands of one Worseley a Goldsmiths, which
Money was procured by one Father Leshee a French Jesuit, and Confessor to the
French King, which Letter the Deponent saw and read, and saw it subscribed by
the above said persons, and carried them to St. Omers, he went down to Dover in
a Coach, place being taken for him by the said William their Servant, but whose
Name is John Groves the Letter carried bore date -- December 1677. Stilo Novo.

10. That Letters were enclosed in this Letter aforementioned, the
aforementioned Father Leshee, in which thanks were given him, by the Father
that had subscribed the Letter, to Father Richard Ashbey for his great charity
to them, and his care for the propagating the Catholic Religion, and that all
means should be used to destroy the opposers of it, both root and branch,
which Letters bear date the sixth or seventh day of December, which Letters the
Deponent carried enclosed with those of Richard Ashbey to St. Omers, and from
St. Omers to Paris, and delivered them into the hands of the said Leshee, about
the 18. December. as near as the Deponent can remember.

11. That other Letters, bearing date December. the 12. 1677. were sent from
Richard Strange and others of the Society of London, to those of the Society of
the English Seminaries at St. Omers, and them Letters were enclosed to Father
Leshee, in which they told him they had stirred up the Presbyterians in
Scotland to a Rebellion, and that 20000 l. of them would be in Arms, if that
his Majesty would break with the King of England, and that a way was also made
for the French King landing an Army in Ireland, and further that the Irish
Catholics were ready to rise in order, to which 40000 Black Bills, were
provided to serve the Irish Soldiers withal, which Letters were subscribed by
Richard Strange, John Keines, and John Fenwick, and the outside Letter directed
to Richard Ashbey and told the Deponent that the Letter to Leshee was carried
by a special messenger, for which he had 10 Pattacoones as the said Ashbey, to
the Deponent said, and that the Messenger was Drummer of St. Omers.

12. That an other Packet sub-date the 18. of December 1677. in which it was
specified that the Father Grall of the Society of Jesus at Rome, had written
and removed Richard Strange from being Provincial, and had proffered the
Provincialship on Thomas Whitebread: Ordered that Father Conyers should Preach
on Thomas of Canterbury's day, in the sodality Church, in the English Seminary,
against the oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, and that he should exhort the
Fathers to stand by the new Provincial, who would be as zealous for the
bringing in of the Catholic Religion into England, as ever his Predecessors
were, and would not leave one stone unturned to promote the same, which said
Letter was directed and read by Richard Ashbey, and this was about the 24. of
December.

13. That another Packet Sub-Date the 26. where it was ordered by Thomas
Whitebread, Richard Strange, John Keins, Bazill Longworth, John Fenwick,
Francis Gray, Father Hartcourt Senior, Father Hartcourt Junior, Father Michael,
Father Benefield, Father Ireland, Father Blundel, Father Jenison and some
others of the Society; That Father Leshee should be written to by Richard
Ashbey, and informed that the Fathers before named had met together, to
contrive the advancement of the Design of the happy disposal of His Majesty of
Great Britain: and if his Royal Highness should not appear to answer the
expectation, the former giving no hopes at all, they would endeavor with all
speed his dispatch; that he might not hinder their design of Bringing in the
Catholic Religion; and if they could not find an opportunity of taking him
from his Kingdom, they would take his Kingdom from him: which Letter, he, this
Deponent, saw in the hands of Richard Ashbey, and desired to read it, but the
said Ashbey would not read it to him, Jan. the 2. 1678.

14. That in the said Letter of December the 26. it was specified that Richard
Ashbey, and Nicholas Blundel was Constituted by Patent from the Provincial, to
be Ordinary of Newgate, to go and visit the Condemned Prisoners, and to seduce
them to the Catholic Religion, and to Catechize some Youths in London; and
every day in the Week he has his several places, where he teaches Youth
treasonable Doctrines, and mutinous against the Interest, and Person of His
Sacred Majesty; and gives several sums of Money to their Parents, if Poor, to
encourage them to send their Children to be thus instructed, which passages was
contained in the aforesaid Letter, and afterward practiced in London.

15. That another Packet came to Richard Ashbey, to St. Omers, from Thomas
White, John Keines and others of the Society of Jesus in London. Which Letters
from them and others were enclosed to Father Thomas Stapleton Procurator at
Brussels, to persuade the Father Confessor to the Duke De villa Hermosa, to
inform him that His Majesty of England, did not intend to assist His Majesty of
Spain, but to stand a looker on, till he was ruined by the French King, which
Letter being not sealed, was seen, heard, and by Richard Ashbey, Rector of St.
Omers, in which it was ordered, that if the said Father Confessor should not be
ready to comply with the said Stapleton; that Messengers should be forthwith
sent to Father Sinman at Madrid, to inform His Majesty of Spain, of the said
concern; and to make the same relation of the business to the Archbishop of
Tuam, in the Kingdom of Ireland, now at the Court of Madrid. That he the said
Archbishop, and the said Sinman, might jointly give an account to the King of
Spain, of the motion made, or to be made to the said Father Confessor, to the
Duke De Villa Hermosa: and also to advise the Spanish King to Seize the Estates
of the English Merchants, in several Factories in this Kingdom. For that they
have endeavored to Transport them to England, which would tend highly to the
prejudice of Spain; and for the Confirmation whereof, they procured Letters
from one Fausica, sometimes an Agent in London, to attest the same. To which
the said Fausica willingly condescended, and sent his Letters to St. Omers, to
be sent to the Court of Spain, that the Fathers might give their approbation,
which Letter was long and large, with attestations therein made against the
Merchants residents in their several Factories, concerning the matter of Faith
before mentioned; and also other Letters to Daniel Armstrong at Valladolidd,
and John Armstrong at Madrid; which they were ordered to Confirm this
affirmation made, or to be made by the Fathers in England; and of the English
Seminaries at St. Omers. Or if the said Stapleton, together with that of
Fausica the above mentioned Spanish Agent, now lives at Bruges in Flanders: All
which Letters bore Date the First, Second of January, 1678. Stilo Novo; and
were seen by the Deponent at St. Omers: and in the Letters to the Two Fathers,
Armstrong and Cross in Spaein, was contained a special Order, that if the
fermer could go to Madrid, he should send his Attestation to Don John of
Austria, and to carry on which, 200 l. was made over by Father Sinman and the
English Fathers.

16. That when the Lords came from England, about the business before mentioned
to St. Omers, Edward Nevil, and Thomas Farmer did say, that they would not let
this Black Bastard go so, to His Grave in peace, meaning the King of England;
for that he had cheated them so often, and that now they resolved to be served
so no more. That this Deponent standing by, said if the Duke prove slippery,
they both replied that his Pas-Port was ready, when ever he should appear to
fail them. These words were heard by the Deponent, on the Third of January in
the Afternoon, in the Library of the Jesuits at St. Omers.

17. That on the Fourth of January 1678. Stilo Novo, Letters were sent from
Richard Ashbey, Edward Hall, Edward Novil, Christ. Peter's, William Busby, James
Junior, Thomas Farmer, Michael Constable Jesuits of the English Seminary at St.
Omers; as also from Father Williams, Rector of Watton, and Master of the
Novices there. Sir Jo. Warner Barroner, alias Clare, Franois Samby, alias
Ditz-Biling, to the Father-Confessor of the Emperors Majesty: That His Majesty
of Great Britain has treatherously been the ruin of the Confederates;
especially, of the Germain Empire, and of his Catholic Princes under him, and
has under hand stirred up the Hungarian Rebellion against his Imperial Majesty,
and found them Money to go on in their Rebellion: His design being not to keep
any Alliance with his Imperial Majesty; but only in show that he might advance
the Prince of Orange his Nephew, and make him absolute; and therefore prayed
the States of Holland might have notice of it. Which Letter was seen, and
perused by the Deponent, it being writ in the Latin Tongue. All which Letters
were sent away by a Lay Brother, who was a Dutch Man; and when these Letters
were sending away, one of the Lay Brothers, whose name was George; did say, the
Prince of Orange was more fit to Roban Orchard, than to be a General of an Army.

18. That Letters bearing Date the 1. of January, Stilo Novo, arrived at St.
Omers January the 20. from Archbishop Talbot, Arch Bishop of Dubline; wherein
it was expressed that the Fathers of the Society in Ireland, were very vigilant
to prepare the people to rise, for the defense of their liberty and Religion,
and to recover their estates; and if the Parliament that was to fit in England,
shall join with the King in declaring war against France, and should put His
Majesty to engage in a War with France, that a place in Ireland should be open
to receive the French Kings Army, when His Most Christian Majesty should think
fit to Land one their. And in the Letter he advised the Fathers of St. Omers,
to advertise Father Leshee of the same, and other Jesuits that had an interest
in the French King; and that His Majesty of Great Britain was brought to that
pass, that if any Male content amongst them should not prove true to their
designs; His Majesty would never give ear to their information, and prayed them
to be diligent, for now was the time, or never. Which Letter this Deponent saw
and read, and in order to the Fathers Compliance, with the said Archbishops
Letters to Father Leshee to Paris and appointed Edward Nevil, and William Busby
to carry, and deliver them to the said Leshee, which Letters were answered with
all speed by the aforesaid Messengers, Jesuits, as above. The one of them being
Prefect of Studies, and the other Procurator for the Seminaries, and by them
writ Letters to Thomas White Provincial to the Rector of St. Omers, (viz.)
Richard Ashbey, but of that to the Provincial, the Deponent can give no
account; but of that to Ashbey, the Deponent faith, there was expressed in it,
that the General of the Society of the Jesuits would Contribute 500000. Crowns
to be paid in June next coming; and that his Holiness the Pope would not be
wanting to supply them, when they had made some progress in that glorious
attempt.

19. That another Packet arrived at St. Omers, directed to Richard Ashbey
Rector there, the Date whereof is not well remembered by this Deponent; but as
near as he does remember, it was about the beginning of the Parliament, for
then came the Kings, and Lord Chancellors Speeches, and Votes of Parliament,
which were put into ridiculous Phrases, in contempt of the King and both Houses
of Parliament, and for the Fathers and Scholars to Laugh at, and then
Translated into French, and given to the Governor of St. Omers, who sent them
to the French King his Master; and in the Packet was contained, the account of
the attempt of one Pickering, a Lay Brother, that waited on the Jesuits lying
at Sommerset-house, to Shoot the King as he was Walking in St. James's Park,
when he was at some distance from his Nobles, and Attendants, but the Flint of
his Pistol being loose, he did defer the Action till another opportunity, and
if he had done it, and had suffered, he should have had 300000. Masses said for
the Health of his Soul, which Letters were signed by Thomas White, alias
Whitebread Provincial: when received, the Fathers of the English Seminaries,
were in great trouble for Pick^rings negligence; which Letters the Deponent saw
and read in the latter end of January, and the Votes put into such
Mock-Phrases, as also the Kings and Lord Chancellors Speeches, in the Month of
February.

20. That the Deponent went out the 29th. of January, to know of his
Confessarious, whether he might keep the Thirtieth day of January as a Fast,
the Confessor replied, that the account with them was the Ninth of February, by
reason the account with England did differ from that on that side of the Water,
the Deponent then asked if he might keep the Ninth of February, the
Confessarious asked him, why? the Deponent replied, because of the Martyrdom of
the late King: He answered, the late King was no Martyr, but a Heretic; and
withal added, that he was not King James's Son, but a Bastard, begotten on the
Body of Queen Anne of Denmark by her Tailor; this Confessarious is a Jesuit,
and his name is Charles Peter's, Prefect of the Sodality.

21. That Letters bearing Date 18. of February, Stilo Novo, from Thomas
Whitebread, John Keines, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Micho, Father
Richard Ashby Rector of St. Omers (then ill of the Gout) to the English Fathers
there, and did let them know, that they had sent William Morgan into Ireland,
to see how Affairs stood there in that Kingdom, and expected his return by the
end of March, and that he set out the 26th. of January, with Instructions to
order the Affairs in Hand, and to encourage the Irish Natives to defend their
Religion and Liberty, and his Companion was one Francis Lovell, who was to go
into the North of Ireland, to see the Fathers of the Society there, and carry
2000 l. to supply their present wants, and to promise 4000 l. in case of action.

22. That another Packet came from Thomas White, alias Whitebread, Father
Micho, Father Ireland, Father Hartcourt, and others of the Society of London,
bearing Date Feb. 7. 1678. in the which was contained, an account of the
Fathers Progress in Berk-shire, Oxford, Essex, in persuading the Catholics,
who are Votaries, for the Order of St. Ignatius, to Contribute to the Irish
Rebellion, and maintaining of a Civil War in that Kingdom, in case the French
King should break with the King of England, and also have received Letters from
Scotland, in which they were informed, that the people would rise to oppose
Duke Lauderdale, and the Royal Party in that Kingdom, by which means they
thought to weaken both Parties, and also that they would endeavor by
themselves, their Agents, and Purse, to provoke the Scots against the English,
and withal, told the Affairs at St. Omers, to whom this Packet was directed,
and by whom it was read, that they should be glad to effect such a design,
which Packet the Deponent saw and read, Letter by Letter.

23. That the Fathers of St. Omers, (viz.) Richard Ashbey Rector, Edward Hall,
Edward Nevil, and others of the English Seminary, did Write to Thomas
Whitebread and other Fathers, in the which it was expressed, that it was now
apparent, that the Catholic Religion was to be brought in the same way that
they had used, for the Destruction of the Father of this King, and as that
could not be effected by the effusion of Blood, and withal, prayed them to
Prosecute their design in taking away the King, and if His Royal Highness
should not comply with them, to dispatch him also, for they did fear that never
any of the Stuarts were men for the effecting of their ends and purposes, and
this Letter and Instructions, were given to the Fathers, how to feel His Royal
Highness stood affected, which Letter bore Date February the Ninth, Stilo Novo,
and was signed by the Persons abovesaid, in the presence of the Deponent, who
did Compose the said Letters for them, according to Directions given him by
them, which Letter was (to this Deponents knowledge) carried into England, by
one Father Eury, who then went thither.

24. That an answer of the aforesaid Letter, February the 19th. Stilo Novo,
came Dated the 20th. of February, from Thomas White, John Keines, Bazil
Longworth, Richard Peter's, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Hartcourt,
Father Blundel, Father Matthew Wright, Father Thomas Wright, Father Jenison,
and Father Sinman, who some times belong to Summerset-house, who also Signed
with the rest the said answer, which told the Fathers of St. Omers, (viz.)
Richard Ashbey, to whom the Letter was Directed, that they found, that although
the Duke was a good Catholic, yet he had a tender affection for the King his
Brother, and would scarcely be engaged in the concern, and if they should but
once intimate the designs and purposes unto him, they might not only be
frustrated of their design, but also might loose his favor: which Letter, the
Deponent saw and read in February.

25. That the Fathers of the English Seminaries at St. Omers, did oblige one
Brother George, a Lay Brother in that Seminary, to go to Ghent in Flanders, to
the English Jesuits there, with a Letter from St. Omers, Dated the 26th. of
February from London, and the said Brother Arrived there, as they advised the
Father, the First of March, that the Secular Clergy should be Treated with
about the business, but they finding them at that time, to be men inclined to
live in Peace and Obedience to their Prince, the Father, with Thomas White,
etc. answered them in one of the Tenth of March, Stilo Novo. That the Clergy
were a sort of Rascally Fellows, that had neither Wit nor Courage, to Manage
such a Great Design, and did pray them of Ghent, and those of St. Omers, to be
of god Cheer, for they went on well, both in Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Fatal Blow shall be given the Black Boy of White Hall, with all the speed that
might; which Letter to them at Ghent, and from them, to the Provincial, they
being brought to St. Omers before they went: as also those of March the Tenth,
the Deponent saw and read.

26. That there was an attempt, to make an assassination on the Person of His
Sacred Majesty, in the Month of March, several days as he was Walking in the
Park, and once as he was going to the Parliament House, by Honest William and
Pickering, but opportunity did not offer it self, for the which, the former was
Chidden, and the later had a Penance of Twenty strokes, with a Discipline on
his shoulders, it being judged by the Fathers, the effect of his negligence:
Which passage the Deponent saw, mentioned in a Letter, from Thomas White, to
Richard Ashbey, bearing Date the 26. of March 1678.

27. That on the 5. of April, Letters came from Thomas White, and the Fathers
in London to Richard Ashbey, and those in St. Omers, in the which, the former
gives the latter to understand, that William Morgan and Father Lovel, were
returned out of Ireland, that they had given them an account, that the Irish
was ready to rise at ten days warning, with Twenty thousand Foot and Five
thousand Horse, and would let the French King into that Kingdom, if he should
come with an Army to land there, and that Father Lovel did give an account,
that Fifteen thousand Foot, would rise in the North of Ireland, and that the
people were patient but very resolute, and that the Duke of Ormond now Lievt.
is in great perplexity to see the Catholic Religion thrive so well in Ireland,
and that there are persons, that have Secretly taken Commissions from the
General of the Society of Jesus, by virtue of a Breviate from the Pope, Dated
October. 1673. and that they are resolved to cut the Protestants Throats once
again, when they rise, and in the said Letter, the Provincial Summoned a
General Council, to be holden in London, and therefore commanded the Fathers,
on the other side of the water to be present, in which Letter the Deponent, did
see himself to be Summoned to assist at the Consultation, as a messenger from
Fathers to Fathers, this Letter the Deponent saw in the Month of April.

28. That in order to this Command on April the 24. 1678. Father Warren Rector
of Liege, Sir. Thomas Preston Barronet, Father March Rector of Ghent, and
Father Williams Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices, Sir. Jo. Warner
Barronet, Richard Ashby being sick of the Gout would not go, but out of the
Seminary of St. Omers went Sir. Robert Brett Barronet, Father Poole, Edward
Nevil, there were in all with the Deponent about nine or ten, who met in
London, about Consultation with Thomas Whitebread, Father Hartcourt Senior and
Junior, John Fenwick, Father Longworth, William Morgan, John Keines, Father
Lovel, Father Ireland, John Blundel, Richard Strange, Father Micho, Father
Gray, and others to the number of fifty Jesuits, met at the White horse Tavern
in the Strand, where they plotted their designs for the Society, and ordered
Father John Gray (who was always there) to go Procurator for Rome, all which
consultations they held in May, 1678. The Deponent was present to attend the
consultory, and did their concerns from Company to Company, some met at Mr.
Saunders house in Wildstreet, others at Mr. Fenwicks, at Mr. Airs house in
Drury Lain, others at Mr. Ireland's in Russel Street near Covent Garden and
other places, all which though in several Companies did contrive the death of
the King, in order to which Papers were sent from Company to Company, which the
Deponent did carry containing their opinion of the business and the manner how
it was to be done, and within three or four days after, the Deponent went to
St. Omers with the Fathers, who came from the other side of the water.

29. Item that on the 10. of June Stilo Novo, came Tho. White Provincial of St.
Omers, and in order to visit his Colleges in Flanders and Germany, and in his
Chamber of the tenth day, when the Deponent with Richard Ashbey were present,
he told the said Ashbey and the Deponent, that he hoped to see the Fool at
Whitehall laid fast enough, and that the Society need not fear, for he (that is
the King) is grown -- and would hear no complaint against them, and if the Duke
should see his face in the least manner to follow his Brothers foot steps, his
pasport was made to lay him asleep.

30. Item that the said Thomas Whitebread, on the Thirteenth of June, did tell
the Rector of St. Omers, that there was a Minister of the Church of England,
that had Scandalously and basely put out the Jesuits Morals in England, and had
indevoured villanously to render them odious to the people, and asked the said
Rector whether the Deponent might possibly know him, and the Rector not knowing
called the Deponent, who heard these words as he stood at the door, wherein
being entered, the Provincial asked the Deponent, if he knew him that was the
Author of the Jesuits Morals, his Person but not his Name: The said Thomas
Whitebread demanded then, whether the Deponent would undertake to Poison or
Assassmate the said Author, which the Deponent undertook to do, and to have 500
l. reward promised him by the Provincial, and appointed to return to England,
and the Deponent does further testify, that at the same time, the said
Provincial did in his Chamber say, that he and the Society in London, would
procure Dr. Stillingfleet to be knocked in the head, and also Poole the Author
of Synopsis criticorum, for writing something against them.

31. Item That Richard Ashbey Rector of St. Omers, being ill that evening with
the Gout and Stone (viz) the 15. of June, he desired the company of the
Deponent, and did tell him, that Father Warren now Rector of the Jesuits
College in Liege, did when he was Procurator at Paris, Reconcile the late Lord
Chancellor Hide to the Church of Rome, upon his Deathbed, which words were
occasioned by the Deponents taking notice that the late Duchess of York (the
Lord Chancelors Daughter) dyed a Papist, and the Deponent, when he heard the
said Ashbey speak these words, replied, that he never had heard any thing of
the return of the Lord Chancellor, answer was made that the said Ashbey was
certain that the Lord Chancellor was reconciled by the said Warren.

32. That the 23 of June Stilo Novo, in the afternoon the Deponent, had express
order presently to repair to Callis, and then take the Packet Boat, and so away
for England, to attend the motions of the Fathers in London, till he had orders
from the Provincial to the contrary, and gave the Deponent four pounds for his
Charges, and promised him 80 l. for service already done, for the Society in
Spain and elsewhere, and the Deponent says that night he parted for Callis,
where he met four Jesuits bound for London, on Friday they all took Boat, on
Saturday they arrived at Dover, where they met John Fenwick, who had brought
Students to Dover, to transport them to St. Omers. The Deponent says further
that the four Jesuits, John Fenwick (who went at Dover by the name of Mr.
Tompson) and himself took Coach, and that at Burton six miles this side
Canterbury, the Coach was stopped and a Box was seized, of the said John
Fenwicks, by the Searchers of the place, and when by them opened, in it, they
found Beads, Pictures, Images, and other Agnus Dei, which were to be given by
Bundles, the Catechize to Children to encourage them, to come to Catechizing
School, and to be Catechized by him, according there was a direction to him,
fixed on the Box, to the Honorable Richard Blundel Esquire in London, which Box
so seized by the said Searchers, and they had searched the Pockets of the said
Fenwick, they had found such Letters about him, as he confessed to the
Deponent, might have cost him his Life, they (calling said he) the concern in
hand, but the said Letters the Deponent did not see.

33. Item that in the Month of July, Richard Ashbey came to London, with
instructions from the said Thomas Whitebread, or White, that the 10000 l.
procured by Father Leshee, and in the hands of the Society in London, should be
sent into the hands of one Worsely their Banker, and that the said Richard
Ashbey, with other Fathers, should agree with Sir George Wakeman, about the
Poisoning the King, and if that he would undertake it, he should have 10000 l.
which the said Richard Ashbey told the Deponent, showing him the said
instructions, by way of memorandum, in writing, in the which memorandum was
contained, an Item given by the said Thomas Whitebread, to the said Richard
Ashbey, for the assassination of the Right Reverend Father in God Herbert, Lord
Bishop of Hereford, and for that the said had been educated in the Popish
Religion, and was fallen, and they were resolved that they would not spare any
Apostate from the Roman Faith; the said Richard Ashbey asked the Deponent,
whether the said Bishop was a forward man against Catholics, to which the
Deponent not knowing the said Lord Bishop, said, he could not tell, and the
said Ashbey did say, the times now being ready to Change, they would be ready
to punish Apostates, but all those Heretics, that had obstinately opposed the
proceedings of the Society, and their Agents in propagating the Faith and
interest of the Church of Rome, a just reward for their obstinacy and Apostasy,
and though the Parliament had taken away the Act for Burning Heretics, yet
they should not escape the vengeance of Catholics.

34. Item That in the Month of July, 1678. Richard Strange late Provincial of
the Jesuits, came to the Lodging of Mr. Richard Ashbey, who before he went down
to the Bath, lay in the new Provincials Lodgings at Mr. Saunders his house, and
finding the Deponent with the said Ashbey, did desire him, the Deponent to meet
him at his Chamber, at Mr. John Groves in York-street, and after a very short
stay with him, took his leave of the said Ashbey, and the Deponent, took his
leave also and followed the said Strange, and got to his Chamber presently
after him, where the said Strange did encourage the Deponent, to go on in
assisting the Society, in carrying on the design, and thereupon told the
Deponent, that they got 14000 l. by the Fire in London, in 1666. the Deponent
asked the said Strange, how they came to Effect that great and famous Work, the
said Strange replied, that himself, one Gray, one Pennington, and one Burton
Jesuits, and some others, with one Kinmash a Dominican, Joined with one Green,
that met at one Mr. Wests house at the Green Dragon at Puddle-Dock, the said
West was a Tailor, whom they employed to make them some Clothes, and there they
did debate the manner about the Firing the City, and where they should begin,
and did attempt it in February 1664/5. But then not being provided with
assistance enough, lost that good opportunity; because Down and he being
afraid to be killed, ran away. This was the greatest Plunder of one sort they
got, (as the said Strange informed the Deponent) there was a 1000. Carrats of
Diamonds rapt in several Papers, for several Goldsmiths; but they were conveyed
by the first opportunity to St. Omers: The Deponent asked Strange how One Man
should trust them with so much Goods, and never One Man had so much Jewels at
once. The said Strange said, he could not tell that; but certain it was they
met with them, and sold them for 3500 l. sterling in Flanders, and had a Fish
Dinner into the Bargain, at the Salutation Tavern in Holbourn, at the return of
the Money. The Deponent asked Strange, how the Fire began: The Deponent farther
asked Strange how many servants the Society employed; and he said about 80. or
86. he could not tell which, he the said Strange said farther, that indeed they
were resolved to have Cut off the King, when at work in Person about the Fire;
but then they were not got secure of the Duke, who was then but a well-wisher
of theirs; and besides* they seeing the King so Industrious, they could not
find in their Hearts do it. Whilst this discourse in hand, a Gentlewoman knocked
at the Door, and so we broke off; being Nine of the Clock, and ended at almost
Eleven in the Forenoon, and the Deponent went to his Lodging in Drury Lane.

35. Item, That Richard Ashbey, the day before he went down to the Bath, which
was in July, had a Conference with Father Hartcourt, Father Fenwick, Father
Ireland, Father Keines, Father Strange, Father Jenison, Father Blundel, and
others of the Society, by Order of the Provincial, to send new Messengers into
Scotland, to promote the Commotion there, and to inform the People of the
great Tyranny they lie under; by reason of their being denied the liberty of
their Consciences, and that not to be procured but by the Sword: they must take
that course to purchase their Liberty; by which means (said the Fathers thus
assembled) we shall weaken both the Presbyterian, and the Episcopal party: at
which Conference the said Deponent was present, and heard these words.

36. Item, That in July the said Richard Ashbey went down to Bath, in Order to
his being Cured for the Gout; and the Morning that he went away, the Deponent
being in the Chamber, to take his leave of him, Father Hartcourt Rector of
Lond^n came to him, and told him that if after he left the Bath, he would make
a little progress into Sommersetshire, to inform those of the Society of the
design, it would do well; and withal desired the said Ashbey to hasten to Town,
after he had finished the said Information, which the Deponent did hear.

37. Item, That on the First of August, Letters from Thomas Whitebread, bearing
Date the 22. of July, to John Fenwick, in which it was expressed; that if 10000
l. would not do, he would have 15000 l. should be proposed for the effecting of
the Kings death; and that 150000 l. should be proposed to Sir George Wakeman,
if he should refuse the 10000 l. But whether Sir George has been Treated about
the Concern, the Deponert cannot as yet inform in this Article; but Sir George
was diverse times in Ashbey's Company, as the Deponent was informed by the said
Ashbey; and saw the Letters sent to John Fenwick, Three days after, which was
the Fourth of August, 1678.

Item, That Letters arrived in London, bearing Date, the Fifth of August, 1678.
from Thomas White Provincial, to John Fenwick, from St. Omers, in the which, he
did inform the Fathers, that he had made his Visit within his promise; and that
he Ordered Twelve Jesuits to go for Holland, and Inform the Dutch, that the
Prince of Orange did intend to Assume the Crown of a King, and that he was
resolved to bring them under another Government; which Missioners took their
leave of the said Thomas White, on Ignatius's day, the 31. of July; but got no
further than Watton, by reason of a Mischance they met withal in the way; by
which Missioners the said Thomas White, did design to beget in the Dutch an
evil Opinion of the Prince of Orange, and to cause a Commotion there against
the Prince: Which Letter, the Deponent saw, and read in Fenwicks Chamber, the
Eleventh of August, 1678.

39. Item, That another Letter of the Master of the Augustins came to Blundel,
and because the Thames was Frozen over, and the Sickness coming on, they
altered their purpose, and in January 1675/6. they met with this Green again,
who closed with them in their design; and that they might Ingratiate themselves
the more with him, furnished him with Thirty Pound (he being Poor, yet they
found him an Active Man, and fit for their purpose) and the more to engage the
said Green, they pretended to hold many Fifth-Monarchy Men's Principles; which
when Green perceived (Judging them too zealous) brought them acquainted with
Eight others, who were zealous in the business. The aforesaid Jesuits, were
earnest to have the business done in February, before the return of the
Inhabitants to London: But the said Green entreated them to suspend that
resolution; because that they should be the sooner discovered, and such a
design must have an uproar; and besides that the King would not be much in Town
(if at all) until the Plague was more abated; whom the said Green did say must
be Cut off too, when the People were in a hurry, by reason of the Fire; and
this Motion pleased the Jesuits and Dominicans well; and it was put off in a
very little time after the said Green, and the rest of the Fifth-Monarchy Men,
together with those Four Jesuits above named; and the Dominicans were suspected
by the said West, that kept the house at Puddle-dock, and were forewarned the
said house; and presently after Green and his Eight acquaintance were clapped up
in Prison: But for what the said Strange did not tell the said Deponent upon
the Imprisonment of these Nine Persons. The said Jesuits did go to St. Omers,
and remain there till May, after the Execution of Eight of these aforesaid
Persons (Green dying in Newgate) one Fitz-Gerard an Irish Man and Jesuit, and
one Neal of White-Chappel did write to this Strange, as the said Strange
informed the Deponent, that none of the Fathers names were mentioned in the
business of these men, and thought they might safely return so. In the latter
part of May, they set forth for England, and got to London the beginning of
June, and then concealing their Names and Lodgings, they began afresh to
consult about this Fire, which was still carried on by the Jesuits in London,
in the absence of the said Persons, and it was plotted by them in the
Fire-time, to Cut off the King, that the number of the Beast might be
accomplished (in the uttering of which words, the said Strange broke out into a
great Laughter) but said the said Strange; To be short, we got 50. or 60.
Jesuits to ply the work, and one Everard was very diligent in preserving the
Fireballs, which they had made, and put into Granada-shells; and the more to
Palliate this, they procured this Everard a Place in the Kings Service, to look
after the Ammunition that was to be carried down to the Fleet, it being in the
time of the First Dutch War; and the said Strange told the Deponent that great
Attempts we made at the Tower, but without effect. But said Strange to the
return, ordering our Affairs, we were also in Fee with several French men; who,
also were faithful in the business; and all things being ready, and the place
pitched upon, Strange removes his Quarters, and got to lie in a house in
Fanchurch-street, and went by the name of Walker; this he did in August, 1666.
and with him he took the aforesaid Kinmash the Dominican together with
Pennington and Purton, who lay at an Apothecaries house in Shooe-lane, etc.
Fitz-Gerrard lay at Neales in Whitechappel; but Neale was one to see the Fire
carried on through Thames Street, and so to the Tower. In a word, the said
Strange told the Deponent, they spent 700. Fireballs; and when the
Fire-Merchants were at work, then others (both Men and Women) were at work to
Plunder what they could; and that they had a Warehouse in Wildstreet, where
some things so plundered were laid, and other things they concealed in
Sommerset-house, as Holland, Cambrick, Fine Cloth, and some considerable
quantities of Plate, and a Box of Jewels, the Owners gave their Men to carry
away, and ordered his Servant to go along with him; but they having increased
their number ordered the Servant to be knocked down by the Fathers in London,
for not giving an account of what progress they made, or to be made in the
proposals to Sir George Wakeman; and how he refused it, if made, and if not, to
do it; for it would not be convenient to deferr it, and told them that Ireland
was safely* arrived at St. Omers: Who only told that the King was very secure;
and therefore he the Provincial, admonished them to be very vigilant; which
Letter, the said Blundel showed the Deponent, the 19. of August, 1678.

40. Item, That another Packet of the 15. of August, from St. Omers, from
Thomas White Provincial, to Father John Fenwick; in the which were Letters
enclosed to Father Jenison, Father Hartcourt and others, which Letters he did
not see; but that to Fenwick the Deponent saw and read; and in it the said
Thomas White did write, that he hoped that the Figure 365. should lie as low as
ever 666. did; and that if Poison did not take the King away, Fire should, for
the Catholic Religion would never flourish, unless I. H. S. took its Course.
Now the Deponent says, that the Figure 365. is meant Westminster, and by 666.
London; it being the Character or Cipher for those places; and the Letters I.
H. S. Jesuits, they using it always.

41. That the Deponent was informed by John Fenwick, and others of the Society
then in his Chamber; that the Jesuits had 60000 l. per annum good Rents, and
100000 l. in Bank; that he and the rest of the Society, have in the name of
their several Trustees, lent Money out at 5 l. per cent, the improvement of
which Money in Bank, is used about these practices, and that it costeth them
400 l. per annum, for intelligence, besides their daily Messengers (on which
vast sums of Money are spent) and besides, an other part is transported
Beyond Sea, by Bills of Exchange, which the Deponent (in a very great part)
knows himself to be true, and of the rest, they themselves have informed him
several times, all which tends much to the damage of the Kingdom.

42. Item, That on Monday 5/15 of August, Father Hartcourt, John Keines, John
Fenwick, and another of the Society (whose names the Deponent remembers not)
did say, they intended to raise a commotion in England and Wales, which also
did appear by several Letters, which the Deponent did see and read, the Date
whereof the Deponent does not know, nor now well remember, but he saw them in
August.

43. Item, That Two New Messengers were sent into Scotland, on the Fifth of
August, one by the name of Father More, the other Father Saunders alias Brown,
with instructions to carry themselves like Presbyterian Ministers, and to
Preach to the disaffected Scots, and the necessity of taking up the sword, for
the defense of liberty of Conscience, these the Deponent saw dispatched, and
ordered to go by Father Hartcourt, in the name of Tho. White Provincial.

44. Item, They have several times communicated (and do still) what they have
revealed to them of the Kings Secrets: Which they purchase by giving Money, and
then send them over to Leshee the French Kings Confessor, and the Deponent has
seen several particulars (as others pretend) how the King stands affected to
War or Peace, and this they do by one Smith, who daily lurketh about Whitehall
and Westminister Hall, in time of Parliament, and is (as he says) in Fee with
the Clerks of the Parliament, who gives him the intelligence, and with the
Clerks and Officers, of his Majesty's Privy Council, and Cabinet Council. The
Deponent says further, that one Coleman does assist this Smith with private
intelligence, as John Keines Jesuit, and this Smith have told this Deponent,
several times in the Months of July and August. 1678.

45. Item, That these Jesuits drive several Trades in Town, as Merchants,
Tobacconists, Goldsmiths, Scriveners, and by means of the last, come to the
knowledge of several Estates, of several Persons of Quality, and other
Scriveners of their Religion and Practices, by which they take an estimate of
the strength of the Nation, as this Deponent was informed by John Keines in
August, and it is probable their Scriveners have great Employment.

46. Item, That on Friday the Ninth of August, Came Letters of the Sixteenth
Ditto, by an especial Messenger from Thomas White Provincial, and subscribed by
the Fathers of St. Omers, in which, he and they did rejoice very much, that Sir
George Wakeman had taken the business into his hands, and if he did it the
15000. pound should be paid, but ordered that Pickering and his companion
honest William, should not desist their endeavoring to Assassinate the Kings
Person, which Letters, the Deponent read and asked Fenwick, how the Provincial
came to understand that Sir. George had undertaken the business, he the said
Fenwick told the Deponent, that he had dispatched a special Messenger away, to
give him notice, and that the said Messenger brought this Answer, and withal
said Fenwick, it cost at least Ten Pound to give him word of it.

47. Item, That one Will. Berry (now a secular Priest,) that had formerly been a
Jesuit, because that the said Berry had written, and was about to Print some
sheets of Paper, in vindication of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
in it persuaded Roman Catholics, to a more charitable compliance with the
Protestants; Bazil Longworth and others did offer it to the Deponent, to kill
the said Berry, and if he durst not do it himself, to procure some others to do
it, assuring the Deponent, who ever did it should have a pardon. This was
proposed August the Ninth 1678.

48. That on the Ninth of August in the Evening, in the Chamber of John Keines
Jesuit, in Warkwickstreet, where John Fenwick a Jesuit, and the Deponent were
together, there came one Richard Heath, a Lay Brother of the Jesuits, who after
some discourse, of the design of Killing the King, did say he was a Bastard,
and indeavored to Rule by the Sword, which words the Deponent did hear, and so
did Keines and Fenwick, and replied one after another in the hearing of the
Deponent, that the Bastard should not trouble the World long.

49. That on the 10/20 August, the Deponent did meet with John Groves, In
Wild-street in the afternoon (as near as he remembers) about Five a Clock, and
Groves having made several promises to the Deponent, to give an account of
South-wark Fire in 1676. The said Groves took the Deponent into Wild-house
Garden, and and thus began, he said, that he had certain Fireworks made for
that very purpose, and he and Three Irish Men more, that were his assistants,
went into the Burrow, and not finding an opportunity, went to St. Margarets
Hill, where they found an Oyl-shop, which the said Groves bragged he Fired; the
Deponent asked Groves, how he came acquainted with these Three Irish Men, he
said his acquaintance was not much, but they were procured by Foggerly an Irish
Doctor: For which the Society Richard Strange Provincial, gave him and his
Assistants 1000 l. Viz. 400 l. for him, and 200 l. a piece for the Irish, and
the said Groves told the Deponent, that the Society got at least 1000 l. in the
Fire, which was also told the Deponent another time by Richard Strange.

50. That on the 15. of August (Sunday) this Deponent saw Letters from St.
Omers, Ditto written by Father Ireland, in the name of the Provincial Thomas
Whitebread, to John Fenwick, in which Letter (by the contents thereof) there
was Letters to John Keines, Mr. Jenison, Blundel and others, which the Deponent
did not see, but in that to John Fenwick it was specified, what diligence was
used in Ireland by the Jesuits there, for the destruction of the Duke of
Ormond, and for the procuring another demonstration of zeal, for the promoting
of the Catholic Religion, and interest in that Kingdom, and that which arts
would not effect, the Sword should, to the great vexation of the Protestants
there, and he intimated to the greatest joy he had, that there was yet hopes,
the disaffected Scots would not lay aside their endeavors for, and after the
defense of their Liberties and Religion, and that the Catholics in Scotland,
had promised to use their Utmost Endeavors to keep up the Commotion there, and
the said Father Ireland, bad the said Father Fenwick to exhort the Fathers
there, to be earnest in their design, for now was the time that the English
Nation, was to be reduced. And further more, ordered (in the name of the
Provincial) that Letters should be written to all the Societies in England,
that they make it their business, to encourage their friends to braveness of
mind, for that God had hitherto given them such a hopeful Prospect of things,
and that no opportunity on his part should be lost, and that they In London (if
they thought fit to communicate these things) that they should have a care,
that they did it not to more then one at a time, least they should be bafled in
their Enterprise, which Letter (when read by the Deponent) Fenwick to whom the
Letter was directed, told the Deponent, it was his duty to offer up a Mass or
Two, that God would prosper the design of these Holy endeavors of the Society,
to promote the Catholic Religion and Faith, and told the Deponent further,
that if he lived till Christmas, he should see a good change of things, either
that 48. should be taken from the World (or the World, especially that little
World he was concerned in) should be taken from him, and that one that was a
Catholic should play such a Game, as never was played since the Conquest. All
which the said Fenwick, told the Deponent in his Chamber, and the Deponent
asked the said Fenwick, who this Catholic was, and the said Fenwick said it
was the (...) and the Deponent said 48. is put for the King.

51. Item, on the 21. of August in the Evening, the Deponent went to the
Lodging of John Keines, where he found another Jesuit with him (whose name this
Deponent remembers not) in whose presence the said John Keines told the
Deponent, that his Provincial had taken great care, for keeping alive the
differences between the disaffected Scots, and Duke Lautherdale, and that the
Affairs in Ireland went on with great expedition, and that means was now used,
to create a difference between the Dutch and Prince of Orange, and if it could
be effected, there was no question to be made, but that the Protestant interest
would fail in Holland, and that 48. would not last long in England, for that it
was high time to hinder 49. from being effected, that Barley Broth trade
should grow dead, and Twelve be cut off; that Mum and Chocholate should be put
down, and the order of Magpies should be turned into their first institution
and habit, now the Deponent says these words to hinder 49. to be effected, is
an odd expression amongst them, for the cutting off the King, before he be 49.
Years Old complete, Barley Broth is the House of Commons, which shall be turned
out, and sit no more, Mum and Chocholate is Protestant persons which if not
destroyed, shall never have any vote in the House of Peers after this Kings
death, and by the Magpies they understand the Bishops, whose habit in
Parliament is Black and White, which shall be turned into Purple, whilst the
said Keines and the other Jesuit entertained this Deponent with these
Treasonable discourses and expressions, Mr. Jenison came to the said Keines,
and told him he lost a Letter, which he had received from Thomas White the
Provincial of St. Omers in a Walk he took to Islington, and would give Ten
Pound to any friend that would give it to him, and was afraid some
inconveniences would follow, if found by some Heretic; which words put the
said Keines into such a Consternation, that he asked him if he had a mind to
ruin them all; but then the said Jenison bad the said Keines to be quiet, for
none could understand it, which word this Deponent did likewise hear.

52. Item, That Mr. Keines was on the Twelfth day of August, determined to go
to Windsor, in Order to settle business therein, and toward the dispatching
48. at Windsor, if the King should go thither; and it was Judged the said 48.
would in few days go to Windsor, to make his abode there for some Weeks; but
the said John Keines told this Deponent he might chance to fall short of his
return again; these words were spoken to the Deponent by John Keines in his
Chamber; but the said Keines did not then go down to Windsor so soon, as
afterward appeared to the Deponent.

53. Item, That Smith within mentioned, that lies in Drury Lane, at one Mr.
Lowdes house a Tailor, in Cockpit Alley in the aforesaid Lane; and is also
employed to go from House to House, to see how the Catholics stand affected,
and Mr. Jenison did say, that if the Catholics had Courage enough, they might
Rise and Cut the Throats of 100000. Protestants in London; of which expression
of Jenison, the said Smith did tell the Deponent, asking his Opinion also of
the same; he answered, that Mr. Jenison talked like a Person that had more heat
than light. The said Smith did at the same time tell the Deponent, that the
Society gave him Five Pound per cent. for his Intelligence he gets at Court
of the Kings Actions, words, and Council, and transmits the same to John
Fenwick, who does the like to St. Omers; where it is Translated into French,
and so goes to Father Leshee the Confessor to the French King; which daily
Intelligence, the Deponent did daily see from the said Smith, he Lodging in the
same house with the Deponent, and the said Smith at the same time did tell the
Deponent he was a Lay Brother of the Society of Jesus, of the Order of
Politicians, as they term it, and attends Father Blundel to Newgate, in Order
to Convert the Prisoners there: All which the said Smith did tell the Deponent,
the 12. of August; and likewise the said Blundel did tell as much to the
Deponent, who has seen the said Blundel and Smith go to Newgate together.

54. Item, That one Matthew Medbourn a Player in the Dukes Theater, one Mr.
Penny, Mr. Mammock, Mr. Sharp, Mr. Shedon, and one Willim Smith a Schoolmaster
at Islington, one Edward Everard, and others meeting in a Club on Thursday and
Sunday Nights, with one Jones a Priest, and one Kinmash within mentioned: All
these Persons are employed by the Jesuits to Villifie the House of Commons, and
to go about the City of London, to Incense the people against them, and against
the Bishops of the Nation; and they delivered this Treasonable Position, that
the Commons Assembled in Parliament, are the Devils representatives and not the
Nations; which Treasonable and detestable words, this Deponent did hear at the
said Club, which is kept in Fullers Rents near Grays Inn, in the Month of
August; and the Deponent was Ordered by the Jesuits in London, to give the said
Persons great respect, and in their Names to thank the Club for their
faithfulness to them in that Particular.

55. Item, That Mr. Jenison on the Twelfth of August, did say, and did boast
that he had put several out of Love with the Kings Interest, and would so
continue, if that the King did not Turn Roman Catholic; and if the King did
not become Roman Catholic, he would not be Charles Rex long.

56. Item, That a Packet 10/20. August, arrived in London, from Thomas White
Provincial, Mr. Stapleton, Mr, Nevil, Mr. Peter's, Mr. Busby Procurator, and
Master of the Humanity Schools, to John Fenwick, in which it was specified that
the Twelve Jesuits were gone into Holland, and would use their skill and
interest to make a Commotion there; and that the Apple Tree which the Deponent
says, is meant the Prince of Orange should not be Great, and they hoped the
Fathers in London would follow their business closely, which Letters this
Deponent saw and read.

57. That a Packet went from London 12/22 August, in which the Provincial was
informed by John Fenwick, and the rest, that the Court was gone, or going to
Windsor, and the Fathers and honest William were ready to attend the Court, as
this Deponent was informed by John Fenwick.

58. That on August the 13. in the Afternoon, about Six of the Clock a Sermon
was Preached by John Keines to Twelve Persons, Men in poor habits (yet Men of
Quality, as the Deponent verily believes) by the whiteness of their hands: In
which Sermon, he did deliver that Protestants, and other Heretical Princes were
deposed (ipso facto) because such; and that it was as lawful to destroy them as
Oliver Cromwell, or any other Usurper: At which Sermon the Deponent was present,
not designedly, but by accident.

59. That on the 15/25 of August, John Keines, and John Fenwick went to a
Gentleman's Lodging, in or about Westminster, and persuaded him to remove his
Quarters, least God destroyed him with the sinners of the City, for God had
raised them and others of their Society, to do such things against the City,
that would make a man's Ears to ring that should hear it. The same Evening
Keines and Fenwick told the Deponent the Story, and laughed to think in what
affright they had put the Gentleman into, whose name they named but cannot be
called to mind by the Deponent.

60. Item, That John Keins came to the Lodging of this Deponent on Saturday the
17. of August, and told him it was endeavored to dispatch 48. at Windsor, if
possible, and withal told the Deponent that Mr. Howard Prior of the
Benedictines, Hilchcock Sub-prior, and Skinner, and Mr. Cook, and some other
Benedictines had promised to assist them with 6000 l. in order to the carrying
on the design: Now the said Monks did then by, at or near the Wardrobe behind
the Savoy; which report the said Keines the Deponent did believe; for that the
said Mr. Howard Prior, and Hilchcock Sub-prior of the Benedictines, told the
Deponent in the Morning, the 17. of August, that they had promised such a Sum,
and withal that the securing his Majesty's Person, in flight from Worcester,
was the worst days work that ever simple Jack Huddleston did in all his life
time, but now it was the time of their business, to get the Stewarts out of the
way; which the Deponent related to John Keines, and he the said John Keines did
tell the Deponent, if he would undertake to assist in dispatching the King, he
should be well rewarded, if not here, in Heaven; and the Deponent replied, that
he never shot off a Gun in all his life, and withal told the said Keines, he
could not be guilty of such a thing for all the world: Then the said Keines did
further Inform the Deponent, that Mr. Coniers a Benedictine Monk, was resolved
to pursue the design of dispatching 48. (which is the King) which appears to be
evidently true to the Deponent; for he heard Coniers on the 14. of August, Lay
a Wager of One Hundred Pounds with a Gentleman (not known to the Deponent) in
the Benedictine Covent, behind the Savoy, that the King should not Live to Eat
any more Christmas Pyes, of which Wager Ten Guineys were by each party
deposited in the hands of Mr. Hilchcock Sub-Prior; so that the Deponent said to
Keines, he told him no more of Coniers than he heard from himself the 14.
Ditto. But the Deponent before he parted with Keines, asked him what News about
the Town, and the said Keine told the Deponent, that all the News was War with
the French; the said Keines did say, if that prove true, then have at the
Rogues the House of Commons, they shall be remembered for all their Long Bills
against the Catholics. The Deponent replied, that with submission he thought
that the revenge proposed against them, would not do the business; and
therefore not a resolution consistent with a Catholic Spirit; for the
enterprise will be more Noble and Martial, and the Deponent urged he feared the
death of the King would not scarcely do the business, and effect the design,
unless His Royal Highness would pardon those that did that Act, and stand by
them in it. To which the said Keines replied, that the Duke was not the
strength of their trust; for they had another way to effect the setting up the
Catholic Religion; for when they had dispatched the King, they had a List of
Twenty Thousand Catholics in London, that were substantial Persons, fit to
bear Arms, that would Rise in Twenty Four hours time and less; and if James
would not comply with them to Plot, he must go also; it being late in the
Night, The said Keines prayed the Deponent to come to his Chamber at Eight of
the Clock next Morning, and he would have an hours discourse with him, before
he said Mass; and being about to take his leave of the Deponent, asked the
Deponent what he meant by those words, could not be guilty of such a thing, as
to assist in dispatching the King, there being no guilt in the thing. The
Deponent smiled, and said, he would not be guilty of so much Courage: Besides,
the Deponent says, that he told the said Keines, that it was his Opinion, that
it would be more safe to let Sir George Wakeman try his skill, and then the
People would not apprehend it so much.

61. Item, That he went to Keines Chamber on the 18. in the Morning, about
Eight or Nine of the Clock; but he was gone abroad, and left word that the
Deponent should come at Four in the Afternoon, and then he would have some
Discourse with him; and the Deponent went accordingly, but met Mr. Keines in
the Mewse, who said he was to meet some of the Fathers in Covent Garden, and
there would meet them some Dominicans; so would have the Deponent go along with
them, and coming to the appointed house, the Dominicans were ready met, these
(viz.) Mr. Vincent Provincial of the Order of St. Dominick in England, Joseph
Davies, Kinmash, Mr. Dominick, Mr. Collins, Mr. Fidding, Mr. Mansell and Mr.
Launsdale, as they said in the Name of all the rest of the Order in England, to
consider and comply with the Fathers of the Society, to propagate the Catholic
Faith, and when John Keines was sat with the Fathers of the Society by him (all
on a side) John Keines, Father Hartcourt, Father Fenwick, Father Wright, and
Father Blundel; the said John Keines propounded to the Dominicans, to
contribute to the design of killing the King, and carrying on the business in
England and Scotland. The Dominicans answered by their Provincial, that they
were Poor, and not able to do much; for they had but little or no money, but
they would let them have their personal assistance and Council, and procure
what Interest they could; but as for money they could not part with any, for
they were in Debt, and had scarce Four hundred pound in Stock, and the most
they could make of their Estates, is Three hundred and sixty pound per annum;
at which Consultation the Deponent was to and fro, and what was more said, the
Deponent cannot tell, for he was sent with the Proposals made to the
Dominicans, to the Carmelites Doctor Hanson, and Kemball, and Mr. Trevers, and
they said they had not One Penny in Stock, nor any Income, besides the Spanish
Ambassadors Allowance, for assisting in his Chapel: They by the Deponent did
present their Service to the Fathers met together, and bad him tell them their
prayers to God and our Blessed Lady should not be wanting: all which was acted
by Order of the Provincial of the Society.

62. Item, the Deponent went to see John Fenwick, on the 19. of August in the
afternoon, and whilst he was there, in comes John Keines, and presently after
him Richard Blundel, after Salutation past they asked the Deponent what news,
he answered he had heard none, but what was in the Gazett, then Blundel said,
he had been with his Workmen and they wanted Oil (what the meaning of this
is, the Deponent cannot positively tell,) but believes it was Sheeps Fat; for
the said Blundel, would not tell the Deponent his meaning by it, when asked:
Then the Deponent asked of Keines when he was for Windor, he replied the Court
was scarcely settled as yet, but said, Mr. Coniers and Mr. Anderton were to go
down on the Morrow, August the 20. and in the Morning. And if they did any
thing as to the business in hand, it would hasten his going down, and therefore
as yet could not certainly tell; when the Deponent asked further how honest
William did, Keines replied he was troubled with a sore Throat, and very bad
with it, that he could not ride to Windsor, and it would be dangerous for him
to go by Water, and that cold would be contracted, and he rendered unfit for
service. Then the Deponent took his leave of them, if being near Six of the
Clock in the afternoon, and went to the Monks Convent, and enquired there of
one Rumley a Lay Brother of the Orders, for Mr. Coniers, who said he was not
within, yet not far off, yet not to be spoken withal, for he was with some of
the Benedictine Fathers about business, and on the Morrow Morning was to go out
of Town betimes. So the Deponent left him, and being but a little way from the
place met Coniers, who laughing, said, the Roone
Still People were fools to set upon The King
48. at Windsor, because he was seldom in a posture to receive their kindness,
but he would see his Worship, and talk with him in some other Language.
Gunpowder.
Then Formillio, the Deponent asked him, how he replied, that if the Shirt on
his back knew he would Burn it; if that should not take effect, no means or
opportunity should be neglected, in order to the dispatch of 48; he further
told the Deponent he was in have, his time short, and business great, but told
the Deponent, honest William, and Pickering should stay in Town, seeing the
Person concerned was hic and Vbique, never long in one place.

63. Item, That on Tuesday the 21 of August, a consult was held by the Jesuits
then in London, with certain Benedictine Monks, about a Letter received from
the Archbishop of Dubline Talbot, to the Fathers of the Society, in which they
were given to understand, that Four Irish Jesuits, had undertaken the death of
the Duke of Ormond, and upon his death the Irish were ready to rise, and in his
Letter told them, that a Legate was arrived in Ireland, from the Pope, and that
he had asserted the Popes right to that Kingdom, and that the Kings of England
ceasing from being Roman Catholics, were no longer concerned therein, being
given them during the good pleasure of his Holiness, and therefore did
encourage the said Archbishop to contrive and use all means for the Recovery
of that Kingdom out of the hands of the English; and in the said Letter it was
mentioned, that if opportunities did not permit, the said Jesuits to do their
business, that they should send over one Dr. Foggarlie, now lodging at Mr.
Symmonds, the Widow of Symmonds and Apothecary, and that he and the Fathers in
Ireland, together with the said Foggerlie, would find out an expedient way, for
the death of the said Duke of Ormond. Furthermore, he did specify, that they
had procured several Irish to be made Commissioned Officers, in the Garrisons
in Ireland, and that he, and the rest had dispensed with them, to take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and that the Irish, that had so gotten
Commissions by the Archbishops means, had promised to betray their interest
into their hands, when the business should be ripe, and therefore desired the
Fathers to be diligent in England, as he and the rest of the Clergy were in
Ireland, which Letter John Keines did show to, and read to this Deponent,
Keines and Blundel giving this Deponent an account of the consultation, also
Foggerlie did tell the same to the Deponent, on the 21. of August, and that he
had great Interest in the Court of Ireland.

64. Item, That the said Foggerly is a main Agent, in this Hellish Plot, and
has promised, if the Archbishop Talbot will make use of him, he will do him
all the Service he can, as the Deponent is ready to justify, to the face of
the said Foggerlie, who did tell the Deponent, that himself and Coleman were in
the Consult, when Wakeman was contracted withal in order to Poison the King,
and said, if he had the interest in the King that Wakeman had, he would have
undertaken it himself, and all this was told the Deponent, on the 21 of August
in Foggerlies Chamber. And furthermore, the said Foggerlie did then and there
tell the Deponent, that he had hired Four Irish Russians whose names he did
neither tell the Consulters that met that day nor the Deponent, and they were
to mind the Kings posture at Windsor, but the Deponent telling the said
Foggerlie, he heard the King was gone to Porch-mouth, he was wonderfully
troubled, by reason (as the said Foggerlie did say) it did much impede their
design, and nothing would be attempted, as long as absent from Windsor.

65. Item, That the Lord Ambassador at the Court of Spain, Sir William
Godalphin; holds great correspondency, with Jerome Sinman the Irish Jesuit
before mentioned, Procurator for the Jesuits in England and Ireland, also with
the Archbishop of Tuam now at Madrid, -- as is a friend in his business, as
the said Sinman did inform the Society in a Letter of the 30, of July, 1678
Stilo Novo. And likewise in one to the Deponent, wherein he did specify that
Sir. William was as industrious as any one could be, to answer the expectations
of the Society, and that he had one Protestant Servant and his Chapline in the
House (viz.) the the Cook which makes a couple, and the Deponent knows that
Godolphin is a Papist, and has perverted a Kinsman of his own, also the
Deponent knows the Ambassador is very familiar with the Irish Jesuits, the
Arch Bishop Tuam and Sinman, and the Deponent does verily believe, that Mr.
Hodges sometimes Chaplain to the Lord Ambassador; if required testify as much:
and this Deponent further says, that when he was at Madrid, the said Chaplain
has left his Employ, because of the Ambassadors being a Papist, and the
Deponent has seen the said Ambassador at Mass, and has a Jesuit that comes to
his House, who reads both Philosophy and Divinity to the said Ambassador, of
which the Deponent was perpetually informed by the said Jerome Sinman, and the
said Archbishop of Tuam both Irish Jesuits of Madrid, but the Letters which
the Deponent speaks of, he saw and read at Mr. Saunders house, August the 22
1678.

66. Item, That the 22 of August, Money was sent from the Society by a Servant
of theirs, to supply the expenses of the Four Russians mentioned, who were got
to Windsor the 21. at Night, and the Sum sent was 80 l. which the Deponent saw
told, and they have written to, and informed them, that if more was wanting
they should have it, and they were bidden, not to be too frequent in one
another Company, and always to profess but small acquaintance, which order and
Money was dispatched away by Hartcourt Rector of London, in the Name of the
Provincial and whole Society.

67. Item, That the Deponent went to the Chamber of John Fenwick, which told
him he was at St. Omers, with Ten or Eleven Students (as near as this Deponent
remembers) there the, said Fenwick was to attend the Provincial, and with him
to return in Ten or Twelve days (as he said) together with Micho and others.
And while the Deponent was with the said Fenwick, a Messenger came in (viz.)
John Groves, with Orders from Hartcourt Rector of London, John Keines, Richard
Blundel, Mr. Write, Bazill Long worth, and Four other Jesuits that lie at
Sommerset-house, to pray the Provincial to write to Leshee the French Kings
Confessor, and let him know how well the business in Ireland stood, and desire
him to acquaint the French King therewith; the Deponent asked Groves, where the
Fathers were met again at Mr. Saunders house, and the Deponent after he had
received the Orders or Memorial, for so it was Instituted, and saw their Names
about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, he went to the house of Mr. Saundirs,
where this Deponent saw these Fathers, who told them of the said Order, and
after a short stay took his leave of them, and by them was Ordered to meet them
at Four of the Clock at Mr. Keines Chamber, where the Deponent met them, where
he saw Doctor Foggarlie, who showed him a Letter Writ to Mr. Benning field with
his own hand, and likewise the Deponent saw Letters from Blundel and John
Fenwick, and one from Father Ireland at St. Omers, but that of Dr. Foggarlies
to Mr. Benning field did contain in it, an account of Eight Letters that were
written to the Jesuits, some of which were delivered to the Post Office in
Russel Street, others to the General Post Office, others sent by Private
Messengers to Mr. Peter's a Jesuit, who lived with Mr. Charles Shelly in Sussex,
that Married the Relict of the Baron of Abergamy, the said Peter's was Ordered
to meet with the Provincial at London, about the design in hand, which if it
take not effect at Windsor, then speedily John Keines was to go to Windsor, to
meet with Conniers, who was designed to go out of Town, on the 20. instant with
Mr. Anderton to Windsor, 440. and after their business was done at Keines
Chamber, the Deponent left them.

68. Item, That the Deponent being to meet Doctor Tongue, on the 22. of August,
at the King's Head in Grays-Inn-Lane, about Six of the Clock at Night;
accordingly he went, and finding the Doctor was not come, he walked into the
Walks, and there he met with Coniers, who was supposed to be gone to Windsor:
The Deponent asked how it happened he went not his Journey; he told him his
Horse fell so Lame, he could scarce carry him Three Miles on the way; and he
himself was troubled with the Sciatica, which had given him great trouble all
the Night before. The Deponent was then urgent with him to tell him how he
would kill the King, seeing he laughed at the Means the Fathers intended to
use, (viz.) by shooting him; then said Coniers by reason of the Deponents
Importunity (showed him a Dagger, or a Knife Two edged) with a very sharp
point, and broad toward the Haft, which was of Bucks-horn, being a Foot long
in the Blade, and near half a Foot in the Haft; with this said he, shall the
Villain fall to the Ground, if it be possible. Coniers demanded of the Deponent
what he thought it might Cost, the Deponent answered, he could not tell. He
replied Ten Shillings or there about; the Deponent said it was too dear, and he
said nothing could be too dear for the King; the Deponent asked him where he
bought it: Coniers replied at the Old Cutlers in Russel Street; the Deponent
asked him why he made it so long; he replied that the Villain might fall by it;
the Deponent asked him how he said through his Cloak -- The Deponent asked him
how he could hope to escape. Coniers answered, he doubted not but to obtain a
Pardon, if he were not knocked in the head on the same place; the Deponent after
some short discourse, went to the King's Head, where he met Doctor Tongue
between Six and Seven of the Clock at Night.

69. That the Deponent did on the same 22. of August, about Nine at Night meet
Mr. Blundel, and seeing him have a Bag, asked him what he had; he replied
Tukesbury Mustard-balls, a notable and biting Sauce, and would furnish
Westminster, when he had enough of them.

70. Item, That on the 24. of August, Blundel told the Deponent in Fenwicks
Chamber, that it would be so ordered by the Society, that the Catholics of
England would endeavor to advance the design in hand, for shortning the Kings
days, and bid the Deponent be of good Courage, for Protestant Religion was now
on its last Legs.

71. Item, That on the Thirtieth of August, the Deponent met with the said
Blundel; who told him he must show him what Westminster, and the Houses on both
sides the Water must be done withal, and carried the Deponent to Fenwicks
Chamber, and there drew out a Letter-Case and Paper, in which the manner of
Firing Westminster, and the Houses on both sides the Water must be done withal,
and carried the Deponent to Fenwicks Chamber, Wapping, Tooly-street,
Barnaby-street, and St. Thomas the Apostles were contained. First, for
Westminster, if the Wind was Northerly, then they were to begin at the next
door to the Pauls-graves-head Tavern; the Jesuits and their Agents were to
carry it on to the Savoy, then the Benedictines were to carry it down on both
sides to Charing Cross, then the Jesuits and other Agents to Whitehall, and
were to the end of the Stone-Gallery; another Company to begin and carry it
into King Street, and Channel-Row, which was first to be Acted in the great
Fire 1666. But then they were not assured of the French Kings assistance, which
they are now assured by Leshee the French Kings Confessor (as the said Blundel
told the Deponent) at the same time Wapping, and the Ships in the River were to
be burned; and in Case the Wind blew up the River, the Fire to begin at a Place
near Bugbies-hole; and is to be carried on by Four men, they have made sure of
Wapping Middle-stairs; and then Four or Five more to carry it up higher. The
Deponent himself with Seven more, were ordered to ply about the Hermitage; and
his business was to encourage the Seven committed to his Care, and for his
reward, One thousand pound was promised, besides Eighty pound for former
service; but the Deponent says, in that Paper was contained if the Wind stood
contrary, they should change the Fire; at the same time others were to have the
charge of Tooly-street, Barnaby, and Thomas the Apostles on the other side the
Water committed to them, and the Fire is to begin on Redriff side, when it
begins at Wapping, or presently after: And this is to be done when the Tides
are low, that the Ships get not off from the Keys, in order to the Deponents
managing that part of the Fire committed to his own care at the Hermitage; he
was ordered to remove his Lodging into Wapping as soon as Orders should be
given him, and should have a Priest come to him, and say Mass in his Chamber
for good success to the design; but the Deponent says, he did not know he was
to be an Agent in the business, till he saw the Paper was signed by Thomas
White Provincial, in the name of the whole Society.

72. Item, That the Deponent says, that the Pope has Issued a Bull, a Copy
of which Mr. Blundel showed this Deponent on the 30. of August, and as near as
he remembers, bares Date, November or December last; in which the Pope was
pleased to Order, and dispose of the Bishoprics in England, and other
Dignities of the same, as follows.

ARCHBISHOPS.
Canterbury, Cardinal Howard, with an Addition of Forty thousand Crowns per
annum, for maintaining of a Legatine Power and Authority. York, Perrot
superior to the secular Priests, who has Power of Probate of Wills, Licenses
for Marriages, and all Episcopal Jurisdiction, except Ordination and
Confirmation.
BISHOPS.
London, Corker President of the Benedictines. Winchester, White Provincial of
the Jesuits. Durham, Strange Late Provincial of the Jesuits. Salisbury, Doctor
Godden. Norwich, Napper a Franciscan Friar. Ely, Vincent Provincial of the
Dominicans. Exeter, Wolf one of the Sherbon. Peterborow, Gifford a Dominican.
Lincoln, Sir John Warner Barronet, a Jesuit. Chichester, Morgan a Jesuit. Bath
and Wells, Doctor Armstrong a Franciscan Friar. Carlisle, Wilmot a secular
Priest, alias Quartermain. Chester, Thimbleby a secular new Cannon of Cambray.
Hereford, Sir Thomas Preston Jesuit. Bristoll, Mounson a Dominican. Oxford,
Williams Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices: he is to have the Denary
of Chichester, and is to have Precedence over Professors in Divinity, and
peruse their Lectures ere they read them in Public. St. David's, a secular
Priest Benson. St. Asaph, Jones a secular. Bangor, Joseph Davis, Kinmash a
Dominican.
ABBOTS.
Of Westminster, Doctor Sheldon a Benedictine Monk. Of Sion house, Skinner a
Benedictine. Of Canterbury, Bettum a Sorbonist. Of St. Paul's, Leyborn, a
Secular, and Secretary to the Cardinal. Of Windsor, Howard with Twelve
Benedictine Cannons. Of Chichester, Morgan a secular.
Winchester, Doctor Watkinson President of the English College at Lisbourn;
many Dignities of the Church not here named, are to be supplied by the
Spaniards, and other Foreigners; because they have not Clergy enough to be
Professors, nor are there any Prebendaries, or other Places undisposed; and in
the same Bull it was ordered that the Jesuits read Philosophy and Divinity in
all great Towns, and Places where they had Colleges, but not give Degrees; and
whilst English Jesuits are employed in Instructing in Humanity and Philosophy,
and others in reading Divinity, Preaching and Catechizing, they should be
supplied by Spanish Jesuits, and other Foreigners to assist at the Altar, and
in the care of the Colleges.

73. Item, That the Deponent saw the Second of September, a Packet out of
Scotland directed to John Groves, Dated August the 20. 1678. in which the
Fathers from thence met at Edenborough did tell the Fathers here, that they had
not much to write, but that Eighty thousand Catholics in that Kingdom were
ready to Rise and assist when the business should grow hot, and would join with
the disaffected Scots when required by the Scotch Jesuits; and in the said
Letter it was mentioned that one Westby was destroyed, by one that was Servant
to one Lovel a Jesuit, for endeavoring to detect the Rebellion, with its
Authors and Contrivers to the Council of Scotland.

74. Item, That the Deponent saw on the ^/12 September, Letters of the Fourth,
Stilo Novo, from St. Omers, written and subscribbed by Thomas Whitebread
Provincial, in which was given to Blundel, to whom the Letter was directed;
that Twelve Scotch Jesuits were sent into Scotland, by Order from the General
of the Society, and have One thousand pound given them by Leshee the French
Kings Confessor, to keep up the Commotion in Scotland, that the French King may
Land an Army in that Kingdom; and that the said Jesuits, had Orders to carry
themselves like Nonconformist Ministers amongst the Presbyterian Scots.

75. Item, That the Third of September, this Deponent saw a Letter from St.
Omers, from the Provincial; but it was Dated the First of September, by which
the Deponent did perceive that though the Letter was Dated from thence, it came
not from thence, because it was Old Style, and thereby did believe the
Provincial was in England. Fifteenth, a Letter directed to Blundel, was
specified that the Provincial was informed of some discoveries made; at which
he was somewhat surprised, and upon second thoughts Ordered the said Blundel to
desist the business in hand; but to write to Benningfield not to take notice
what Keines said, it being but a conceit of his own, and the said Blundel did
on the Third of September write to Benningfield, and did advertise him of the
Provincials thoughts, concerning what had past about that concern; and in the
Letter of the Provincial to Blundel, it was ordered that thanks should be given
to Doctor Fogarly, for his Care in the business of 48. (the King) and for his
forwardness to assist those in Ireland, and Ordered Letters to be sent thither
with all speed, and give them his thanks, and tell him he would not cease to
pray for their good success.

76. Item, That the Provincial came to London on the Third day at Night, and
the Deponent went to his Lodging, and was ordered to wait upon him next Morning.

77. Item, That the Deponent went on the Fourth in the Morning, according to
the aforesaid Orders, and when the Provincial saw the Deponent; he asked him
with what face he could look on him, since that he the Deponent had played him
such a treacherous trick, and struck him Three Blows with his Stick, and a Box
on the Ear, and charged him with being with the King, and a Minister with him;
whom he suspected to have informed the King of these things; because that
Benningfield had related in a Letter to Blundel, that the Duke of York had
suggested some such thing to him, and did therefore Judge that it must be so by
the Deponent, that must have been drawn in by some person to the same; but at
last the Provincial told the Deponent he was willing to be reconciled to him,
if he would discover who the person was, his Name, and place of abode; to the
end he might be secured of him; and were resolved to kill him, and in the mean
time the Deponent was ordered to make himself ready to go Beyond Sea within
Fourteen days (as the Provincial said) and that the Deponent might not cheat
them, they were to pay for his Coach-hire, and ordered him entertainment at
Sittingborne, and other places on the Road to Dover; and there Mr. Coniers at
the King's Head was to pay for his passage to St. Omers, where the said Deponent
was to remain till further Orders from the Provincial, and R. Blundel was to
take care of carrying on the Fire at Wapping, in the Deponents Room.

78. Item, on the Sixth of September, Pickering told the Deponent that Coniers
was gone to Windsor, and he said after Ten days stay, he would go to the Lord
Brudnels House.

79. Item, That about Night the Deponent attending the Provincials door, and
about to go in, he heard White and some others, whom the Deponent supposes by
their Voices to be Father Micho, and one Mr. Pool, consulting about the
disposing a person, he supposes to be himself, their words were these; this man
has betrayed us, and therefore we will give a Coachman Twenty Pound, to take
him up and carry him directly to Rochester, to Esquire Leeds house who lives
near the Town, and from thence to Dover by some by way, because he was
acquainted at Sittingbourn, and said if they could get him beyond sea, they
would torment him till he had confessed to them, who it was that had been with
the King, and informed him of the business, when the Deponent heard these words
he made have away and durst not lie that night in his own Lodgings.

80. Item, That the Seventh of September at Night, the Deponent returned to his
Lodgings, where he intended not to lie, but only to take some necessaries for
his use the next day; but meeting one Grigson a Papist, at whose house he had
formerly lodged near the Read-Lion in Drury Lane; the said Grigson told him
that the Jesuits were displeased with him, because he answered not their
expectations, in being true to them, and that the Jesuits are dangerous
persons, and would ruin him if they could; and said further, that the said
Grigson had known their Rogeries this Twelve or Fourteen years; and the
Deponent being through discourse detained by him, was forced to lie in his
Lodging in Drury Lane; and when the Deponent was laid down in his Bed, one
Stratford (a person utterly unknown to the Deponent, discoursed with, or any
otherwise provoked) endeavored to break into the house, where the Deponent
lay, and broke down a door to get into his Lodging, but was forced back,
because he apprehended himself to be observed by the Servants; and when he saw
he could not come at him to Assassinate him (as he verily believes); he reviled
him* The Deponent, and brake several Quarrels of Glass in a Window under his
Lodging; the Deponent being therefore verily persuaded, that Stratford was set
on by the Jesuits, to do him a mischief, made his escape thence easily on
Sunday Morning; but durst not return thither again, because that Stratford
threatened to kill him; now the House where the Deponent lay is a School, where
Blundel usually Catechized every Sunday in the Afternoon.

81. Item, September the Eighth, whilst this Deponent was going to attend Gods
worship in the City of London, a Papist, who goes by the Name of Nevil, met him
in the Strand, and told the Deponent there was great murmuring amongst the
Jesuits against him; because a complaint was made against them by some persons,
of whom he was suspected one. The said Nevil did tell the Deponent that it was
reported he must ruin the Jesuits, or they him; telling him moreover, that the
Bishop of Rochester was made acquainted with it, and said he would lead them
such a Dance, as they never followed since the Fool their Founder came into the
World; to which this Deponent made no reply, but taking this person to be a
Trapan, when asked for his Lodging, gave no account.

The Names of the Conspirators, and where they are.
Jesuits.
THomas White Provincial England. Richard Strange, late Provincial England.
Richard Ashbey alias Thimbleby, England. Mr. Hartcourt Mr. Jenison in England.
John Keines in England. William Wright in England. Richard Blundel in England.
Gregory Pool in England. Micho in England. Benningfield in England. Langworth
in England. Morgan in England. Richard Peter's in England. Dorrington in
England. Lacy in England. Vaughan in England. Every in England. Sir Thomas
Preston at Liege. Sir John Warner at Watton. Thomas Stapleton at St. Omers.
Thomas Farmor at St. Omers. Mr. Egglestone at Watton. Mr. Sanders at Liege.
Edward Hull at St. Omers. Coniers in England. Launell and Christopher Peter's at
St. Omers. Jenison at Watton. Marsh at Ghent. John Peter's in England. Blake
alias Cross in Spain. Munford in Spain. Wilkinson in England. Woolfe in
England. Nevel in England. Sabrand at St. Omers. Walker at St. Omers. Roper at
St. Omers. Constable at St. Omers. Canny at Rome. Crane at Watton.
Benedictines.
Howard at Doway. Hilchcock at Doway. Anderton in England. Coniers in England.
Rumly in England. Cocker in England. Skinner in England. Crosby in England. Mr.
Reeves at Doway.
Carmelites.
Doctor Hanson in England. Mr. Trevers in England. Mr. Kemball in England.
Franciscans.
Mr. Napper in England. Doctor Armstrong in England.
Dominicans.
Joseph David Kinmash in England. Dominick in England. Collins in England.
Vincent in England. Hidden in England. Mansell in England. Lynsdale in England.
Captain Busby in England. Cooper at Rome.
Secular Priests.
Perrot in England. Morgan in England. Willmot in England. Doctor Godden in
England. Jones Senior in England. Jones Junior in England. Woolfe in France.
These Seven only by Information.
Gerrard in England. Herick in England. Fisher in England. Jackson in England.
Pi^kerd in England. Sharp in England. Doctor Preston in England.
Scotch Jesuits.
Lovell Saunders More
Twelve Jesuits whose Names I know not, lately gone into Scotland, but their
Persons I know.
Secular persons.
Doctor Foggerly Sir George Wakeman Mr. Coleman John Groves.
Assassinates.
Four Irish. Pickering Lay-Brothers. Smith Lay-Brothers. Talbot and Lynn
Archbishops. Jerome Sinman. Sir William Godolphin, Lord Ambassador in Spain.
The Examination of Titus Oats before the Parliament.
WHo begins his Account from King James's Reign, and tells them that he and His
Son Prince Henry, were both dispatched out of this World before their times, by
what means, and by whom, he gave an account how the last Rebellion begun, and
what the Jesuits were, concerned in the death of the Late King; how they Fired
the City in 66. what Persons managed every street; what Ingredients the
Fireworks were made of, and where they were made; he further gives an Account
of the Firing St. Katharines, and Southwark, and that lately at Limehouse and
several other places in the Country, he acquaints them that the Rector of St.
Omers gives the French King an account of the Transactions here, and relates
these Correspondencies in Town; he tells this Conspiracy has been hatching
ever since King James's time, only the Measures and Instruments have been
altered according to the several ages; he names the Jesuits that are in
Scotland under the Character of Presbyterian Ministers, to Preach up Rebellion
there; he says that the French King has already Landed a great Army in
Ireland, being those Forces that left Messina, and it is to make them up 25000.
which are to join with the Irish Papists in a second Massacre, to Fire the City
of Dublin, and destroy the Duke of Ormond and his Adherents, and that part of
the Conspiracy was managed by Coleman, and that the King was to be killed by
Three persons whom he named; any of them to take an Opportunity, and use all
means they thought most effectual, that there was a Fire to be begun without
Temple Bar, and to be carried on to Charing Cross, several Porters being
assigned to manage it; he says the Ciphers used for the Kings Name in all
their Breviates was 48. for the Nation 66. for the Parliament they called them
Barly-broth, he tells them there was such and such Jesuits in Holland, to stir
up Animosities among the people, and to set them against the Prince of Orange.

The Examination of Titus Oats before the Lord Chief Justice, October 24 1678.
This Examinant says, that in the Month of May last, he saw a Patent under
the Seal of the Father General of the Society of Jesuat Rome, called Johannis
Paulus de Oliva, at the Chamber of Mr. Langhorn; wherein it was expressed that
by virtue of a Breviat from the Pope, he did constitute the Lord Arundel of
Warder, Lord High Chancellor of England, which Patent was sent to the Lord
Arundel of Warder, by a Messenger who was the Son of Mr. Langhorn, and this
Examinant says, that he saw a Letter subscribed by the Lord Arundel of Warder
as he believed; wherein he acknowledged the receipt of the same Patent, and
accepted of the same, and promised to ask acceptance of the Society.

This Examinant says, that in June last he saw the Patent, wherein my Lord
Powis was Constituted Lord Treasurer of England, which Patent was carried by
one Parsons Secretary to the Lord Powis, from one Sanders's house in
Wildstreet, to be delivered to the Lord Powis, and at the delivery of the
Patent 300 l. was paid by Parsons to one Fenwick and Ireland, to carry on the
design of the Jesuits, which was to raze Rebellion in the Three Kingdoms, and
destroy the King. In the Month of July, this Examinant saw a Letter subscribed
Powis, directed to Fenwick; wherein his Lordship did own the receipt of the
said Patent, and did accept of the same, and said he had 300. Men and Horse
ready for the design, and that he would venture his life and fortune for the
Affair.

In the Month of August last, This Examinant saw a Letter directed to Mr.
Langhorn by the outside, but within to the Society of Jesuits, wherein Sir.
William Godolphin acknowledged, he had received the like patent to be Lord
Privy Seal, and he accepted thereof, and in July 1677. This Examinant saw the
same Patent in the hands of the Archbishop of Evan at Madrid in Spain.

This Examinant says in July last Mr. Coleman acknowledged, and confessed to
John Fenwick, in this Examinants presence, that he received the like Commission
or Patent to be Secretary of State, this was a good exchange.

This Examinant says, that in May, June, July and August last, this Examinant
saw Two Letters Signed Stafford, whereby it did appear that my Lord Stafford
was in the Conspiracy against His Majesty, and that he had returned several
Sums of Money to the Jesuits to carry on the design, these Letters were
directed to Fenwick and Ireland.

And in August, this Examinant saw another Letter directed to the same persons,
signed Stafford, wherein my Lord writ, that although he has sent his son to
Lisbone, yet he would be never the worse friends to the Jesuits, and this
Examinant conceives the reason of that Letter, was because there was a
difference between the English College at Lisbone and the Jesuits.

In July last, this Examinant saw in the hands of Fenwick a Commission,
directed to my Lord Bellasis, from the persons aforesaid to be General of the
Army, to be raised in England against his Majesty, and in the same Month this
Examinant saw a Letter directed from my Lord to Fenwick, wherein his Lordship
acknowledged the receipt thereof, and thanked the Society for the same, and he
accepted of and would do what in him lay, to answer their exspectation; in May
last, this Examinant saw a patent in the hand of Mr. Langhorne, to make the
Lord Peter's Lieutenant General of the Army; and in June last, this Examinant
did hear my Lord Peter's, in the presence of Mr. Langworth his Confessor,
acknowledge the receipt of the same, and that he accepted thereof, and his
Confessor presently wished him much joy thereof.

This Examinant in July last at the Phesant in Fullers-rents, on a Sunday did
give one Penny a Commission to be a Captain of Foot, this Pennys Sister is
Servant to the Queen as Penny said, the like Commission for Mr. John Carrol to
be a Captain of Horse, at my Lady Dramants in July last, and gave the Examinant
Twenty Shillings, that is to say Four new Crowns.

This Examinant says, he delivered a Commission to one Mr. Townly, at the
Red-Posts in Wildstreet to be Captain of Foot, this was delivered in July or
August.

This Examinant says that in July last, he saw Mr. Fenwick fill a blank
Commission, which he informed this Examinant, was a Commission to Sir. George
Wakeman to be Physician to the Army, and this Examinant says, that he knows
that Sir George Wakeman is Physician to the Society of Jesuits, and has seen
his Patent.

This Examinant says that in August last, there was a Consultation, at which
Sir George Wakeman, William Herrent, John Fenwick, Nicholas Blundel, John
Keines, Thomas Jenison, Edward Coleman, and Dr. Foggarly was present, and that
15000 l. was proposed to Sir George Wakeman to Poison the King, who accepted
thereof, and then received of Coleman 5000 l. in part, this Examinant not being
well, was not present at that Consultation, but was informed of it by Foggarly,
Fenwick, and Blundel, and this Examinant saw the Levy thereof, with Fenwicks
hand, and Foggarlie told this Examinant, that he told Sir George Wakeman if he
had such Interest at Court as Wakeman had, that he would have undertaken it
himself, and so he told this Examinant that he would have done it.

Sworn before me (by Titus Oats) William Scrogs,

This following Examination taken upon Oath before us, Sir Edmund Windham, Sir
Thomas Stringer, and Sir Gilbert Gerard.
AS to the circumstance of time and place, this Examinant says he cannot
certainly depose as to such particulars, but says, in the Months of June or
July last, this Deponent did in Wild-garden, deliver to Sir Francis Ratcliff
Baronet, a Commission to be Major General of the Army, in the presence of his
Eldest Son, who at the same time received from this Examinant a Commission, to
be Captain in the said Army, and at the delivering of the said Commission, Sir
Francis Ordered his Son to give this Examinant Three Ginneys, which he did
accordingly, this Examinant never saw Sir Francis Ratcliff before then, other
then his Son, who he was very well acquainted with, who told this Examinant
that Sir Franois was his Father.

This Examinant says that in June last, he saw in the hands of Fenwick, a
Commission or Patent to John Lambert, to be Adjutant General to the Army, and
in July after, this Examinant saw a Letter directed to Fenwick, wherein Lambert
confessed the receipt of the said Commission, and accepted of the same, and
this Examinant is well acquainted with Lamberts Hand.

This Examinant saw Mr. Langhorn to have a Commission to be Advocate General in
his Own hands, in May last.

This Examinant in May last, saw a Commission to the Eldest Son of the Lord
Arundell of Warder, to be Commission General of the Army, and heard he accepted
of the same, at the same time his Father received it.

This Examinant in June last, saw a Commission in the hands of Fenwick to my
Lord Baltimore, to be Colonel of Horse in the Army, and Fenwick delivered it to
Groves, and this Examinant went with Groves to my Lord Baltimores door, and
Grove carried the Commission into the house, and told the Examinant he
delivered it to my Lord, and this Examinant within Two or Three days after saw
a Letter from my Lord, wherein he acknowledged the receipt of it.

There was a Commission to Colonel Thomas Howard, delivered him by this
Examinant to be Colonel in the Army (but he is since dead) this was delivered
in June and July last in Wild Garden.

This Examinant in August last, delivered a Commission to Mr. Leshley, to be a
Colonel of Horse in the Army, to be raised against His Majesty, this was
delivered in a house in the Strand near the Savoy, and this Leshley gave this
Examinant a Ginney the same time.

Another Commission delivered in the same Month to one Roper, to be a Colonel
by this Examinant, and another to Ropers Son to be a Captain, and the Father
gave this Examinant Ten shillings.

In June or July last, he delivered on to Matthew Medborn to be a Captain, this
was delivered at his house in Plough-yard in Fetter-lane, and at the same time,
he gave his Examinant a Black Hat for a White one.

This Examinant in August last, delivered a Commission to one Winter or Wittor
to be a Colonel of Foot.

FINIS.

