One Cry more of the Innocent and Oppressed FOR JUSTICE: Being A Fourth
Relation OF THE Unjust Proceedings of the MAGISTRATES in and about the City of
London, with and against XVII. (of the People of God) called Quakers, at the
IV. several Sessions hereafter named; where they received the unjust Sentence
of Transportation.

He that oppresses the Poor to increase his Riches, and he that gives to the
Rich, shall surely come to want.

Prove. 22.16. For the Oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffs at
him.

Psalm. 12.5. Printed in the Year, 1665.

A short Relation of the Trial of five of the aforesaid People, at the Sessions
held at Hickes-hall the fourth and sixth days of the second month (called
April) 1665.
THe Judges names the Prisoners knew not, but be sure their sins will find
them out, John Francis Tryponet, Ann Haley, Margaret Walsby and Francis Marloe,
being all set to the Bar, and an Indictment read against them which was much to
this purpose; that they with several others were met together at an unlawful
meeting, or Sedicious Convinticle, etc. at one John Elsons house in
Johns-street contrary to the Laws of this Realm, notwithstanding they have been
twice convicted before, etc.

Judge. John Francis, guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. As much as I do understand, this Indictment is taken up falsely
against me, and so he was set by.


Judge. Anne Haly, are you guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. This indictment which you have drawn against me is false, for I was
never taken at any meeting, nor had before any Magi^^^ate for being at any
meeting, but only once, neither was I ever Prisoner, or in Prison before this
time, except it was to visit my friends, so that I am not guilty of that
indictment.


Judge. We have Ann Haleys name twice upon record, and this is your third
offense: then answer was made she had a Daughter, and her name was Ann, and she
had been in prison twice, yet for all it was so plainly manifested unto them
that she had been but once in prison, as William Turner who is one of their own
members told them, yet for all this they proceeded against her, and passed
their unjust sentence upon her, viz. to be transported to the Island of Jamaica
for seven years, and as they were carrying her out of the Court, she said, take
heed what you do, for you are about a work that will call for judgment, to
come down upon your heads, and one that sat upon the Bench said, woman, woman,
you have money enough, pay down one hundred pound, and you shall be discharged


Observe. Does it not plainly appear that it is money which they aim at, and
that it is not us that they seek, but that which we have, for that which they
call an offense, which we know is none, viz. to worship God in Spirit and
Truth, the penalty of it may be taken off for money; so that it is very plain
and evident, that instead of seeking our preservation, they seek our
destruction.

And this unjust action of theirs, in sentencing this ancient and innocent
Widow was laid so plainly before most of them, that had a hand in it, at
several times, and also before the whole Court, where she received her unjust
sentence; so that they were fully persuaded in themselves that they had done
the said Widow much wrong, for it was plainly laid before them all, the next
Sessions, yet for all this there was not a man in the Court that would appear
to do her Justice.


Judge. Margaret Welsby are you guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. Of what?


Judge. Of going to Conventicles, or unlawful Meetings.


Pris. As for Conventicles I deny them, neither am I guilty of any unlawful
Meeting, for I own the meeting of the people of God to be lawful: And so she
was set by.


Judge. Francis Marloe, guilty or not guilty:


Pris. I never was at such a Meeting in all my life as a seditious Conventicle,
but I meet to wait upon the Lord, to enjoy his Presence.


Judge. You must plead guilty or not guilty.


Pris. I am not guilty of any such thing, as you accuse me of: And so she was
set by.

And then the Witnesses were called and sworn against the aforesaid four, and
the Jury charged with them who went forth, and within a little time returned
again, and the Prisoners was set to the Bar, and the Jury was asked if they
were agreed, and answer was made yes.


Clark. Are the Prisoners guilty or not guilty?


Jury. Guilty: And then the Court seemed to rejoice; and then they passed the
aforesaid Sentence upon them, not suffering the Prisoners to speak any thing
more in their own defense.


Obs. The said John Francis aforenamed being a German, and not a Subject of
this Realm, therefore not within the reach of the late Act; yet notwithstanding
they proceeded against him, and passed the aforesaid sentence upon him.

And the next Sessions after they had received the unjust sentence, the
aforenamed Ann Haley, was had down to the Old Baily, by William Turner Turnkey
of Newgate, who said to her by the way, When you come in Court you must promise
never to come amongst this wicked crew any more, nor go to any more of their
Meetings.


Pris. How dare thou call them a wicked Crew? for they are the people of the
Lord, and I shall not promise to absent my self from them. And when she came in
Court, they called for the Quaking Woman's Paper, and one began to read, saying,
Ann Haley you have been three times convicted in London; the Prisoner answered,
Nay, but once, and so he read twice or thrice, and she still made answer, Nay
but once; then the man stopped, and asked her if she was sorry for what she had
done? She answered I do not know any thing that I have done to cause me to be
sorry: And then they bid take her away, which was done; and so returned back to
Newgate, where she with many more by their unjust actings lies liable to be
Transported, etc.

The sixth day of the aforesaid Month, John Horsy being called to the Bar at
Hickes-Hall, and an Indictment read against him, which was much after the
manner and form of the rest.


Judge. Guilty or not guilty?


Pris. The Indictment is false, for I was at no such Meeting, as in contempt to
the King, or any in Authority, for our Meetings are peaceable and quiet, and
not in contempt to any.


Judge. You must plead, Guilty or not guilty.


Pris. Would you have me say I am guilty of that which I am not guilty of. And
then the Witnesses were called, and the Clark told the Judge they could do
nothing till William Turner came, for said he, he may make many scruples, and
we cannot do without him; and so he was sent for, and when he came, the Judge
asked him if he had me from the Meeting on the 19th. day of March? He said yes;
then I said he has born false witness, for he was not at the Meeting to see me
there, neither did he receive me into his Custody that day; and so they charged
the Jury with me, and told them that they needed but one Witness in this case;
and then one of the Jury asked another whether they should go out or no? they
said, no; the Case was clear, and so cried a Verdict presently, and said the
Prisoner was guilty, and then they passed the aforesaid Sentence upon me.


The Trial of Thomas Tailor, Thomas Davis, Edward Patisson, John Fitz Gerrard,
John Samon, Hannah Camack, and Anne Standrige, at the Sessions at the Old
Bayley for the City of London, the 8th day of the second Month, called April,
65. where Judge Hide and Keeling sat as Judges.
THe Prisoners all being set to the Bar, and an Indictment read against them,
That they were taken at Unlawful Assemblies, or Seditious Conventicles, under
color and pretense of the Exercise of Religion, in other manner than is
allowed by the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, and in contempt
to the King and his Laws, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

Judge. Thomas Tailor, are you guilty, or not guilty?


Prison. I am not guilty of being at any unlawful Assembly, Conventicle, or
Meeting; and then he was set by.


Judge. Thomas Davis, are you guilty, or not guilty?


Prison. I am innocent, and have wronged no man, neither did I meet contrary to
the allowance of the Liturgy, nor in contempt to any in Authority; for the
Liturgy does allow of people to meet together in the worship of God. And so he
was set by.


Judge. Edward Patisson, guilty, or not guilty?


Prison. Not guilty. And John Fitz Gerrard, and John Samon answered much to the
same effect.


Judge. Hannah Camack, Guilty or not guilty?


Prison. I am not guilty of being at any unlawful Meeting, and Anne Standrige
made answer to the same effect.

And then the Witnesses were called, and sworn, which was the Marshall and two
or three of his men, who swear that the aforesaid Prisoners were met together
at the Bull and Mouth, naming the day; and one from the Bench asked the
Witnesses, if they knew Thomas Tailor? the Marshall said, yes, very well, for
it was as much as three or four of us could do, said he, to get him in at the
Counter gate: the Prisoner replied, yes, and that he had good reason to refuse
going with them, because they did abuse him, for the Marshall did pluck him by
the hair, and did knock his head against the gate, and his man did strike him
several blows on one of his legs with his Cain, at which the Judge took no
notice, so as to reprove them, for their so abusing of him; so he told them,
that they that made the Laws were the first breakers of them, for whereas you
should send two Justices of the Peace, you send the wicked Marshals, and their
men, and a company of Judase's band to abuse us. Then the Judge spoke to the
Jury, incensing them against us, saying, that we were a people that would not
be subject to Magistracy, and that we would not swear, (swearing being a
special part of Gods Worship, etc.) and the Prisoner would have spoken more in
answer to the Judges reviling speeches against him, but he was pulled from the
Bar; and as they were having him away, he told them that they might have saved
that labor, as to fetch us from Newgate, to make the people believe that they
would do us Justice, you might as well have sent us word that we should be
banished, and that would have saved both you and us the labor.


Judge. Thomas Davis, what do you say yet, are you guilty, or not guilty.


Prison. To what purpose should I plead, you might as well never have brought
me hither to be tried by twelve men, for its but merely for fashion sake, and
to blind the eyes of the people, thinking to make them believe we should have a
fair Trial, but he told them, they might as well have sentenced him before he
came thither, for he did believe they were resolved what to do, and that it was
observed, Jury or no Jury was all one, for if they were men that would not
violate their consciences, in condemning the innocent, then they should be
threatened, and fines laid upon them, as late experience in that place has made
manifest. And then Judge Keeling stood up, being in a rage to hear of their
Injustice, and said that the Prisoner was made of nothing but railing, or words
to that purpose; and further said, that if the Jury bring not in their Verdicts
according to the intent and meaning of the Law, that they were not to receive
it: to which the Prisoner answered, that he did believe the Juries were Judges
in matter of Fact, and that they who are called Judges are obliged to receive,
and to do justly between man and man; but to this they made no answer, and then
they commanded that the Prisoner should be taken away, if he would not say
guilty, or not guilty: then the Prisoner looking upon the Jury, said, that he
was innocent, and he would not that they should be guilty of his innocent
sufferings: then he was violently taken away and thrust into the hole amongst
the Felons.


Judge. Edward Patisson, what can you say for your self?


Prison. I was not at a Meeting that day which the Witnesses have sworn they
took me on.


Judge. Where were you then?


Prison. Ask your Witnesses: then the Judges asked the Witnesses whereabout
they had me? they said in the great room at the Bull and Mouth: then the Judge
asked me where I was about 11 or 12 a clock? I said I was at home about the
eleventh hour.


Judge. How came you to be taken then?


Prison. I was at Ann's lane end, and two halbert men came behind me, and
pulled me by the Coat, and told me I must go to the Counter. I asked them for
what, they answered, they could not tell, but said, you must go. Then the
Marshall remembered himself, and said, that there was one taken out of the
street at that time, but they taking little notice of it, and I not being
suffered to speak any more, the Jury brought me in guilty among the rest. And
John Fitz Gerrard, and John Samon pleaded much to this effect.


Judge. Hannah Camak what did you do at the Bull and Mouth?


Pris. I was there to worship the Lord in Spirit and in Truth.


Judge. You have said well, That is crime sufficient: Take her away.


Pris. Is Worshipping the Lord in Spirit and in truth become a Crime amongst
you? To which they gave her no answer, but haled her away. And so the Jury went
forth a small time, returned again, and the aforenamed seven Prisoners were all
set to the Bar, and the Jury were asked whether the Prisoners were guilty or
not guilty? and answer was made guilty; and one Howell who is Deputy Recorder
of the City passed the unjust and unreasonable sentence of Transportation upon
them, to the Island of Jamaica there to remain for the space of seven years;
much more passed between the Prisoners and the Court, which is not here
mentioned; this being only a Relation in short, to give all or any that desire
to understand how we are proceeded against, that in time to come none may say
we did not know of these things.


The Trial of Robert Witham at the Sessions House in the Old Baily the 10.11.
and 12. days of the third Month 1665.
HE being called to the Bar, and an Indictment being read against him, but he
could not well hear what it was by reason of the lowness of the voice of him
that read it, and the great noise that was in the Court.

Judge Keling. Asked him whether he was guilty or not guilty?


Pris. I am innocent before the Lord, for he knows the secrets of all hearts.


Judge. You must plead guilty or not guilty.


Pris. What am I guilty of?


Judge. You have broken the King's Laws.


Pris. I never had any evil in my heart against the King, nor against you,
since I have known the Lord.


Judge. There is a Law that you should not meet above the number of five.


Prisoner. What would you have of me, would you have my life? the Judge said no.


Pris. If the Lord require one thing, and you another, judge you whether I
should obey?


Judge. Take him away, and on the 12th. day of the aforesaid Month they passed
their unjust Sentence upon him, to be transported to the Island of Iamaica for
the term of seven years, he not being tried by any Jury; and indeed it made
little matter of their calling a Jury, for Jury or no Jury is all one, for that
same Sessions there were three of the people called Quakers, that were to be
tried by a Jury, and because the Jury did bring in the verdict according to
their evidence, and contrary to Judge Kelings mind, and what he had intended,
he threatened them exceedingly, and fined ten of them one hundred Marks a
piece, and committed them to Newgate, there to remain without Bail or
Maineprise, till payment thereof were made: so that all people may see and take
notice what service Juries are of, and what service Laws are of, for if they
would lay all their acts and Statutes aside, and Juries, and Witnesses, and say
it is our wills that such and such things should be done against you, this
would be plainer, and down righter proceedings then those proceedings which we
receive under the pretense of a Law; and verdict of a Jury.


The Trial of Joseph Haugh, Richard Thomson, William Stevenson, and Mary Dall
at the Sessions at the Old Baily, upon the 22 day of the 4th. Month, called
June, 65, where one Keling sat as Judge.
JOseph Haugh being called to the Bar, and an Indictment read against him, much
after their old form, and Witnesses sworn, the the Judge asked him guilty or
not guilty?

Pris. What benefit shall I have by pleading? the Judge answered I should be
tried by the Country.


Pris. If the Jury bring me in not guilty shall I then be cleared? the Judge
said yes; then I said, the Jury might be sent to Prison for me.


Judge. Oh are you there about, let them look to that, if they did contrary to
the Law they should suffer, but you shall be cleared.


Judge. Will you plead guilty or not guilty?


Pris. Your wills are your Law, you must do your pleasure. Then he said, take
him away.

Then was set to the Bar, Richard Thomson, William Stephenson, and Mary Dall,
and an Indictment read against them, that they were taken at unlawful
Meetings, or Sedicious Conventicle; where they with others were met together,
under color and pretense of the exercise of Religious Worship, in other manner
then is allowed by the Liturgy of the Church of England.


Judge. Richard Thomson are you guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. I am innocent, and have not offended the Law of God, neither have I
wronged any man by word or deed, neither was I at any Seditious Conventicle.


Judge. Will you plead or not?


Prison. What would ^hou have me say?


Judge. You must plead guilty or not guilty.


Prisoner. I am not guilty.


Judge. William Stevenson are you guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. I am innocent in the sight of the Lord, and do not know what evil I
have done, neither have I any evil in my heart against any man, yet I dare not
but fear the Lord more then men.


Judge. Take him away.


Judge. Mary Dall are you guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. If I plead it will be little, or if not it will be all one, for your
wills is your Law, but we know the Lord will plead our Cause.


Judge. Take her away.


And then Richard Thomson was called again, and some of the Marshall's Men
swore against him, and the Jury was charged with him, and went forth, and
within a little time returned again, and brought in that the Prisoner was
guilty of breaking the Law, then the Judge rose up and said, what verdict was
that, the Foreman said again that he was guilty of breaking the Law, the
Recorder said that was enough, and then the Prisoner was put in the Hole, and
after a little while the four Prisoners were all brought to the Bar, and the
unjust Sentence of Transportation was passed upon them.

It was observed that the same Jury at the same time, which brought in Richard
Thomson guilty, brought in two Fellons not guilty, which appeared in Court to
be guilty: but the Innocent was Condemned, and the Guilty Cleared, for which
the Lord will Visit.

Much more might have been written concerning the Trials of the aforesaid
Prisoners, and many Observations might be drawn from several Passages, but this
is only a Relation in short, spread before the unprejudiced Reader to judge of
with the Spirit of Meekness.

THE END.

