Mr. OLIVER's SERMON Before the LORD MAYOR, etc. At St. Paul's Cathedral,
October 23. School.

EDWIN, Mayor.
Jovis xxvii. die Octobris, School. Annoque RRs Wilhelmi Tertii Angliae, etc.
Decimo.
THis Court does desire Mr. Oliver to Print his Sermon Preached before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City at the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, on
Sunday last.

GOODFELLOW.

A SERMON PREACHED in St. PAUL's Cathedral, BEFORE THE Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN,
etc.

On SUNDAY, October 23. School.

By EDWARD OLIVER, M. A. Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge; and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of Northampton.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Castle, next Scotland-Yard-Gate, near Whitehall.
MDCXCVIII.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc.
JOHN IV. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
sprit and in truth.
OUR Blessed Redeemer neglected no opportunity of exerting that universal
Charity he came into the world to teach, that thus by his Practice his Doctrine
might gain Credit, and the stiffest Prejudices be wrought off and conquered by
so powerful an Example Answerable to this we find him here in this Chapter
bearing with patience the Ignorance and subtle Shifts of a Woman; with
tenderness reproving the Sins of an heinous Offender; with kindness, though
himself a Jew, conversing with a Samaritan.

Thus by his Affability and stooping to the meanest Capacity, does he convince
the Understanding that was fraught with Prejudice and Infidelity; subject that
Will that was led captive at the pleasure of each unruly Lust: In short, of an
Idolater and Adult'ress, makes a Convert, and a Teacher of others.

Such care does he take to have all come to the knowledge of the Truth, that we
find him supplying the defects of Education, removing those Disadvantages she
lay under; and what the Jews might have learnt from the Books of their Prophets
(which Books the Samaritans did wholly reject, and so were not capable of
understanding), he here with great plainness, nay, more than he vouchsafes to
his own Nation, declares, (viz.) That he was the Messiah, and was to introduce
a new and better Law. So much advantage has Ignorance, and a Confession of
Sins, above an affected Pretense to Knowledge, and a counterfeited Zeal.

There is no Verse that has relation to this Story, but would afford many
useful Remarks: But since I have pitched upon this of the Text, I shall take no
further notice of the rest, than as they are particularly necessary to the
Explication of it. And in order to this, 'twill be expedient to consider to
what this Position is opposed: And we shall best understand what is here meant
by Spirit and Truth, if we look back a little, and take notice how it was
introduced. -- (Nor will the Reflections which I shall make be improper for
this Auditory; where, though I believe there is neither Jew nor Samaritan to
convince, yet we have those, I fear, sometimes to deal with, who make such a
Medley of Religion, that they are near as dangerous to the Truth of it. For so
do the Romanists confound their Will Worship and Idolatry with the Essentials
of Christianity, that they take both from its Truth and Spirituality. So do
other Dissenters from Us mistake the true Notion of its Spirituality, that they
derogate from the very Essentials of our most Holy Religion, and would go about
to persuade us its Truth consisted in mere Airy Notions, and Wild Enthusiasm.)
-- Our Blessed Savior having convinced this Samaritan of his extraordinary
Knowledge, by telling her all that ever she did, she is so far from denying or
concealing her fault, that she owns him for a Prophet, and as such, begs his
Instructions in that great Dispute that was between the Jews and those of her
own Nation. It being necessary for her that knew her Sins were many and
heinous, and had not only learnt out of the Books of Moses, that there could be
no Atonement made between God and her, no Remission obtained without a
Sacrifice; but also, that the Almighty would accept of no other Sacrifice, but
such as was offered him in that one Place he had chosen to put his Name in;
nay, yet more, That all Sacrifices that were offered elsewhere were esteemed no
better than of wilful Murder: It was necessary, I say, for her to understand
how and where this her Offering would be accepted. Nor could she judge any more
fit to resolve her, than one of whose great Wisdom and Knowledge she had then
had such full Proof and Experience. The Religions that at this time took place
in the World, were those of the Jews and Gentiles: The Jews worshipped only One
and the True God; the Gentiles abounded in such as were False, to whom they
paid their Adoration. Now the Samaritans made a mixture of both these, and
added to the Worship of the true God the Adoration of the false. For when
Shalmanesser carried Israel away captive into Assyria, he sent the Refuse of
diverse Nations to possess Samaria and the cities of it; 2 Kings 17.25.
who in the beginning of their dwelling there feared not the Lord, therefore
the Lord sent lions among them and slew some of them. To remove which Plague
their King sent one of the Priests which he brought from thence, to dwell
there, and to teach them the manner of the God of the land: So they feared the
Lord, and served their own gods, ver. 33. that is, admitted the Religion of the
Jews, and yet retained their own Superstition.

Now though the Jews and Samaritans differed in many things, as were easy to
show; yet they chiefly disagreed in the Place of their Sacrifices. These
pleading the Practice of their Forefathers, whom they, forgetful of their true
Religion, esteemed Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, believing themselves descended
from them, and settled in this Land ever since the departure of Moses out of
Egypt; in the mean time upbraiding the Jews, that their Religion was only
founded on Hearsay and Opinion.

The Jews justly esteemed theirs the Holy Temple of Jerusalem, where God
appeared between the Cherubims, where was an unquestioned Succession of Priests
to minister, and where their Kings had always offered Sacrifice.

On the other side, the Samaritans boasted their Mount Gerizim as the Place
chosen of God; where Abraham (as their Tradition would make them believe) in
obedience would have offered up his Son Isaac, and where Jacob returning out of
Mesopotamia worshipped.

Nay, so were they possessed with a belief of the Antiquity of their Temple,
that in the time of Ptolomy Philometor, about a hundred and sixty years before
Christ, they undertook, with the hazard of their Lives, to prove it before that
of Jerusalem, even out of the Laws of Moses. So strangely mistaken may the fond
boasts be of Succession and Antiquity, and so little Credit to be given to bare
Tradition.

This was the foundation of the Woman's Question ( v. 20.), and this Question
she justly thought dignus Vindice nodus, worthy of a Prophet to resolve. Now so
does our Savior frame his Answer, as to declare the Worship of the Jews
preferable to that of the Samaritans, and consequently Jerusalem to Mount
Gerizim; but adds, that the whole Question will henceforth cease, while both
their Religions were to be abolished, the one as False, the other as Imperfect.
The Samaritan's false, because mixed with Idolatry; wherefore our Savior says,
Ye worship ye know not what, v. 22. The Jew's, though it must be allowed true,
because he adds, We worship what we know, yet to be abolished, because weak and
imperfect: Neither in this mountain shall ye worship, because Idolatry shall
cease as the Prophets foretold, And the Lord alone shall he exalted in that
day, Isa. 2.18.
and the Idols he shall utterly abolish: Nor in Jerusalem, because Sacrifice
and Oblations he will no longer accept, but a third and perfect Worship should
be established; for the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him, v. 23. In which Answer of our Blessed Savior, the Deficiency of
both the former Religions, and the Excellency of that which was to succeed is
plainly set forth. For the worship of the Samaritans was not in Truth, but
abounded with Errors and Ignorance; That of the Jews was not in Spirit, but
consisted in Bodily Observances and Outward Ceremonies, which were but Shadows
of things to come; and it was only the Christians that could henceforth be true
Worshippers, whilst their Religion alone was endued with what the others were
deficient in (viz.) Spirit and Truth. Nor could any other Religion than this be
proper to be established, no other being agreeable to the Nature and true
Notion of a God; and this in the Text is given as the: fundamental reason why
the others were abolished, and this introduced: God is a Spirit, etc.

And that the Christian Religion is thus agreeable to the Nature of God, I
shall endeavor to show, by declaring what is here required of us,

I. By worshipping in Spirit. And II. In Truth.
And by the way shall take notice of such as deviate from this Worship: Which I
desire may serve as an Application of the Discourse, since it is all which I
fear your Patience will permit me to make.

And I. I am to show what is meant by Worshipping God in Spirit.

1. Then do we worship him in Spirit, when we are possessed with a true and
lively sense of his Divine Majesty, Power, and Rule over us; humbly acknowledge
his unspeakable Goodness; so adore his Infinite Wisdom which searches our
hearts, that we in all things submit to his All-wise Will: When we love him
with all our Hearts and all our Souls, and yet fear and reverence him as a
Father, and with the greatest cheerfulness obey whatsoever he has been pleased
to command us. When we not only give up our Souls pure and spotless, but keep
our Bodies too fit Temples for the Holy Ghost, and thus joined, offer up our
selves one Reasonable Service.

For when we have once this true and awful Notion of the Almighty, we must and
shall exert our selves in acts of Piety and public Testimonies of Devotion;
Express our Sense of his Power and Rule by our daily Supplications; our
Acknowledgments of his Goodness by our continual Praises; our Love by our
Charity to our Neighbors, and Zeal for his Worship and Service; our Fear, by
our abstaining from the least appearance of Evil, lest we offend so gracious a
Father.

And all this with Humility and Reverence, Decency and Order, with Obedience to
Authority, and respect to those whom he has set over Us: These being most
certain and spiritual Duties, nay the only things wherein we are capable of
testifying that we really do worship Him in spirit. And once come up to these
just and awful Thoughts of the Divine Majesty, which produce such true acts of
Devotion and Piety, How agreeable to his Nature must be this our Sacrifice, how
much beyond whatever the policy of the wisest Heathen could invent; nay even
what he himself instituted in the Jewish Religion?

God is a Spirit; That is, a Being Incorporeal and Immaterial; his Worship
therefore ought to be like Himself, refined and spiritual, and to deduce its
Source from the Reason and Soul of Man; not to consist barely in outward Acts
and Things merely Corporeal.

It Is confessed God had permitted, nay commanded such a Worship under the Old
Law; but this was only Temporary, and fitted for a People carnal and
stiff-neck'd; but now the fullness of time was come, it no longer suited the
Divine Majesty, he therefore commands a Worship more Real and Divine. If
therefore our Actions do not proceed from the Heart and Soul; that is, from a
lively Faith, fervent Love and sincere Principles of Holiness, they cannot be
acceptable to God, nor is this our Worship agreeable to his Nature. But if they
take their Rise from the Heart, then are they a spiritual Worship; for thus are
they spiritual in their Original, Source and Cause, and bear some proportion
even with the Almighty himself, who is a Spirit. And this I take to be the true
meaning of worshipping in spirit.

How grossly then do they err who would make all Religion to consist in Notion
and Talk, and frame to themselves a Worship that should have nothing of reality
in it, but at once mock both God and Man? These are they that are above
Ordinances, and all manner of Rule, guided by Fancy and a frantic Zeal, which
they put on to deceive the giddy Multitude with a noise of Holiness: who think
it enough to vent and boast their Notions of the Power and Excellency of Faith,
but never take care to show it by their Works; nay esteem the pressing of them
as necessary to Salvation, nothing less than Superstition and Popery: that will
talk of Love to God, and Familiarity with the Person of Christ; and yet forget
their Obedience to the Magistrates whom he has set over them, and hate,
back-bite and slander their Neighbor: that pretend to the greatest Zeal for
God's glory, yet are so far from abhorring Sacrilege, that it is one great Mark
of their Godliness. Blessed God! If these be the effects of spiritual Worship,
we have changed for the worse, and are much farther from Heaven than the Jew or
Samaritan.

Others there are that go not so far, yet urge this Text against all manner of
Ceremonies, and prescribed Forms of Devotion. Are we, say they, to worship him
in spirit? what means then this Show and outward Pomp, this Rubric and these
Forms? Shall we again be bound up with Jewish Slavery? Are we not promised the
Assistance of the Spirit, and shall Christ dye in vain to free us?

We willingly confess that the Worship under the Gospel is more refined and
spiritual than that under the Law; but that it should be wholly so, debarred of
all outward Ceremonies, we affirm to be against the Practice of all Ages, nay,
utterly impossible. Is not the whole Question here concerning Public Worship,
the one false and idolatrous, the other gross and carnal; and is it any other
than a Public Worship that our Savior opposes to them, Spirit to the one, and
Truth to the other? Is not the very Word he uses, (...), most expressive of an
outward Act of Devotion and Adoration? Did ever the Jews who knew what they
worshipped, do it without Ceremony? And have we not Examples every where in
Holy Writ, even from our Savior and his Apostles, of external Acts of
Adoration? Nay, which perhaps is a greater Argument to these men, do not they
themselves use them? What mean else their set Looks, formal Voice, and forced
Gestures? In short, all comes to this, they will, they must have Ceremonies,
but they must be of their own making; and their dislike is greater, it is to be
feared, to the Church that enjoins 'em, than to the Things themselves. It Is
true, the Law shall give place to the Gospel, nor shall there be any appointed
Place for Sacrifice, for that it self shall be abolished; but worship we must,
and how that shall be done without prescribed Place, Time, and Order, is
absolutely inconceivable. Still we must worship in the beauty of holiness; and
though we are neither confined to Jerusalem or Mount Gerizim, yet must we not
forget the assembling our selves together.

As for the Objections from hence against Set Forms, and the Pretensions to the
Spirit, How vain and frivolous are they? Where is such Assistance promised? or
upon what account indeed necessary? Let these Pretenders to Inspiration work
Miracles too, and then we shall believe these extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which we rightly now judge already ceased. Besides, so little reason
have they, that the very Opinion contradicts it self, and what they pretend an
Extemporary Effusion, is no more than a Form to all the Auditory, who are tied
up to those Words they are pleased to put together for them, and are often
worked up by Heat and Passion to say Amen to no better than Nonsense;
sometimes, I fear, even Blasphemy it self. Strange is it, that men otherwise
sober, and that will not venture a Sermon, which they only address to the
People, without Care and Accuracy of Wording, should yet dare to entertain
Commerce with God at all adventures, buoyed up with a little Popular Applause
and Self-conceit! Most evident it is, that what they would make the World
believe is immediately from Heaven, is attainable by Memory, and a Volubility
of Speech, and perfected by a great share of Confidence. Then do we truly
worship in Spirit, when after our Blessed Savior's Example we pray with Warmth
and Devotion in a sound well-weigh'd Form of Words; nor does the Almighty ever
deny his Assistance, or the Petitions of such Adorers.

So sensible has all the World been of the Necessity of a Form, that there is
no Age or Church that has left themselves at liberty; nor was it ever thought
on, till Religion grew a Blind for Faction and Interest. We worship not as the
Jews did, with such Ceremonies as are signs and figures of things to come;
those we know are and were to be abolished: But our external visible Services
imply the Truth of the Promises already exhibited, and our outward Acts are
testimonies of our inward Faith, Love, Humility, and other Christian Virtues.
Nor is it to be questioned but that diverse Saints and Holy Prophets did in this
manner adore; nor is this taken away but perfected by our great Lawgiver. Would
it not be very strange that Christianity, which gives us Rules of Conversation
and Civility, reaches us Obedience to our Prince, Submission to Governors,
Respect and Kindness to all men in general, should yet suffer us to make our
approaches to the Almighty with Disrespect and Rudeness! Yet do we not often
see such men as will pay due Reverence to a Neighbor or Equal, rush into the
Place of Worship, and the Presence of God himself, without the least show of
Devotion and Respect?

It Is allowed, all men in comparison of the great God are equal, and Titles
cease when we have regard to one Omnipotent: But this should be so far from
lessening, that it should infinitely heighten our outward Acts of Submission
and Humility: Is he not our Master, where is then our Reverence? Is he not our
Lord, where is then our Fear? Thus on the one side have some wandered from the
meaning of the Text; nor do the Papists less err on the other, who are so far
from worshipping in Spirit, that they still retain that Sacrifice that was once
offered up for all; that cloud and load their Religion with innumerable
Ceremonies; that content themselves with repeating so many Prayers, and
conclude they have then sufficiently worshipped, when their Set-task is
finished. Now how insignificant and sapless must this Devotion be, how
unacceptable to the God of Purity and Omniscience, that searches the Heart, and
expects a reasonable Service? Or how can it be agreeable to Him who sent our
Savior into the World to remove this very Bondage from the Jews, and to
establish a Spiritual and Divine Worship? Nay, can it satisfy a man of Sense
and Consideration? Yet so far can the Prejudice of Custom and Education
prevail, that this is the known Practice of those that profess that Religion.

Happy! thrice happy are we then in the Constitution of our Church! May it long
so flourish.

Whilst we have no Ceremonies but what Decency require, and Primitive Practice
allows; have Instructions plain and easy, Prayers serious and accommodate to
the meanest Capacity, and so free from just exception, that we may well
question that man's Understanding, always his Charity, that refuses to say Amen.

But thus much of the First Particular.

I come now to what is meant by, II. Worshipping him in Truth.
For though nothing hinders but they may be here taken one for the Exposition
of the other; yet have we hitherto, and shall still treat of it as it was
opposed to the False Worship of the Samaritans; which was now to be abolished,
and they no longer to worship they knew not what on Mount Gerizim. So that by
it is forbidden all Corporeal Representations of the Almighty (for so the
Samaritans did worship him), as all mixture of Heathenish Superstition and
Idolatry: Who are said in Scripture to belie the Almighty, whilst they changed
the truth of God into a lie, and served the Creature as or with the Creator,
who is blessed for evermore.

Then do we worship him in Truth, when in serious and devout Meditation we can
work up our Thoughts above all things material; when we only contemplate a
Being incorporeal, infinite in all that is great and good, and to him alone, as
such, offer up our Supplications.

What shall we say then to the Romanists, who would still confine the Almighty
to Mount Gerizim? What else mean their Prayers and Offerings, their famed
Shrines, their long and tedious Pilgrimages to some particular Chapel, or
renowned Altar? Still have we the Boast of the Practice of their Fathers,
though equally false with that of the Samaritans, and a Religion made and
upheld by Superstition and Policy, delivered down as Primitive.

Still have we a mixture of Idolatry in their Worship; nay, the God of Heaven
almost dethroned by a Crowd of feigned Saints and counterfeit Miracles. With
what glittering Tawdriness are their Churches filled? How are their Altars
beset with Puppets, the variousness and ridiculousness of whose Dress serves
only to amuse and divert the Traveller? How do they dare to represent the
Almighty under the Decays of Age, and lie prostrate before each Image their
Fancies prompt 'em to choose? This is the daily Practice of all in general; and
if this be not Idolatry, certainly there never was any yet: Nor can we ever
distinguish between the Opinion and general Practice of a Church, so far as to
excuse them.

To conclude:

Let us that have a plain and easy Rule to walk by, so carry our selves between
these two dangerous Extremes, as by our Examples to promote and uphold the
Well-being of the best of Churches, Let us be constant to our Liturgies,
fervent at our Devotions: Thus shall we with Decency and Order worship the God
of Truth, and offer up a reasonable, a spiritual, and acceptable Service. Thus
shall we after a Peace of Conscience which we may justly expect in the
Performance of our Duties, be made Partakers of an Inestimable Reward.

To which God, etc.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by Edward Castle, near Whitehall.
ADvice to an Apprentice under these following Heads: 1. Religion. 2. Justice
and Fidelity. 3. Obedience. 4. Diligence. 5. Affability. 6. Temperance. 7.
Chastity. 8. Thrift. 9. Humility. 10. Discretion. With a Preface to the
Masters. A Catechism, or familiar Instructions on the Principal Points of the
Christian Religion: By Mr. Drelincourt. Translated out of French. A Treatise of
the Causes of Incredulity: Wherein are examined the Motives and Occasions which
dispose Unbelievers to reject the Christian Religion. By Mr. Le Clerc.

