A Thanksgiving-Sermon, FOR Deliverance of this Kingdom FROM Popery and
Arbitrary Power.

The Publisher to the Reader.
THIS Sermon had been published sooner had not the Carrier ^ept it several
Weeks in his Hands before he delivered it; yet I hope the pious Reader will not
think it comes too late for public Use, when he considers the Occasion and the
Matter of it, and how excellently well it is managed by the Reverend Author.

So great and amazing are the Providence of God toward us in England in
delivering us from Popery and Arbitrary Power, by the glorious Conduct of the
Prince of Orange, (now our Gracious King) that discourses of this Nature (which
so well represent the Glories of this Deliverance) should never be esteemed
unseasonable, and it is hoped the Wisdom of the Nation will make the Duty of
Thankfulness anniversary on this account, that so the present and future
Generations may praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works
to us the Children of Men in this Island.

I heartily wish our present Murmurers (commonly called Grumbletonians) would
but seriously consider how conspicuously the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God
appear in the late Revolutions, I think then they would be convinced (if they
do not wilfully shut their Eyes against the Beams of Divine Majesty) how great
their Sin is in provoking the great God at the Red Sea, even at the Red Sea of
our Deliverance, by hankering after the Onions and Garlic of Egypt.

I pray God open all our Eyes that we may know in this our Day, the things that
belong to our Peace, before they be hid from us. Amen.

ENGLAND's CALL TO THANKFULNESS, FOR Her Great DELIVERANCE FROM POPERY and
ARBITRARY POWER, By the Glorious Conduct of the Prince of Orange, (now King of
England) in the Year 1688.

In a Sermon preached in the Parish Church of Almer in Dorsetshire, on February
the 14th, 1688/9

By JOHN OLLIFFE, RECTOR there.

LONDON; printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

PSALM cxxvi. ver. 3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad.
THE Design of our assembling together at this time, is to render Thanks to
Almighty God, for the late great Deliverance which he has wrought for us, from
the subtle and dangerous Attempts of our Popish Enemies to subvert our
Government and Religion, and to implore his farther Blessing and Assistance,
that that may be perfected, which is so happily begun. And surely if we have
been awake to take notice of things, if we have had our Eyes open to see and
observe the several Transactions of Providence, which have been in our Behalf
in this respect, we cannot but think this a very reasonable Service. And you
will easily perceive the Words which I have read to you out of the Psalmist to
be a fit Subject of my Discourse upon this occasion.

This Psalm was composed, as appears by the subject matter of it, at the
return of the Jewish People from Babylon, after their long and hard Bondage
there; which was a Mercy of so great and strange a Nature, that it filled them
with Admiration and Astonishment to consider of it, that they could scarce
believe their own Eyes and Ears in what they heard and saw, but were so
surprised with it, that they thought it to be but a Dream or Delusion of their
own Fancies: ver. 1. When the Lord turned again the Captivity Sion, we were
like them that dream.

And the Heathen were as much amazed and startled at it as they, ver. 2. For
then said they among the Heathens, The Lord has done great things for them.

It was the wonder of all, that an Heathen Emperor of his own free motion
should set at Liberty a captive People, and send them to their own Land, a
People despised and scorned of all; when it had been esteemed the Policy of all
the former Kings to destroy and ruin that singular sort of Commonwealth, that
was separate from all People, that had been the great Eyesore of all the
Nations about. And this mighty Prince does not only freely discharge them, and
send them back into their own Country, but assists them in the building of
their Temple, and setting up the Worship of the true God of Israel, whose
Ordinances were different from all People: well might they therefore be amazed
and wonder at so strange a Revolution and turn of things.

And here in this verse now they ascribe and attribute all to God, they own it
to be his Work, though Cyrus was the Instrument; and that it was a great Work
indeed, which rightly called for Joy and Thankfulness. The Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad.

And that which the Jews here say in their Thanksgiving and Praise, I think we
of this Nation have cause likewise to say at this time, viz. That the Lord has
done great things for us; and that there is justly due to him a Tribute of
delightful Praise now, as there was from them then.

Let us consider therefore,

I. The great Things that God has done for us. And,

II. The Praise that is due to him for the same.

I. Let us consider the great Things that God has done for us: which will
appear to be great indeed, if we consider them even nakedly in themselves, and
much more if they are considered in their Circumstances.

First, The Things which God has done for us, are very great in themselves.
For it is no less, than the saving of our English Government from apparent
Ruin, the recovering of our Rights from Arbitrary Invasions; the securing of
our Liberties and Properties, and above all the preserving our Religion, which
was in manifest Hazard of being undermined and destroyed, and the preventing
the Massacres and Bloodshed, which probably must have attended the same.

It is agreed on all hands, that the English Government was in the way to ruin;
the force of Laws, even in themselves as Laws, was enervated, and many mortal
Blows were given to the Legislative Power it self in its very Fundamentals; and
the Rights of Men imbodied in Corporations, and the particular Liberties of
Persons were no longer secure to any, when once they stood in Competition with
Popish Designs.

But this inslaving of our Bodies, and depriving us of our outward Rights was
the least of those Miseries that were growing upon us, and which we were
already in part groaning under: That which is worse, is the Inslaving of our
Souls and Consciences, by a mighty Power, which goes to check-mate it with
Almighty God himself. This was coming on us amain, like an overflowing Deluge
invading the Land. For those that think most moderately of the Administration
of things before, must allow, that all that Liberty that was promised or given,
was no farther intended, than as it was hoped it might be an Introduction to a
more Arbitrary Invasion of our Laws, and a means of Establishment and Increase
of the Romish Religion among us.

And it is well known, what the Nature of that Religion is, when once it has
got the Power in its Hands, it will suffer none to stand by it, whatever Laws,
Provisions, or Promises are made for the securing of any other; as is apparent
from the Popish Management in the Neighbour-Nation, where such a Persecution
has been set afoot, and carried on against the Protestant Party, as the Tongue
of Man is not able to express, nor the Pen of any to depaint in its right
Colors. And neither the Merits of that Party, nor the Edicts and Laws, that
were in their Favor, could ward it off; which is an Evidence, besides the many
sanguinary Proceedings and bloody Massacres that have been before executed in
that and other Popish Countries, what we must have looked for when once that
Religion had got the Ascendant over us, that it had been out of Fear of Danger
it self: What could we then have expected, but that Prisons and Racks,
Confiscation of Goods, and Fire and Sword must have been our Portion, as well
as our Neighbors, having also had so many Testimonies and Marks of their
Kindness to us in former Ages at home.

But we have cause to fear, that this would not only have been the end of this
Religion, when once it could have come to its Growth and Establishment, which
must have been a long time first, if that was to be procured by ordinary and
common Methods.

But the fiery Zeal of our Enemies was too rapid and fierce to be contained
within the ordinary Bounds of slow and usual Methods; we must have expected it
to have broken out far beyond; and it is not to be doubted, but if they could
have been secure of their Arms at home, and of a Fleet at Sea to have served
the Design, or as soon as they could have ordered the matter, that it would
have been so, there should a foreign Force have then joined with them; and we
should have had Swords and Guns to have converted Protestants, which Arguments
and Reasons had been too dull Tools to effect: what the Politics could not
have brought about, should have been attempted by main Might.

And what between the Prerogative of a bigoted Prince, the Sentence of corrupt
Judges, the Color and Favor of Laws to be procured for Popish Service, and
the Violence of an armed Force, poor Protestants could have expected nothing
else, but to have been ground to pieces, as between so many Milstones: And this
was coming upon us a-pace, if our Almighty Deliverer had not procured for us a
Remedy in good time.

And if once England had become a Prey to Popish Rage, which has been justly
esteemed the great Bulwark of the Reformation, the Protestant States abroad had
not been like to subsist long, but in humane prospect of things must have
undergone the same Fate.

And whose Heart would not ache then to consider the Power and Prevalence that
the Romish Religion should have had, not only among us, but all Christendom
over, if God had not put a stop to its rising Greatness, and beat off the
Chariot Wheels, by which our Enemies did drive so fast; and in the nick of time
drown the Egyptians before they could overtake his Israel?

The glorious Reformation, which has so long shined with a mighty Luster, must
then have set in obscure Darkness. And those Protestants that would still have
kept the Faith and a good Conscience, must have run to Caves and Holes of the
Earth for Shelter, for there had been no longer any place of abode for them in
the City that is set on a Hill.

Then you must have been bowing your Knees to Idols again, and falling down
before Stocks and Stones, or would have had such a weight of Oppressions and
Cruelties laid on, that would have broke your very Backs; and if we could not
admit to bear the Load of all the Popish Superstitions, we should have had a
Load of another Nature, that without the Strength of Martyrs we must needs have
fallen under. We must have taken the Mark of the Beast in our Foreheads, or we
should hardly have bought and sold in the Markets.

Then Traditions and Canons must have been our Rule, rather than the Holy
Scriptures: Yea, we should not have been allowed to have believed our own
Senses, nor to have made use of the most natural Right which belongs to us as
rational Creatures, to have judged for our selves, but must have submitted
Sense, Reason, Conscience, Scripture, and all to a pretended infallible Judge,
though we know not how he came by his Infallibility, nor can see any thing in
the World that he has to say for it, but big Words, and proud Boasts: But we
must have put out our own Eyes, and yet have been forced to have followed blind
Guides. If we had kept the Foundation, we must have had Hay and Stubble built
upon it; and then if ever we had been saved, it must needs have been with the
greatest Difficulty imaginable.

We and our Children must have been nurtured up with corrupt Doctrines, and
false and lying Legends, instead of being fed with the sincere Milk of the
Word. You must have had half Sacraments, and Latin Prayers, that you should not
have understood what you had been about; and you must have worshipped a little
piece of Dough for a God, conjured into a Deity by five words of the Priest,
when you may have as good an one your selves in your own Cupboards.

And if you could not have turned Papists thoroughly, then at least you must
have turned Hypocrites, and dissembled before God and the World, or else a
Crusado of red Coats and Dragoons fit for the purpose would have tried their
skill upon you.

But all this and much more, which might be represented, our gracious Savior
has mercifully prevented; and not only so, but we have good hopes of such an
Establishment and Settlement, that all our other Grievances may be redressed
likewise; and Peace and Righteousness may flourish in our Land.

I have good hopes, that we shall not only be feoured from the Fears of Popery
and Slavery, but that we may see a long-look'd-for blessed Union among
Protestants, and Religion, in its Power and Purity in good Reputation among us,
that it shall be a thing of as bad a Name to be a wicked Man, as to be a
Papist. It has been a mighty Work which has been done already; and that will
give us Encouragement to hope for more, if we thankfully accept and improve
that which is begun.

You will all allow, that these are great things indeed, there being nothing
that is more dear to Men, then the saving of Life, Liberty and Religion. But
these great things has God done for us in this his wonderful Dispensation at
this time.

Secondly, It will appear that God has done great things for us, if we
consider the Circumstances.

As that it was at a time, when our Enemies were bold and confident, when they
thought all things secure to themselves, and past danger of miscarrying; they
had the Advice and Assistance of that Society, and Order of Men, that have been
cried up in this last Age, for being expert in all the Arts of Policy. They
have been framing and laying, and turning and winding this Plot of extirpating
the Northern Heresy for a long time.

The Softness and Fearfulness of the first of the two Royal Brothers was indeed
some Hindrance to them: but now they had got a Prince, whose eager and fiery
Spirit, animated with Popish Zeal, resolved to accomplish the Design, or
himself to die a Martyr for the impious Cause.

Some of them in the former Reign have been heard to say, that the Plot was
laid so deep, that all the Devils in Hell were not able to hinder it. And
indeed so far they were partly in the right; for then Satan should have been
divided against himself, it being the Interest and Business only of that black
Kingdom; but they have found there is a God in Heaven, that has been able to
frustrate all their Designs.

But they however were confident and big with Expectation of Success; and some
have given out very bold Words, that we must either burn or turn, and that it
were the better way to come over to them in time by Persuasion, than stay till
we were compelled by Force.

For the Design that was laid, was the Fruit of their long and best Counsels;
so that now at last they little doubled but all would be theirs, and they began
already in Imagination to divide the Spoil among themselves. Now to have all
these Hopes disappointed, and to have all these Counsels disannulled, is
certainly a very great thing.

Then consider on the other side, that we were almost hopeless of finding any
Remedy. A Faintness and Dispiritedness had seized the Nation; they having been
so long time used to Infringements of their Rights, to Burdens and Oppressions,
that the bearing of them now was almost grown natural by being common, and so
became to be the more easily endured. Many indeed of Superior Quality, and of
tender Resentments, could not but look on with Discontent, but knew not how to
help.

On their parts it is true there had not been many Converts, but what they could
not get in Persons of their own Religion, they found in such as had none at
all, who being therefore put in places of Judicature and Trust, would serve
their Designs as well or better than their own most Religious Votaries.

So that the Law was perverted to favor their side. There were Armies, and
Troops to prevent Insurrections: A great number of the best Protestants were
lulled asleep by the present Ease that they had, like Persons wearied after
long Labor, and now were glad to sit down and be at rest. Others had been
hamstrung with pretty uncouth Doctrines, that though they were in pain, yet had
no mind to move either hand or Foot.

And then above all, there was a mighty Nimrod beyond the Seas, to espouse and
carry on the Project, and is one who had been long flushed, both with Cruelty
and Success.

So that what could we hope, unless Help should come from the Clouds? And we
had no thought of Miracles. But such indeed, and no less has appeared in these
great Things, that God has done for us.

Consider again, Here is a Deliverance, sudden, unexpected, hardly thought of;
so that it may be well applied, what is here said by the Jews at their
Deliverance out of Captivity, we are like them that dream, when our Adversaries
Confidence and our own Fears would not give us leave to hope. God has been
seen in the Mount, just when we were appointed for Sacrifice: and our Soul is
escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler, the Snare is broken and we
are escaped.

Consider moreover the manner, in what a strange and unheard of way it has
been, as well as sudden and unhoped for. All this glorious Scene of Counsels
and Arts is taken down as it were in a Moment, and almost disappears. That
which we have seen contriving and promoting for so long time, how soon is it
unravelled! and the Work of so many Years is undone almost before you can think
how.

And yet hardly any Blood spilt in the case, or but very little; when we could
not have thought, but that a Sea of Blood must have flowed in upon us, before
the Banks of Right and Justice could have been set up again, which were fallen
down.

But though our Adversaries storm and fret never so much, our Deliverance is
wrought; and those whom we had cause to fear most from, as the Instruments of
our Mischief, come to be our Helpers, whereby the long Train of Popish
Contrivances is blown away like Chaff: and the Pit which they had dug for
others, they are fallen into themselves: and the proud Scorners have been
filled with their own ways.

Yea, our Deliverance has been carried on farther than we could expect, even
after it was begun, and we have hopes of more yet; and those things which have
seemed to be Hindrances and Lets in the way, may prove the greatest
Furtherances to the most happy End.

It is to be hoped, that all will grow wiser after all that long dear-bought
Experience, which we have had of the evil of our Divisions; and that neither
Party will think so hardly of one another for the time to come, as they have
done. But that ways will be found out to compose our Religious Jars and
Differences, that we may like Brethren live together in Unity. And then shall
we become as a City compact within it self; which is never in so great Danger,
as from intestine Fouds and Quarrels.

But now that the Mercy which we have received may be more inherent in our
Apprehensions, compare the Condition of our poor Brethren in other parts, and
what they have suffered, whilst we are delivered. We have had a Cloud over us,
that has been no bigger in Comparison than a Man's hand (though others have
been gathering about) and have had but a few Drops in comparison falling upon
us: whilst it has been with them a Day of Blackness and Darkness, of
Gloominess and thick Darkness; the whole Heavens have been filled with Clouds
and Rain, with Storms and Tempests, so that they have not seen the Sun nor
Stars for many Days; a very bitter Cup has been wrung out to them, which we
have hardly sipt of, but they have drunk the very Dregs; and who can tell, what
may be the Portion of our Brethren in the Neighbor Kingdom under the same
Government with our selves, who must needs be sighing still in fearful and
dreadful Expectations, whilst to us it is a good Day? We have an early Help and
Salvation wrought, which they can see yet but at a Distance: And it is well if
their Hopes can overbalance their Fears.

And must we not say then, that all this is a mighty Work, and that God has
done great things for us? Long and lasting Miseries and Calamities did sorely
threaten us, neither could we see any present Help at hand. But God put forth
his Voice, and called back the proud Waters, that they have not prevailed over
us. He has brought us out, and has set our Feet in a large place: Our
Government is vindicated from Tyranny and Usurpation; our Liberties and Rights
rescued out of the Hands of Invaders; our Religion preserved, which we were
afraid would have been lost: and we hope all will be but the more furbish'd up,
and rendered brighter by those Rubs and Oppositions that it has met with.

And must not we say, that these are great things? when the deepest Policies
have been defeated; Arms and Power have been turned against the Users; a
Deliverance wrought, and yet so little Effusion of Blood in the procuring of
it. The Minds, Counsels, and Policies of Men turned about upon a sudden: A
mighty Revolution, and yet almost without any noise: A new Face of things
appears, which looks beautiful, though it be not yet fully filled up.

II. Now let us consider then the Praise that is due to God for all this, for
all these great Things that he has done for us. For this Gladness, which is in
our Hearts, should flow out in Praises to God; for that is the best Expression
both of Gladness and Gratitude; which in such a case should always go together.

Oh clap your hands, all ye People, shout unto God with the Voice of Triumph.
For the Lord most high is terrible, he is a great King over all the Earth: Sing
Praises to God, sing Praises; Sing Praises unto our King, sing Praises: God
reigns over the Heathen, God sits upon the Throne of his Holiness: He is
our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble. The Lord of Hosts is
with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Selah.

And now there are these four things to be considered in that Praise, which is
due from us to God at this time.

1. It is to be acknowledged and confessed by us, that it is his Work, that it
is he that has done these great Things for us, though it has been by the
Intervention of Means, which he works, as he commonly does; yet these Means are
of his providing, choosing, exciting; and become prosperous by his Assisting
and Blessing; and therefore though Means are to be valued and honored in their
places, yet it is to God that the principal Tribute of Praise belongs.

And in all such cases, we find that this has been the Method of the Church,
to give God the Honor.

When Moses and Aaron brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, Moses was an
eminent Instrument, he was their Counselor and Captain, yet the Glory of the
Deliverance is ascribed to God, and these were but the Means: Thou leddest thy
People, like a Flock, say they, by the Hand of Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 77.20.

So in the Victories of Deborah and Barak over Jabin and Sisera, Praise ye the
Lord, say they, for the avenging of Israel, Judge 5.2.

And so always, when ever any Deliverer was raised up, or any Deliverance
wrought, it is observed as the Lords doing still: For this God is our God for
ever and ever, Psalm. 48.14.

And therefore, Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O People saved
of the Lord, the Shield of thy Help, and the Sword of thy Excellency! And
therefore thine Enemies shall be found Liers unto thee, and thou shall tread
upon their high places; as Moses speaks in his Blessing of the People, Deuteronomy.
33. ult.

And this is the Churches constant Opinion and Sense of things, as appears in
that Psalm. 124. which is calculated for any times of Deliverance; If it had not
been the Lord, who was on our side, now may Israel say; If it had not been the
Lord, who was on our side, when Men rose up against us, then they had swallowed
us up quick, when their Wrath was kindled against us: our Help is in the Name
of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. The like may we now say; and it is unto
God therefore that we must give the Glory of all that Mercy, that we have
received as the principal Author, Exciter, Promoter, and Worker of our
Deliverance.

And there are several Things, that do manifestly speak the Divine Counsel, and
Power, and Providence to have been eminently in all this Affair, in that there
has been such a strange Concurrence of all things to bring it about to the
pass that it is now in.

As besides the more remote Providence of former Years, the present Ability
and Wealth of that Neighbor State, by whose Counsel and Assistance our great
Deliverer under God was enabled to undertake this Enterprise, they being
together embarked in the same common Protestant Interest with our selves.

And then the Concurrence of the States about in the same Design, all the
Protestants expecting to undergo the same Fate with us.

And moreover a general Union of the Popish Governors themselves against the
French Nimrod, upon whose Assistance the Popish Farty at home did build their
Hopes, as from him they had derived their Counsels; and the very Winds and
Elements made to conspire for the convenient Passage of the Troops that were
engaged to help us.

And such an Union of all Parties, that duly considered of things among our
selves, either to join in with the foreign Helps, or at least not to oppose
them, as has not been known in this Nation for a great while past.

For there was an Universal, either Suspicion or Discontent in all Parties
against the Power, that is now fallen, for fear either of its Frauds or
Violences.

And it pleased God to enlighten at persuade those that were able to do most
hurt by the Arms that they were empowered with, not to concur with Usurpation
and Tyranny to the Ruin of their Country, but rather to give an helping hand by
an amicable Conjunction with those that sought its Preservation.

And such a wise Counsel and Conduct has been pursued in the Affair all along;
and such Shame and Guilt, such Distrust and Trembling seized upon our
Adversaries, that there has been nothing considerably to stop the coming of
this Matter to such a blessed Issue as we could not foresee. So that that is
come to pass, which neither they did fear at first, nor we could hope.

That proud and fierce Jesuit, that stood so near the Throne, has been heard
to make a mock of Providence, when in Discourse one said to him, that God in
his Providence would take care to maintain that Party, that had Justice on its
side: He replied scoffingly, What do you talk of Providence now adays? But he
has found there has been a great and wise Providence that has overruled
all, and has outdone all his Counsels and Policies.

And it is our parts then, to ascribe the Glory of all to this Holy and wise
Providence, as being in such an eminent manner concerned in bringing all about,
which we now hear and see; in putting such a Spirit of Counsel and Courage in
our great Deliverer, providing sufficient Means and Assistance, and uniting all
both at home and abroad to comply with the Undertaking, or not to make any
considerable Opposition: Surely this is the Lord's Doing, and it ought to be
mavelous in our Eyes. Oh sing unto the Lord a new Song; sing unto the Lord
all the Earth, Sing unto the Lord, bless his Name, ^and show forth his
Salvation from day to day; For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; He
is to be feared above all Gods, Honor and Majesty are before him; Strength and
Beauty are in his Sanctuary: Give unto the Lord, O ye Kindreds of the People,
give unto the Lord Glory and Strength; Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto
his Name; bring an Offering, and come into his Courts: Say among the Heathen,
that the Lord reigns; the World also shall be established, that it shall not
be moved, he shall judge the People righteously.

2. The next thing then to be considered in this Duty of Praise is, that as we
acknowledge it to be God's Act, so that we acknowledge it also to be an Act of
free Grace, and mere undeserved Mercy to us; so that we must every way say, Not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be given the Glory.

As our Help comes of God, for vain else would be the Help of Man; so we must
acknowledge, that it is of God's mere Mercy that we are thus delivered, and that
we are not consumed: It is only because his Compassions fail not.

This must always be remembered, as Moses also tells the Jews upon their getting
the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 9.4. Speak not thou in thy Heart, after that the Lord
thy God has cast out these Nations from before thee, saying, For my
Righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess this Land: But for the
Wickedness of these Nations the Lord does drive them out from before thee; Not
for thy Righteousness, or for the Vprightness of thine Heart do thou go to
possess the Land; but for the Wickedness of these Nations the Lord does drive
them out from before thee, etc. Whether it be for their Sins or no, that there
has been such a strange change and Revolution among us, I will not determine;
but I am sure it is not for our Merits.

For I doubt we have cause enough to lament and confess with Shame and
Confusion, as Ezra did the Sins of the People of the Jews, Ezr. 9.6. O my God,
I am ashamed and blush to lift up my Face to thee my God: For our Iniquities
are increased over our Heads, and our Trespass is grown up unto the Heavens:
Since the Days of our Fathers have we been in a great Trespass unto this Day.
And therefore we must say as he, ver. 8. that it is all of Mercy, that we have
been delivered from any Evil, that Grace has been shown us from the Lord our
God, to leave us a Remnant to escape, and to give us a Nail in his Holy Place,
that our God may lighten our Eyes, and give us a little reviving in our
Bondage. And God has not forsaken us, but has extended Mercy unto us. It is
all Grace and Mercy, and not Worthiness and Merit on our parts.

There have been, blessed be God, many pious praying Persons amongst us, that
have been earnest with God for Mercy and Settlement to the Land. But how many
more are there that have been Cursers, Swearers, Atheists and profane
Wretches, that have not had the Fear of God before their Eyes: And we may well
admire, that the Oaths and Blasphemies of the many have not outcryed the
Prayers of the few.

Swearing is a mere Defiance of Heaven without any considerable Temptation,
having nothing it it, either of Prosit or Pleasure: But yet is a Sin that has
got into all parts, into Courts and Cities, into Towns and Villages, to the
Country Man at his Plow and Cart, and the Shopkeeper in his Shop, to bind
every little Bargain; to bloat up a vain Discourse, and to back every giddy
Passion.

We have lived in an Age, wherein Hell has been as it were let loose, and
Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness, Luxury and Intemperance
have been very fashionable Accomplishments; and Sin has been grown downright
impudent, and has outfac'd the Sun at Noonday.

Whereas formerly, as the Apostle tells us; that they that were drunk, were
drunk in the Night, as being the proper time to conceal such Works of Darkness.
Now we have had not only Night-Revellings, but Day-excesses with a witness: And
whereas the Proverb used to be as drunk as a Beggar, I am sorry to say, that
those of higher Quality have seemed to envy the Beggar's good Name.

Sin has taken Heart, and has dared to show it self, and come abroad in Pomp,
having had the Examples and Encouragements of Persons of all Places and
Qualities to countenance and back it; so that there has obtained almost an
universal Corruption of Manners. And then Uncleanness follows as the natural
Consequent of all this, and is always the Companion of a loose and wicked Age.

As for Divine Worship and Adoration due to the great Creator of our Beings,
and our continual Preserver and Benefactor, how little has it been regarded by
most Persons and Families, and by many even on the Christian Sabbath it self?
That Day which has been set apart for Divine Service and Worship, for devout
Meditations and pious Works, has been made with many a mere Market Day of
Debauchery, the best Day that the Devil has, and the worst day of all the
Week: or else a time of mere Visit and Idleness, except what is just spent in
some parts perhaps of the public Service, and which Men have been quite weary
of too: Yea how has all that is Divine, been exposed by Men of corrupt Minds;
the Holy Scripture it self burlesqued and droled at? and how has it been the
Pride and Glory of wanton Wits to dare to speak against Heaven, and to make a
Scoff of Immortality: Religion has been decried in the Streets: true
Seriousness and Strictness have been esteemed a Crime: Formality and a siery
Zeal for particular Forms and Parties, for Ceremonies and outward Garbs, has
been with too too many thought a sufficient Commutation for substantial Piety
and good Works; to bow at the Name of Jesus, and to be zealous for Church and
Liturgy, must atone with many for all manner of Debaucheries and Immoralities.

And what Bitterness and Envy have been among Neighbors? How few have been
clothed with Humility, or have put on Charity, which is the Bond of
Perfectness? But hard Censures, and unjust Surmises, Slanders and Backbitings,
Hatred and Strife have prevailed among those that should have lived together in
mutual Love and Kindness. Families and Neighbourhoods have been the Theater of
unchristian Feuds: and how have those that are joined in the same Societies,
rejoiced in one another Falls and Miseries.

Yea, Religion it self, which should have meekned and united our Hearts, has
been the very thing that our Contentions and Differences have been most about:
and that Charity which should be the proper Character of Christians, as it is
the very Spirit of the Gospel, has been laid aside, as if it did not concern
us, and Fury and Animosity have been taken up instead of it: It has been
thought a commendable Quality to be fierce against all, that would not
entertain their Notions of things, that they could even call down for Fire from
Heaven upon them to consume them.

Men's Feet have run to Evil, and they have made haste to shed innocent Blood;
their Thoughts are Thoughts of Iniquity; Wasting and Destruction are in their
Paths; and the way of Peace have they not known. Judgment has been turned away
backward, and Justice stood afar off: Yea Truth fails, and he that departsth
from evil, has made himself a Prey, As the Words of the Prophet are, Isa.
57.7, etc.

Which of Judah's Sins have we not had among us? Yea I may say, which of
Sodom's Sins? And all this in a Land of Light, which has been lifted up to
Heaven in many Blessings and Privileges, and which professes to receive and
submit to the Holy Institutions and Rules of the Blessed Jesus, by whom sure we
are taught quite other things. If the rude and barbarous Indians or Servants of
some cruel or Dunghill Deity, should wallow in all Licentiousness, or should
like Beasts of Prey devour and tear one another, it would be no such strange
thing: For this would satisfy best the Fiends they serve. But our Savior has
wrote us another Copy, and has prescribed us Rules of the greatest Purity,
Self-Denial, Love and Condescension to one another. And this is our Profession.

And therefore this must needs be a mighty Aggravation of our Crimes, and might
give us a just Expectation of another sort of Treatment from the Almighty. Well
might God have said to us, Ah, I will ease me of my Adversaries, and I will
avenge me of my Enemies. And we might have grop'd for the Wall like the Blind,
for Support and Direction, and yet might not have found it. We might have
roared all like Bears, and mourned sore like Doves; and looked for Judgment,
but have found none; for Salvation, which might have been far from us. This we
might surely have expected, if Providence had measured out to us in his
Dispensations that which we had deserved. So that what shall we say?

And is not our Deliverance then of mere Mercy? God himself has put on the
Helmet of Salvation upon his Head for us, and has put on the Garments of
Vengeance for Clothing, and was clad with Zeal as a Cloak: and when the Enemy
was coming in like a Flood upon us, the Spirit of the Lord has lift up a
Standard against him.

Let us therefore say with the Psalmist, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all
that is within me bless his Holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget
not all his Benefits: Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and heals all thy
Diseases. Who redeemeth thy Life from Destruction; who crowns thee with
Loving Kindness and tender Mercies.

3. But then it is likewise to be considered in this Duty of Praise, that we
show our thankful Acceptance of the Mercy, by our united Studies and earnest
Prayers to have that perfected which is begun, and now it is come to so good a
pass, that it may not meet with any thing to obstruct the desired end.

If there be any Value for so great a Mercy, and if we do really carry a
grateful sense of it upon our Hearts; if we would not relapse into our former
Troubles and Fears, but would see a lasting Peace in our Israel, we should
labor to prevent whatsoever may hinder the full Attainment of a blessed Issue,
and we should with joint Endeavors and strong Cries to the God of all Counsel
and Grace, do our very utmost to accomplish so glorious a Work.

And if we do our parts, we need not doubt, but that he who has so mercifully
given out his helping-Hand thus far, will be as ready to assist in what
remains. For if he had a mind to destroy us, surely he would not have done us
all this good.

But we must not think to dally with Providence, and to have it even at our
Beck or Command. If we play away this day of Grace, and neglect the Season, or
if we divide into Fractions, and run into parties, we must not think to be
saved against our Will.

God has once more put an Opportunity in our hands, wherein we may make our
selves happy, if we will consider the things that make for our Peace. And if we
let this pass, we do not know whether ever we may have such another.

If it should at last miscarry for want of our continual united Concurrence, it
will be in vain for us to pretend an Esteem of the present Providence, or a
Zeal to our Religion, when we still sacrifice the public Good to our private
Interest or unchristian Resentments. But if it should be so indeed, we can
expect no other but to be the Scorn and Derision of all Nations, and the
Triumph of our enraged Enemies, as we shall be really a blot to the English
Name and Reformed Religion; and our Posterity after us may have too much cause
to curse us for the stupidst Generation that ever was.

But then, moreover, if we are truly sensible of the Greatness of the present
Mercy to our selves, and if there be any Grain of Christian Charity left in us,
we cannot but pity those that want it, and shall be as earnest on their Behalf,
that they may partake of the like; and as the Church here prays further, that
God would turn their Captivity as the Streams of the South, and that they who
have sowed in Tears, may at length reap in Joy: So let us pray in the Behalf of
our poor Brethren, with the deepest and most yearning Compassion.

O remember not against thy Servants former Iniquities; Let thy tender Mercies
speedily prevent them; for they are brought very low; Help them, O God of our
Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name, and deliver them: Wherefore should the
Heathen say, Where is now their God? Let him be known among the Heathen in our
sight: And let the Sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, according to the
Greatness of thy Power: So we thy People and Sheep of thy Pasture, will give
thee Thanks for ever; we will show forth thy Praise to all Generations.

4. The last thing that I shall mention that is to be considered in this Duty
of Praise is, that we manifest the Sincerity of our Gratitude by a serious
Study of Amendment and Reformation, that it may not repent the Lord, what he
has done for us. For after all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and
for our great Trespasses, seeing that our God has punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve, and has given us such Deliverance as this, should we again
break his Commandments? Then says Ezra, Would not thou be angry with us,
till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant nor escaping?
Ezr. 9.13, 14.

We must not think that we are therefore delivered, to work Wickedness, or that
we may sin with the greater Boldness. God has a Divine and Holy end in this
and all his Dispensations toward us; as Luke 1.69. He has raised up an Horn
of Salvation for us, that we being delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies,
might serve him without Fear in Righteousness and Holiness before him all the
Days of our Lives.

We must not think that we are delivered from Popery to serve our own Lusts;
which is every whit as dangerous an Idolatry, as to bow to dumb Images, and to
serve Stocks and Stones.

We must not think that we are saved from Errors in our Faith and Doctrine,
that we may have worse in our Lives. For there is no such Error and Heresy in
the World, as a bad Life and a wicked Heart.

And we must not think, that our Liberties and Properties are preserved, that
we may revel more with them in Wantonness and Excess. If our Laws and
Government are preserved, yet that will little avail us, if we do not govern
our selves well, and our own Affections and Passions. It is not the saving of
our Laws will save us, if we are lawless in our own Spirits.

If we are secured from outward Tyranny, what will that signify, if our Sins
and Corruptions within do still tyrannize over us? the World or Sin in our
Hearts will be a worse Tyrant to us, than ever any Prince that could sit upon
the Throne. The Pope or French King could never hurt us, as our own evil
Affections can.

It had been better a thousand times, that our Bodies had been hacked and
massacred at the command of furious Jesuits, or that we had been Slaves for
ever to the most cruel Lords, if thereby our Virtue and Innocence might have
been preserved, than that we should be the Devils Martyrs, or be living Slaves
to the World and Flesh. It is a Reformation, that God intends in what he has
done for us; and that is it therefore, which we should also intend.

Let not our Deliverance lull us asleep in Security. For if we do not make that
Divine and Holy use of it as we ought, God can quickly turn his Hand upon us in
Fury. And though one Instrument be gone, he can quickly sind out another to
punish us; or he can easily make us a Punishment to our selves, if he should
but suffer an evil Spirit of Division and Discord to seize upon us. God has
Axes and Hammers enough at command, that he can make use of to chastise us, if
yet all he has done, does us no good.

As we sind in the History of the Judges, that when the People corrupted
themselves after their Deliverance, God soon raised up other Enemies, that a
long time kept them in hard Bondage, till they repented themselves of their
Sins, and then the Lord heard their Groanings, and saved them.

Jer. 7. 8. Ye trust* in lying Words, that cannot profit, if ye think you may
sin securely, and because of present Mercies that yet shall be henceforth out
of Danger: Will ye steal, murder and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, etc.
And come and stand before me in this House, which is called by my Name, and
say, We are delivered to do all these Aborninations? No. But go ye unto my
place, which is at Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did
to it for the Wickedness of my People Israel. So what Calamities and Miseries
have befallen other Churches and Countries, and how can you but expect the
like, if you do not take warning by their Falls. Thus says the Lord of Hists.
The God of Israel amend your Ways and your Doings, and I will cause you to
dwell in this place.

We are told by the Psalmist, Psalm. 33.12. That blessed is the Nation wh^ has
the Lord for their God, and blessed is the People whom he has chosen for his
Inheritance. For if God be for us, who can be against us? If the Eternal God
will be our Refuge, and will but put under the everlasting Arms, who is he that
can hurt us? So that the greatest thing we can do toward our own Happiness, is
to engage the mighty God to be on our side, and to secure his gracious and
blessed Presence, that it may be ever with us.

But then for this we must see, that we depart from all Iniquity; for he is not
a God that has Pleasure in Wickedness, neither can Evil dwell with him: We
must see that we walk before him, and be perfect: For his Eyes run to and fro,
to show himself strong in the Behalf of them that walk uprightly; then he will
be with us, and save us, and he will never leave us, nor forsake us, if we keep
his Covenant and his Testimonies.

We have plainly seen, that the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot
save; neither is his Ear heavy, that it cannot hear; and he is the same God
yesterday, to day, and for ever. But let us see, that we do not at last provoke
him to leave us by our Sins; let us see that our Iniquities do not separate
between us and our God.

He seemed for our Sins to threaten us sore, and to write bitter things against
us; but he has not yet done his Work, his strange Work; he has not brought to
pass his Act, his strange Act. As the Work of Judgment is called, because he is
slow to anger; Isa. 28.21. Let us see, that we do not provoke him by our Sins
to return upon us in Fury.

It seems as if our gracious God had had a Dispute with himself, not to do with
us as once he had about the People of Israel, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee
up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah?
How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My Heart is turned within me; my Repentings are
kindled together. I will not execute the Fierceness of mine Anger; I will not
return to destroy Ephraim: For I am God, and not Man, the Holy one in the midst
of thee. So that at length Mercy has prevailed over Judgment, and we are saved
as it is this Day.

And now shall not the Goodness of God lead us to Repentance? shall we no
better improve, but basely despise the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance,
and Long-suffering? should we still continue to walk after our Hardness and
impenitent Heart? What would this be, but to treasure up to our selves Wrath
against the Day of Wrath and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, which
yet we may expect, if we should continue to do wickedly?

It is prophesied of Mount Sion, Obad. 17. That upon Sion shall be Deliverance,
and there shall be Holiness, and then the House of Jacob shall possess their
Possessions. Why should it not be so with us? Why should not Deliverance and
Holiness go together? And then might we hope, that we should dwell in a
peaceable Habitation, and in sure Dwellings, and in quiet resting places. And,

Surely if ever any Nation had cause to love and serve the great and Holy God,
we ought to think our selves under the strictest Obligations in the World to do
so. For (as Moses once said to the Jews) What Nation is there so great, who
has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call
upon him for? What Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments
so righteous? And what Nation is there that has had so great Communications of
Light and Love, as we have had?

How early were the Thoughts of God for good to us in the days of our
Forefathers for many Generations past? How soon did the Sun of Righteousness
arise upon this Ionesom Isle, this ultima Thule, at the Ends of the Earth, and
the dayspring from on high did visit us, when many other Nations for a long
time sat in Darkness and saw no Light?

How soon had Christianity here a legal Establishment, and the supreme
Authority and Power embraced and encouraged it, when in other places our Holy
Religion was frowned at, and persecuted by those that should have been
nursing-Fathers and nursing-Mothers to it?

And when for the Negligence and Sins of its Professors, a long Night of
Darkness had overtaken us, as it had also in most other Churches, yet now
blessed be God, for a good while this Night has been spent, and the Luster of
Divine Truth has gloriously arisen again and shone upon us.

And when in many other places this blessed Reformation has continually had
the Powers of the Earth contesting against it, so that it could never get into
the Throne; here it was begun at first, and has been carried on and protected
by public Constitutions, by our Princes and Laws: so that the Profession of
that Religion that has been a matter of great Trouble and Difficulty to
others, because of the Discountenance and Oppositions it has met with from
those in Authority, has been hardly a Virtue to us, who have had the Laws and
Authority to encourage us to embrace it, whereby it has become as well our
Interest, as our Duty.

And notwithstanding all the repeated Designs, the deep and close Combinations
of our Enemies to overturn, overturn, overturn all again, yet how little have
they been able to prevail? He that sits in the Heavens has laughed, the
Lord has had them in Derision.

The Archers have sorely grieved, and have shot at us, and hated us, but our
Bow has abode in Strength, and the Arms of our Hands have been made strong, by
the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob, who has helped us and blessed us.

We have had the Blessings of Heaven above, and the Blessings of the deep that
lies under; we have had the Blessings of the Breast and of the Womb; we have
had the upper and nether Springs; and our Blessings have prevailed above the
Blessings of our Progenitors. And the Lord has still established us an Holy
People unto himself, that all the Earth may see, that we are called by his Name.

We have been a Nation, that has flowed with Riches, Wealth and Honor; so
that we have been both the Admiration and Envy of many about us. We have wanted
nothing; we have had Plenty of all things; we have had Glory and Power; we have
been able to help our Friends, and have not feared our Enemies.

Now indeed we were almost fallen, had not our Almighty Deliverer graciously
prevented us, and found out help for us, who used to have the Honor in that
kind to give, and not to receive.

But now if after all this Kindness that has been showed us, if after all this
that has been done for us, we should sin against him, and should cast his
Commandments behind our Backs, what Tongue were able to express our Ingratitude?

Surely God has planted us a Noble Vine, and in a very fruitful Hill. And
never was any Vineyard so fenced, and secured, and watched over, as we have
been by our careful Protector. In a Word, What could have been done more for
us, than what God has done for us? But now when he looked, that we should
bring forth Grapes, have we not brought forth wild Grapes? Has not our Vine
been degenerated, and become as the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fields of
Gomorrah? And have not our Grapes been Grapes of Gall, and our Wine the Poison
of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps? Therefore may we not wonder, that God
has not taken away his Hedge that was about us, and laid us waste? As he
threatened once to do to the Jews for the like reason, Isai. 5. But now he is
pleased to wait a while longer upon us; but if after all, we do not answer his
Labor and Cost, let us look to our selves. He is prevailed upon by the Prayers
of his Servants, as we find it in the Parable of the barren Fig Tree, to try us
a while longer, Luke 13.8, 9. Lord, let it alone this Year also, till I shall
dig about it and dung it; And if it bear Fruit, well; and if not, then after
that thou shall cut it down. Our Fruitfulness under our Mercies must prevent
our Ruin.

We find in the Epistle, that was written to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.1,
etc. that though that Church had suffered much for their Profession, and was
free from those gross Corruptions that had insected other Churches by the
Errors of the Nicolaitans, Yet I have somewhat against thee, says our
Savior, Because thou have left thy first Love; and for that he is much
displeased: Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, says
he, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent. But we are not only fallen from our first Love,
but have been grown greatly corrupt. We have quite lost our Forefathers Zeal,
and instead of being better by our former means, we are become worse and worse.
The old English Gravity and Seriousness is gone, and we have strived to out do
the deeds of the Wicked. And yet we are spared and delivered.

God threatened to spue out of his Mouth the Church of the Laodiceans, for being
neither hot nor cold, Rev. 3.15. And surely if Lukewarmness in Religion be such
a Provocation, it is a wonder that this had not been our Lot. We have been hot
indeed, where we should have been cold; hot in our Wickedness, Uncharitableness
and unbrotherly Carriage; but in true Godliness, Love and doing good to Men we
have seemed to be as if there were neither Life nor Soul in us.

And as was said to the Church of Sardis, Have we not also had a Name to live,
and yet are dead? Surely at best our Works have not been perfect before God.
And there he threatened to come on them, as a Thief, if they did not watch, so
that they should not know ^n what Hour he would come upon them. This is partly
true of us now; he has come on us indeed like a Thief, as to the Suddenness of
it; but it has not been to kill and destroy; but in one Hour, as it were is
all this Salvation unexpectedly wrought: Surely we have seen strange things to
day.

And now considering his wonderful Grace and Kindness to us, together with our
former Sins and Ingratitude; it is high time for ^s to awake to Repentance, and
to give up our selves to him in an Holy entire Obedience.

We must repent then of our past Wickedness, and set up a present Reformation,
that our Mercies may be lasting to us, and may be intailed upon the Generations
to come. We had need all of us mourn, every Family apart; the Family of the
House of David, and the Family of the House of Nathan, and the Family of the
House of Levi, and the Family of Shimei. And it does not at all an become the
Solemnity of this Day, when we are returning Thanks for Mercies, yet bitterly
to bewail our Sins, which inhance the Greatness of God's Mercy to us, and might
have justly made us to have expected other things. And O that God would be
pleased to pour out a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication upon all Flesh among us
for that End!

But we must not only reflect with Sorrow upon times past, our chief Work is
yet to come. And that is, that we labor for a through and National Reformation;
which though we that are in private Capacities cannot do much to, yet we should
labor to do what we can; that as we have contributed to the national Guilt, by
our Omissions and evil Practices and Examples, so now we may by the same ways
promote a National Repentance: And what we cannot do our selves, let us help by
our devout and earnest Prayers at the Throne of Grace, that Holiness beginning
at the Throne, may flow down through all the Channels of Office and Magistracy
to the meanest Person of the Land.

Let not Holiness suffer for the Miscarriages of some of its Professors. But
let Piety come into Reputation again; and let it be an Honor to Men to be as
good as may be; which would soon be, if all in high place would publicly own
and defend it. We have good Laws already, that all agree in, for the
suppressing of all Irreligion and Immorality: There is no party can have the
Face to desire and beg a Toleration here. Let these be put into Execution; and
let Vice be outfac'd, that has been so bold and impudent among us so long. If
Men will rant and damn, and swear and be drunk, let them do it in Corners; but
let them not dare to appear abroad to infect others by their pestilent Breath.
If Men will dare to affront God, and commit Villainies and Excess, let them be
stigmatized, and let a Mark be set upon them, that they may become the
Observation and Scorn of all, if they forfeit Pity by their Irreclaimableness.
If Men will not become truly religious, yet however they ought to be kept from
abusing Religion.

There is no civilized Nation, but has always thought Religion and Virtue its
greatest Honor and Interest. Atheists themselves will allow that it is
convenient for the public Good. And therefore those that decry and discourage
it, or give Countenance to Irreligion and Sin, ought to be accounted the very
Pests of Mankind, and are really the worst of Traitors and Enemies, that any
State can have: And the greatest Kindness therefore that we can show to our
Native Country, is, by becoming truly religious and good. This is the way to
engage God on our side, to prevent the Miscarrying of that Deliverance at last,
that has had so blessed a Beginning, and to obtain a Blessing upon the public
Counsels and Endeavors, and does in its own Nature tend to promote the Honor,
the Quiet, and the Happiness of the Land.

If Parents would be religious in educating their Children, and would but take
as much Pains to instruct and nurture them up in the Knowledge of God, as they
do teach them any Arts and Sciences. If rich Men and Gentlemen would be
religious, and there* by influence their poor Neighbors to like and practice
the same. If public Officers would be religious, and restrain Sin, as they
might, by their Example and Authority. If they that teach others to be
religious, would be truly religious themselves, and become Examples of it to
the Flock, then we should soon have as it were new Heavens and a new Earth; and
if we would but thus do our Duty to God and our Neighbor, we may be sure he
will not fail to pour down his Blessings upon us.

Let us therefore all consider our ways; and as now we rejoice and are glad at
the great and strange things that God has done for us, let us see that we make
a grateful Return to God of a suitable Obedience; let Religion be our Study in
all its parts; let us keep his Sabbaths, and observe his Ordinances; let us
read and study his Word to this end that we may be better, and let our Delight
be in the Law of the Lord; let us tremble at his Name, and do his Will; let us
fly from Sin, and mortify our Lusts; let us particularly see that we remember
the new Commandment of our blessed Savior, that we love one another, and that
we live together as Brethren: Let us consider, that Religion does not consist
in Meat and Drink, but in Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

And let this our Sion be filled with Judgment and Righteousness: And Oh that
Wisdom and Knowledge may be the Stability of our times and Strength of our
Salvation, and that the Fear of the Lord may be our Treasure: Then the Work of
Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and
Assurance for ever; then Violence shall no more be heard in our Land, nor
Wasting and Destruction in all our Borders; but we shall call our Walls
Salvation, and our Gates Praise. And the Lord shall be unto us an everlasting
Light, and our God, our Glory. The Sun shall no more go down, neither shall the
Moon withdraw her self: For the Lord shall be our everlasting Light, and the
Days of our Mourning shall be ended.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed and Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, relating to the great Revolutions and Affairs in England,
1688, 1689.
AN Account of the Reasons of the Nobility and Gentry's Invitation of the
Prince of Orange into England; Being a Memorial from the English Protestants
concerning their Grievances; with a large Account of the Birth of the Prince of
Wales: presented to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange. A
Collection of Political and Historical Papers relating to the Present, Juncture
of Affairs in England, in eleven Parts; which will be Continued from Time to
Time, according as Matter occurs. A Brief History of the Succession of the
Crown of England, etc. Collected out of the Records, and the most Authentic
Historians; written for the Satisfaction of the Nation. Wonderful Predictions
of Nostredamus, Grebner, David Pareus, and Autonius Torquatus; wherein the
Grandeur of their Present Majesty's, the Happiness of England, and Downfall of
France and Rome are plainly Delineated. With a large Preface, showing, That the
Crown of England, has not been obscurely foretold to their Majesty's William
the 3d, and Queen Mary, late Prince and Princess of Orange; and that the People
of this Ancient Monarchy have duly contributed thereunto, in the present
Assembly of Lords and Commons, notwithstanding the Objections of Men of
different Extremes. Julian's Arts to Undermine and Extirpate Christianity, etc.
By Samuel Johnson. The Impression of which Book was made in the Year 1683, and
has ever since ^^in buried under the Ruins of all those English Rights which it
endeavored to defend; but by the Auspicious and Happy Arrival of the Prince of
Orange, both They and It have obtained a Resurrection. The Mystery of Iniquity
working in the Dividing of Protestants, in order to the subverting of Religion,
and our Laws, for almost the space of thirty Years last past, plainly laid
open. With some Advices to Protestants of all Persuasions, in the present
Juncture of our Affairs. To which is added, A Specimen of a Bill for uniting of
Protestants. Liberty of Conscience now highly necessary for England, humbly
represented to this present Parliament. A Friendly Debate between Dr. Kingsman,
a dissatisfied Clergyman, and Gratianus Trimmer, a Neighbor Minister,
concerning the late Thanksgiving-Day; the Prince's Descent into England; the
Nobility and Gentries joining with him; the Acts of the Honorable Convention;
the Nature of our English Government; ^^e Secret League with France; the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, etc. With some Considerations on Bishop Sanderson
and Dr. Falkner, about Monarchy, ^^th^, etc. Written for the Satisfaction of
some of the Clergy, and others that (...) under Scruples. By a Minister of the
Church of England. (...) reproved, in a Sermon on 1 Cor. 10.10. By Mr. Hopkins.

