THE DOCTRINE OF DEVILS, PROVED To be the grand Apostasy of these later Times.
An ESSAY tending to rectify those Undue Notions and Apprehensions Men have
about DEMONS AND EVIL SPIRITS.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultry, 1676.

TO THE READER.
THat the Doctrine here in this Treatise maintained, is not unnecessary, will
be easily concluded by all those that are any way concerned in the interest and
honor of the blessed Lord Jesus Christ; when they consider how basely is
abused, villanously handled, and cruelly mangled; what wounds and bruises, what
mutibations, and even decollations, and that in the house of his friends, such
at least, as pretend themselves Christians, he has received: we have no
comfort donbtless but by Christ; nor by Christ unless it be by whole Christ,
sound Christ: Christ divided, maimed, or mutilated, can do us no good: A bone
of him must not be broken: nor may an atomical fragment of him be lost. And yet
if we observe, we may find some, not only breaking his bones, or tearing him
piece meal one joint from another, but even breaking his heart, by rending his
Godhead from his manhood, or nulli^ying one joint, one part, one excellency,
one attribute or other, that essentially belonged to one of these. Of old some
there were who despoiled him of his body: others indeed allowed him a body, but
a body brought from heaven, made of caelestial matter: others but a body framed
out of the Elements, not a humane body, or a body partaking any thing of an
earthly mother. Some contended his body was merely a phantasm, without any
reality at all: a delusive apparition. We may not forget the Mono^helites, that
would not allow him, as man, any Will; nor yet pass over the Apollonatists, who
though they allowed him a body, denied utterly, that he had any Soul. The
Nestorians divided him into two distinct persons each perfectly complete,
subsisting in themselves apart, a God, and a man, without any personal union of
the Natures: so making us indeed two Christ's (are we not beholding to them?)
instead of one; though indeed making us more than one, they left us none at
all. But then came Eutiches, and he takes away both Godhead and manhood at
once, in a sort: for while he confusedly jumbles both Natures together, he
makes him neither God nor man perfectly, but some third thing, though what,
they know not, nor any man else, unless it were a confused Chaos; nor flesh nor
fish, nor good Red Herring.

Quaque erat and tellus, illic and pontus and nes. But I must not forget the
Arians: they seemed indeed to deal a little better with him; for as they never
denied him to be something; first a man, so they acknowledge him too to be God
indeed; but then 'twas but a deified God, a God by grace and purchase, not by
nature and essence; that is, a God, and no God. A Sacrilegist, one that being
but a creature in himself, was so bold, as to challenge not the name and title
only, but the honor, essence, and incommunicable attributes of the supreme
Godhead. I need name no more, this is enough to show, how well they used him of
old.

But how is he used now? why truly (which could scarce be thought of)
altogether as bad: Christ has still enemies, and several armies of them that
march up to confront him. The first are the Socinians, these lead the van,
requiring him to lay by his Godhead, and in effecth is Priesthood too. This is
a blow to the head. Then came the Familists, the spawn of Henry Nicholas, who
think to puff him off into mere fume and smoke, as a mere Allegory; these lay
their ax to the root of the tree, and endeavor to destroy him root and branch
at once, making him scarce any better than a mere nothing. The Antinomians come
next, and these deal worse with him than the former: for while they say, He
imposes no Laws, leaving his Proselytes to be lawless and licentious
libertines, they make him to be a wicked thing (God, man, or devil, no matter
which); a wicked thing, which ever it be) is worse than nothing: this is a
deadly thrust too. A fourth sort follows, I know not what to call them,
Novalists, Enthusiasts, or Quakers; I know not which term to give them, or
whether they may not deserve all these: These, as I said follow: for from the
wild heterodoxes of the former they have with the addition of rudeness,
impudence, ignorance, and nonsense, patcht up a something or a nothing, --
from or with the Socinians they account him but a mere man, at least some
calling him, The man that suffered at Jerusalem; and with the Nicholaitans they
account him but a Quality, an Ignis fatuus, a mere illusion, a light within
them, which is not much better than an Allegory, or rather worse; and with the
Antinomians, they respect no laws of King or Keisar, nor Christ neither in his
Gospel, but the dictates of their own fanatic brains: is not this worse than
what Pilate abhorred, Shall I crucify your King? it is a crucifying or worse,
even a mutilating, an annihilating of our King, our Christ, our God. For the
Popeling, I need not say any thing, it has been often enough proved to them,
That by their prefering the Blessed Virgin before him, as to their Addresses to
her more than unto him, her compassion and comfort which they suppose she
affords them more than He: while they worship the Picture with the same worship
they do the divine person, with many other particulars; they ungod him, and
bring him into the condition of a creature, while they make a creature equal,
if not superior to him in any excellency or perfection; their magnifying his
body into an immensity sometimes; and then again at the same time minifying him
into the smallest atoms of a wafer cake, they nullify his manhood. As for his
Kingly office, their dispensing with his, and ordaining others, contrary to his
Laws; their abrogating his Doctrines, and substituting new and contrary; their
offering up a wafer cake for the expiating the sins both of quick and dead,
take away all his offices. But it is the Demonologists I am set against now in
special; who notwithstanding all their pretenses to the contrary, abuse Christ
as much as any of the rest; for while they equalize the Devil, yea even Witches
with him, for stupendous and miraculous operations, they cut off his head, or
ungod him, and what can be worse? He that debaseth a King unto the low degree
of a common plebeian, exalting the plebeian to an equality of power with the
King, makes a King no King, but a mere pleibeian; and the plebeians no
plebeians any longer, but so many Kings: so they that equalize devils with
Christ for power, make Christ either no King for power, or at least devils for
power Kings equal to Christ. This is not a bruising of his heel only, which is
as much as the devil is said to do; but a breaking of his head, nay a crushing
of his heel, head, heart, members, body, and all into atoms: are not these
cruel handlings, and manglings used against Christ? Sure the Godhead, as in all
other Excellencies, so in power must have the pre-eminence, and be paramount,
or else his power will not answer his other Excellencies (he should be lame on
that side) nor befit the Godhead. But upon the suppositions of the
Demonologists, the question may be justly put, Who the greater Miracler, Christ
or Belial, Jesus or Beelzebub? and if equal Miracles, equal Gods, nay doubtless
and he the greater God, who is the greater Miracler; which yet it seems may
fall to the devils share, and so the devil the only God, Christ none: for his
power being gone, or but equalized, much more if exceeded his Godhead is gone
doubtless. This is not bruising his heel, nor breaking his head, but a running
him quite through, bowels, brain, heart and all. I know they dress him a poor,
paltry, cold pultise of marks, and intentions, and aims, -- but it does not so
much as cool, or cover, much less cure the wound, and thus they leave him. Is
not this hard usage? and yet when by their comments they subject him so to the
devils insolency, as that he is content it seems with patience and
pusillanimity, or cowardice enough, to be kicks and spurned from post to
pillar, from prow to poop, like a football, (though there be nothing imaginable
to urge or to answer so great a debasement) from desert to pinnacle, from
pinnacle to peak, and from peak to desert again; me seems they used him worse
yet: but I meddle not with this now; to the former only I propose my dissonant
sentiments in this Treatise; and is it not needful? for if his enemies be left
alone, they will take away at last both name and memory; for what is left of
him already, when every of these have taken his bite, his morsel, more than was
of Jezabel, the scull, the feet, the palms of the hands? If we will indeed have
Christ any longer, it is fit we look after him, to preserve what is left, and
recover if possible what has been snatched off from him; it is high time to
endeavor this especially when the Chaplains and Champions of his grand enemy
are so numerous, every Pamphleter almost giving a snap, or a snarl to him, but
scarce one that so much as takes up a stone to cast at these currs; or if any
do, he shall be branded straight for a Somatist, a Saduce, an Antiscripturist,
yea, an Atheist; but such froth sent upwards, returns upon the faces of them
that vomit it. I shall say no more in vindication of the undertake, Here is a
short extract of what may be more largely expressed hereafter consider and judge,
Christian Reader; and if thou be a Reader truly Christian, conclude thou will,
That the opinion here maintained, is not unnecessary, or unseasonable in these
times.

The Doctrine of Devils, or the grand Apostasy, etc.
1 TIMOTHY 4.1, 2. 1. Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter days,
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils: 2. Speakinglyes in hypocrisy, having their consciences
seared with a hot iron,
CHAP. I. Sir, you thought me too rigid, I thought I had been too remiss; This
Text will decide the point, Whether this Doctrine of Devils, and Witchcraft, be
not Demonomany, or the greatest Apostasy, that ever was, is, or can be, even in
the worst of times?
THat these are the last times is no question, That in these last times, this
Scripture has been fulfilled in our ears, is altogether out of question. For
our ears sure, have in these last times been filled full, (...), with
Discourses, our eyes with Romances, and our heads with the Doctrine and belief
of strange, and incredible things, of, about, and concerning Devils and
Daymons. From whence in consequence, our Land of late, in the Rebellious times
at least (not these of our Restoration I hope) has been defiled and polluted,
with blood of Innocents; and thence, I think it follows, beyond all
controversy, or question: That the Doctrine of Devils, is a most abominable
Heterodox: yea, without this consequence of blood-guiltiness (which yet no
doubt must aggravate), once, this it is an Apostasy, the great, or greatest
that ever was in the World, or peradventure ever shall, or can be. The Apostasy
of these days, when all things grow worse and worse, the very dreggs of all the
former Apostacies; an Apostasy, not from an innocent ceremony, an adiaphorous,
circumstantial, or laudable custom of the Church, in the external worship of
the most august God; but from a fundamental one: not from one such only, but
from many, the most, and most needful, if not from all such. viz. From all
these Truths mentioned, chap. 3. verse. 16. The mystery of godliness, viz. The
manifestation of God in the flesh, his power, his augustness, his universal
goodness, his general comfort to the World, and his glory; in a word, an
Apostasy from all these things, that should maintain, and uphold Christ's
honor: And an Apostasy from all those comforts, benefits, and beatitudes, that
we could expect by him: This is clear all of it; and this also, that it is such
an Apostasy, that God had an especial mind, desire, and care to prevent and
caution the Church against. The spirit speaks it; The Spirit, not some
Martyr, Doctor, Apostle, or Preacher; as either Paul, Apollo, Cephas, nay, nor
any Angel from Heaven, these might all err. And he will not trust them barely
with such a point, but speaks it himself, The spirit speaks; and that not
only tacitly intimates, or in obscure terms hinteth, but plainly, openly,
clearly; and that not in dark Parables, Similes, Allegories, or enigmatical
intimations, upon the imagination, but (...), in express terms, plain words; as
a friend expresses himself to his friend, mouth to mouth audibly: And what the
Spirit opposes it self against, so directly, so plainly, so distinctly, so
immediately, must needs be a most transcendent, abominable, and prodigious
villainy. In a word, it is an Apostasy from the chief fundamentals of Christian
Religion; which as it is the highest crime that can be committed, as being a
deserting, a renouncing, and as it were abjuring of these points, that are most
necessary for the upholding of Gods Honor, and the comfort of our Salvation:
So it is attended, with the most fearful consequents, irremissibility, and
damnation inevitable, if perpetual. If we sin wilfully, after we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but --
Heb. 10.26. Which Text, as it is but rigorously legal, and cruelly Boanergical,
to apply it to every sin after conversion; so it is a merciless pity, an
unconscionable levity, a sowing Pillows under men's Arm-holes, and the
strengthening of the hands of most desperate sinners, not to apply it to
Apostasy, and to this Apostasy in special; yea, though it be not absolute and
general. And indeed it may deserve their consideration (and that, their best)
that are concerned in it, Whether they that embrace this Doctrine of Devils, be
not Witches indeed, both in Scripture-sense, and their own too; since they
renounce Christ, God, and their Truths in many points (and owning the Devil)
would persuade others to do the like? So that I think, though there be many
other great crying sins in the World, in this our World too, our Church and
State, yet none greater, none so great as this; and therefore I may fitly, nay,
must out of necessity (and woe unto me if I did not) set my self, especially,
against this most desperate, and most dangerous Heterodox.

CHAP. II. It is hard to eradicate this opinion, concerning Devils out of men's
minds.
ANd though I know it will be an Herculean labor, and as hard a task as to
whiten a Black-moor, or despunge the spots of a Leopard, to eradicate this
Doctrine of Devils from men's hearts, (since they have so long, and so strongly
imbibed and sucked in this poison, and since some Learned Men, and Doctors (who
write Christian) lay it down as a fundamental of their Creed, a point
necessarily to be believed to Salvation; since there are so many seduced
Spirits, and Spirits that seduce; so many that speak lies in hypocrisy, and so
many that delight in hypocritical lies (having I fear, their Consciences seared
with an hot Iron) since it is so hard and difficult to do this, I say, and
almost impossible that I should do any good; yet since too, that which is
impossible with Men, is easy and facil to be effected with God, yea, by Man in
the concurrence of God): Yet will I on. Who can tell, but that there be Seven
thousand Men yet, that have not, will not, dare not bow the knee to Baal in
this great Apostasy? Or if they have, will yet upon warning given, return,
repent, and recant? But should it be otherwise, yet, Liberavi animam meam, I
have discharged mine own Conscience, and my reward may be with the Lord, though
Israel be not gathered: This without question; Christ's sheep will hear his
voice, and for the rest, they shall one day know to the confusion of their
faces, to the anguish and consternation of their Souls and Consciences, That
there has been a Prophet among them.

CHAP. III. What this Doctrine of Devils is, and first negative, what it is not.
I Need not stop to prove that these are the latter times, as I said, nor that
in these latter times iniquity shall abound, nor that then desperate Opinions,
hellish Doctrines, and damnable Heresies will be broacht, abound, and be
entertained. This is plain, Acts 20.30. 2 Pet. 2.1. But we need go no further
than this present Text: The spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter days
some shall depart from the faith. -- Apostasy, Apostasy from the Doctrine of
Christ, to the Doctrine of Devils, will be rife in the latter days. Now the
spirit speaks expressly, That in the latter days, some shall depart from --
This is it then that I pitch upon, That the belief, entertainment, or attention
to the Doctrine of Devils, is the highest, grossest, and most abominable
Apostasy that ever was, or shall be: It is the Apostasy of the latter times.
There is no darkness nor difficulty in the terms, plain and easy all to be
understood. (...), are Doctrines, Positions, or Teachings, (...), of Devils or
Daymons, good or bad, Angels or Fiends. The worship of Angels is an Idolatrous
Apostasy, and the Doctrine of Devils is no better, but much worse: And here
(...), most properly, must signify not Angels at all, but Devils. Nor this
Apostle, nor any of the rest indeed, in all their Epistles, ever using this
word distinctly for Angels, or comprehensively, as including Angels or Devils;
but for Devils still distinctly, or bad Angels. The Helots were once Freemen of
Laconia, but for some misdemeanour lost their freedom, and were made Slaves.
Will any Man now that hears of the Helots, think, That the Knights and
Gentlemen of Lacedaemon are meant by that term? For though in some
catechrestical sense, the whole Nation of the Lacedaemonians may be signified
by that word, Helots, yea, the Gentlemen and Knights too possbly, to grant this
also; yet that the Helots should signify the Gentlemen exclusively, in respect
of those Slaves, were very harsh: The term properly belonging to the Slaves,
not to the Gentlemen of that Country. So when the Apostle tells us there will
be strange Doctrines concerning the (...) ((...), signifying properly and
generally, Devils rather than Angels) will any Man think that the Apostle means
Angels exclusively in respect of Devils, and not Devils rather, or at least
Devils as well as Angels; and this taste for my Opinion is enough. Besides, it
is here put in opposition to those Angels, that looked upon, admired and adored
Christ, as manifested in the Flesh, Chap. 3.16. The good Angels adore and
admire him, for the incomprehensible Mysteries and wonderful benefits that come
in, of, by, or through his Incarnation, and for the excellency of his power
shown in stupend operations, for the good, the exceeding great good of his
Church, far above all that they could do, yea think or dream of. Thus was he
preached to the Gentiles, believed on generally in the World, and for this, or
thus, was he received deservedly into the highest Glory. But in the latter days
some will be so far from holding this Truth, That they will give heed to such
Doctrines concerning Devils that will make them as honorable as Christ
himself, equalizing them and him, if not preferring them before him, for power
and mightiness of operations, as though these Devils deserved to be Canonized
as well, and exalted to the right Hand of the Majesty on high. This may be the
Paraphrase.

All the scruple is in the Grammar of the Text, (...) without (...) or any
other preposition, The Doctrine of Devils. It is possible some may be (and yet
it is a wonder any should be) so stupid, as to think that doctrine of Devils
intimates the doctrines preached by Devils, They (the Devils) the Doctors, the
Preachers and Promulgators of some Doctrines, and the audible Trumpeters of
them: but this is a wild interpretation, for it supposes, 1. That Devils are
speaking things, have the Instruments of Speech, can speak distinctly, and
articulately what they will; and yet they are mere Spirits, immaterial and
incorporeal Substances. A Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have,
Luke 24.39. 2. They should have the Pulpits and exercise there publicly; but
How then should we know whether we ever heard a true Minister of the Gospel
evangelizing it; or else fiends from Hell demonizing still. 3. This speech of
the Spirit, would not seem to be so true; but rather improbable and incredible,
since in One Thousand Six Hundred Years and more when we be come into the very
last Times, we never hear of any such thing in truth; nor can possibly conceive
how it can be: but yet the doctrine of Demons has been rife, general and
Catholic this thirteen or fourteen hundred years, and almost everywhere
entertained. 4. One part of the Spirits caution here thus should seem vain,
frivolous and needless, though it be ushered in with most grave, and in most
solemn terms: Now the spirit speaks expressly. And who after such a
preparation, or preamble, would not expect some wonderful strange or unusual
things to follow, yea, some things that were inconceivable, or incredible
without such a Divine Revelation? And yet one part of this wonderful Revelation
should be but this, That Devils would speak lies in hypocrisy, and have their
Consciences seared, -- which is a thing no Man can doubt of; if Devils speak,
they will speak lies, as being liars and hypocrites from the beginning; and that
their Consciences are seared with an hot Iron, who can doubt, that considers
what they are, Devils? 5. Forbidding to marry, commanding to abstain from
meats, are things we know that came in, not by the Pulpetting of Devils,
(though possibly, or rather but possibly by their suggestion) but by or through
men's superstition, and covetousness. 6. One special means, and possibly the
only means, That the Apostle proposes here for the prevention of this Doctrine
of Devils, is, To Refuse profane and old wives tales, verse. 7. Refuse, reject,
and contemn those, and such Fables as those, the fictions of Poets, the legends
of Romances, and wild Dreams of Dotards. Without giving heed to such things,
Men had never been seduced into the credulity of this mad Doctrine, but
attending to, and believing of such wild conceits, it is almost impossible, but
that they must be seduced into such Heterodoxes. We have a notable example of
this, in the second of Nice, (by some called the seventh general Council)
wherein, there were by some most Grand and Reverend Men (as they are counted)
such wild, mad, shameless, and incredible lies reported; that a Man of any
Wit, Reason, or but common sense, would think the reporters most impudent
Liars, that they Vyed who should invent the most shameless figments; and that
they were mad and senseless Idiots, that would, or could believe them: And yet
by these most monstrous fables, confirmed they that Idolatry of Image Worship.
See how much profane and old Wives tales, the dreams, lies, and dotages of Men
will prevail if hearkened unto: And therefore was it a needful Caveat of the
Apostle to prescribe (Refusing profane, and old wives tales) for the
preventing of this wild Doctrine, the Doctrine of Devils. If it be well
observed 'twill be found undeniably true, That the ground and rise of this
opinion, was altogether from such Tales as the Council of Ancyra plainly
declares. 7. The words, Profane and old wives tales, seem to be set in
opposition to these in the former verse (words of faith and good doctrine): As
also the hearkner to such Tales, to be opposed to a good Minister of Christ,
nourished up in the words of Faith and good Doctrine; he must refuse profane
and old Wives fables, and thus shall he be secure against this damnable
Doctrine of Devils; and Apostasy from the fundamentals of Christian Religion:
Profane and old Wives tales being the chief, if not only means of being
seduced in this particular. 8. All the particulars of this Prophecy, are in
our sense evidently fulfilled already: E. G. Forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, giving heed to seducing spirits, and giving
heed to the Doctrine of Devils or Daymons: For what is there that is more
generally entertained both in Papistry, yea, and in Protestantism too; than
doting and dangerous, if not damnable Doctrines, concerning Angels, Genii,
Spirits, Souls of men spreeting, Fiends, Devils, -- which may be all called
Daymons. This Prophecy in our sense, is fulfilled evidently enough in all the
particulars; but not one particular of it so much, no not one, in Sixteen
hundred years fulfilled, if by Doctrines of Devils, Devils in the Pulpit,
Preaching Devils, be understood: For in all this time, we do not yet read in
any tolerable Author, yea, or Legendist, of so much as one Devil, that ever
Preached so much as one Sermon, or vented one Doctrine out of the Pulpit, nor
that forbad Marriage, or commanded by his Doctrine to abstain from Meats. I
will not hence infer, That those Doctrines (that forbid marriage, and command
to abstain from meats) are tolerable still hitherto; because it cannot yet be
proved, that they were the Dictates or Doctrines of Devils Pulpetting it: But
this I will say, That it is more honorable, august, and creditable to the
spirit of Truth, That such an interpretation should be embraced concerning his
words, as may make them consonant to Truth by the event, at least within the
compass of Sixteen hundred years, in one particular at least: Not such a one,
as that in all that long, large and vast tract of Time, there can be found not
one particular instance for the proof, so much as of one particular of these
several predicated, to be fulfilled, likely to be fulfilled, or countenanced by
the success; but this might very well have been passed over as a mere Need-not:
But that some men are mad in their opinions, conceits, and dreams; and as That
was, so it is absurd, to say, That the suggesting, or injecting of wicked
Doctrines into men's hearts, is that which is here meant. Let it be at present
supposed (and no Demonologist I think will oppose the supposition) That the
Devil then did, and now does, inject wicked thoughts, heresies, villainies into
men's hearts; yet then, he being equally Devil, and Men equally seduceable by
him, then, as now, That he should inject villainies more multitudinous for
number, or more abominable for nature, now, than then, can hardly be supposed.
2. It is the general opinion of Demonologers, That by Obsession, and
Possession, the Devil domineered more unrestrainedly over the World in the
Primitive times, than in these latter; and if so, Why not by injections too as
much? I see not. 3. That Doctrines as wild, were broached about the time the
Apostles wrote, as ever were in any time afterward (except it be this Doctrine
of Devils here spoken of) is beyond controversy, as is evident by the mad
Doctrines of the Simoniani, Pyletii, Hyminaei, Alexandrii, Nicholaitani,
Pythagoraei, Gaulonitae, Nazaraei, Judaeo-Pagani, Mosco-Christiani, Platonici,
Hermogonistae, Pharisaei, Sadducaei, Essaei, Herodiani, Egyptii, Gnostici. --
4. Again, had the Apostle meant Doctrines suggested by Devils, or Doctrines so
wicked and abominable, as none but Devils would, or could be supposed the
Authors of them, he might have said, (...), devilish Doctrines, or, (...),
Endoctrinating or Teaching Devils; as before (...), deceiving spirits. And yet
5. I add, The Doctrines here by the Apostle mentioned, are but poor, small,
petty, trivial, and inconsiderable Heterodoxes, in comparison of those broached
concerning Devils in these latter days: What are Prohibitious of Marriage, and
Injunctions for the abstinence from some kind of meats, in comparison of
comparing, yea, of preferring of Saints and Martyrs, yea, Devils and Witches,
and abhor such base Varlots with, or before Christ, for stupendous miracles?
Did the Holy Ghost speak so expressly against those lesser, smaller, pettyer and
more trivial Heterodoxes, and omit to speak against those greater, grosser,
more villainous, yea, most blasphemous, most idolatrous, and most sacrilegious
Doctrines? 6. Some of the Ancients, as Epiphanius by name, adds (...) to (...),
Fables or idle Tales, and Doctrines of Devils; somewhat consonant to that, ver.
7. Refuse profane and old wives fables. Does not this show the subject, not
the delators of those Fables? Old Wives, old Grannams, old Gossips, old Mother
Mid-nights, will spend whole Nights and Days, in Tales and Fables concerning
Devils and Daymons. 7. (Giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
devils): As well followed by (...), which may very, nay most properly may, if
not, must be rendered, by or through the hypocrisy, knavery, or deceit of
Liars, Fablers or Taletellers: Somewhat answerable to what we read, Ephesians. 4.14.
(...); -- And Rev. 18.23. (...), by the Legends, Fictions, and monstrous
Fables, of Monks, Friars, and other such vain varlots, are the People seduced
into most absurd opinions concerning Devils. These words here, (...) Rev.
21.27. Intimate but one and the selfsame kind of Persons, Fablers, Taletellers,
Inventers or Forgers of Lies, the broaching or suggesting of such Doctrines by
Devils, cannot be then the thing here meant. (...), is, by or through here,
intimating the cause, instrument, or means, as in the places above cited; Ephesians.
4.14. Rev. 18.23. and many hundred places besides.

CHAP. IV. What the Doctrine of Devils is in the Affirmative.
THese words then, (...), I interpret, Doctrines of, about, or concerning
Devils, though without a Preposition, as intimating the Subject not the
Authors, the Matter not the Doctors, the De quibus, not the Per quos; so we
say, Historia animalium, the History of Animals, not that the Animals wrote the
History, but that the History was written of, about, or concerning Animals: So
Legenda Sanctorum, Doctrina Philosophorum; and thus the Prophet too, Quasi
Luctum unigeniti, as the sorrow of an only Son, not sorrowing, but sorrowed
for, Amos 8.10. And this Elleiptical way of speaking, by the omission of a
word, especially of a Preposition, is elegant, and in Scripture often used. As
(...), for (...), John 11.44. So, (...), Heb. 5.1. where (...) is omitted. So,
(...), Mark 6.7. It Is a mad and wild gift Christ gave his Disciples, he gave
them the power of unclean Devils; thus it runs, without the supplement of the
Preposition, yet is not the Preposition inserted, but must be understood; and
the sense is clear and plain, he gave them power over unclean Spirits. Here
too, verse. 2. (...), for (...). Nay, and verse. 3. One principle verb or leading
word is altogether omitted: Forbidding to marry and to abstain from meats, the
sense is harsh and unsavory, unless we supply (commanding, or some such word)
and commanding to abstain from meats. So would this sentence be harsh too, and
odd if we read thus; Giving heed to doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in
Hypocrisy: So joining, Per appositionem, speaking lies and Devils together, as
one thing, the Revelation would be ridiculous, as before. The Preposition (...)
must of necessity be supplied of, about, or concerning Devils: And (...) too,
if we stick to this expression, doctrine of devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy. But the plainest and easiest reading is, as is intimated before,
(...), by the hypocrisy of lye-tellers; by the deceit, knavery, villainy and
falsehood of Legendists, Tale-forgers, and Fable-faggaters; and thus, Devils or
Daymons must be the subjects of those Fables, and lying Men the Authors. And
now here thus we have a Prediction. 1. That the doctrine of Devils would be
brought into the Church. 2. Men would be very apt to entertain this Doctrine.
3. The means, way or course, by which this Doctrine should be brought in, by
forged lies, false inventions, and hypocritical fables: But this is not that
that I mean, but that the broachers of this doctrine of Devils are so plainly
described, and indigitated here, that we may as easily know, who they be that
are here meant, as we can know a shaven Monk, or Friar by his shaven Crown,
from an honest Man. 1. They are Liars, (...). 2. Prating Liars, venting their
lies in words, and Prate, and Print, and Preach too. (...). 3. Upon a knavish
design; (...). 4. A spiritual knavery, or knavery in respect of spiritual
things. Hypocrisy in Scripture Phrase, is used to express a knavery of such a
kind most commonly. 5. Shameless Liars, though they know their prate to be mere
lies, yet will they not conceal, but loquaciously, impudently, boldly vent
them, (...). 6. As Brazen-faced, so Ironhearted, Having their consciences
seared as with -- not caring what mischief, even to men's Souls, they do by
their abominable lies. And yet, 7. The broachers of this doctrine of Devils are
further yet pointed at in these words, Forbidding to marry, and a commanding to
abstain from meats. -- Now if there have not heretofore been, and yet now are,
many such broachers in whom all the particulars abovementioned do meet, within
the Popedom; if there have not been, and yet are even in Protestantdom some
too, that have, and do give heed to such doctrines, then is not this Prophesy
as yet, nor ever will, in any sort be fulfilled: But it is as clear as the
light even at noonday, That there are an abundance of such Doctors or
broachers of this doctrine in the Popedom, as appears by those volumns of
Legends, those decades of Romances, those huge tomes of Fables that have been
obtruded upon the World, by Monks, Friars, and other shavelings there: It
appears also by the many fardles, faggots and bundles of Scribbles, though by
Divines, Doctors, and Philosophers among Protestants, in vindication of that
doctrine; That there are an abundance of broachers and Doctors, as well as
Sheepish followers and Apish imitators, who give heed to this doctrine of
Devils: So that the Spirit needed indeed to speak expressly against it; and
against it here. Here he does speak expressly; but though so expressly against
it, he has and does still speak; yet some will Teach, and others give good
heed to it: So apt eager and wilful are Men, to refuse wholesome doctrines and
the words of Truth, that their itching ears may be filled with profane Fables,
incredible Lies, and monstrous Tales of old Wives, which turn them from the
Truth, to the embracing of this doctrine of Devils. This interpretation is
consonant to Grammar, to the letter of the Text, and is fully justified by the
success in all the particulars, and therefore cannot I think, be excepted
against. The doctrine of Devils, is the opinion, tenent, or Teach, of, about,
or concerning Devils; their wonderful power, and most prodigious operations:
This is the sum and drift of this Tract. There is not here any, the least
intention so much as to insinuate, 1. That there be no Devils. Or 2. That they
are not abominably villainous in themselves. Or 3. That they are not
mischievous, to the utmost of their power, against Mankind: But only, That they
have not such an unlimited, irresistible, and omnipotent power, as Demonologers
idolatrously attribute to them; especially in Physical or natural things,
whatever their power may be in respect of Morals. That is another question.

CHAP. V. The Doctrine of Devils abuses the blessed Lord Jesus Christ
mightily: And that first in general.
THis doctrine of the unlimited power of Devils in naturals, thus by Christians
entertained, is the highest and most abominable Apostasy, that ever was or can
be in respect of Christ. We need go no further than this very Text for the
proof of this. This Text no doubt is set in opposition to the last verse of the
former Chapter; where the Apostle having spoken of the Mystery of Godliness by
the manifestation of God in the flesh, the wonderful operations of this God-man
Christ, the admiration Angels had for him, his universal goodness as offered to
all Men, the belief that was generally throughout the World, against all
credibility yielded unto him, his glorification, and in his, ours: He subjoyns
this, That there shall be a departing from the faith: What Faith? Why, from the
Faith of the particulars before mentioned. However, in what shall this
departure be manifested or shown? Why, in part and specially, by giving heed to
seducing Spirits and doctrines of Devils: So that the giving heed to, the
attending, observing, entertaining or believing of this doctrine of Devils, is
a denying, refusing, rejecting of, or a departing from those great Mysteries
and fundamental points of the Christian Religion: As particularly, a denying
of, or a departing from, or a rejecting of that stupend miracle of Christ's
Incarnation, and the benefits that proceed from it. 2. An abusing or vilifying
of his most wonderful operations. 3. A taking off of that great admiration,
that Angels had before justly of him. 4. A denial, or abusing of that universal
goodness which he offered unto all mankind. 5. A vilifying of that wonderful
reception of his Doctrine and Gospel throughout the World at the first
Preaching, though for the strangeness of it to Man's natural and carnal
understanding, so unlikely to be entertained. 6. The magnificence of his
installation in Glory. He that turns Jew, Turk, Pagan, does not possibly for
substance abuse Christ worse, than he that heartily and in its latitude
embraces this doctrine of Devils, though he may indeed retain the name of
Christian: The difference is only in the circumstance or manner, the one
wilfully, desperately, obstinately; the other as it is hoped, but out of
ignorance, inadvertency, mistake, and interpretatively: But the same
substantial Apostasy in both.

CHAP. VI. This Doctrine of Devils draws men off, particularly, from that
most comfortable and fundamental Article of the Christian Creed: viz. The
Incarnation of the Son of God.
I Shall touch but upon some of the former particulars, the rest will easily be
guest at, when it shall be manifested in some chief of these, That this
doctrine of Devils draws men off from them. And first thus, The manifestation
of God in the flesh, or the Hypostatical Union of the Godhead to the Manhood in
one person, was heretofore, and now too still ought to be accounted, The great
miracle of the World, The Miracle of Miracles, The most stupend Miracle that
ever was, shall or can be wrought, by omnipotency it self; but if there be a
possession of Men by Devils (as Demonologers give out, Preach, Print, Publish
and Promulgate) then must this stupend and most miraculous work of Omnipotency
shrink into nothing, or at least into Vnum e millibus, into an ordinary and
common feat; it is but an ordinary usual and common prank, no more than Devils
do, and can do every day, every hour, everywhere if they please. It is
possible that the Demonologers will strain hard, to wring out some nice,
obscure, or critical difference between this true and unquestionable Union of
the two natures in Christ, and this fained one of Devils to Men; but certainly,
if as Demonologers say, a Devil or an evil Fiend can act man's body, so as to
move, carry, roodge, hurry, transport it as he pleases, make it light or
heavy, quantitive or not quantitive, visible or invisible too, make it swim
like a piece of Cork, dive like a Fish, fly like a Bird, the natural capacity
of such a Person, yea his Reason, Will, Intellect, Judgment, -- all the powers
and faculties of his Soul, being not only guided, governed or directed by, but
swallowed up and metamorphosed into the will, humor, nature, condition,
inclination -- of the Devil; the difference I suspect, will be very nice, or
rather none at all. This once, the Apostle puts the Mysterium magnum upon this,
That God was manifested in the flesh; and is not the Devil too, and that in his
utmost Devilship, and that in the flesh also manifested, according to this
feigned possession or incarnation which this doctrine of Devils attributes to
him.

I have in another place touched upon the particular mode of the Hypostatical
Union of the two natures in Christ, and have shown, That as that was (...)
Substantialiter; (...) Inconverse; (...) Indivise; (...) Inconfuse; (...)
Communicative; and lastly (...) Inseparate: So according to the doctrine of
Devils is the coagulation of Devil to Man in the possessed, in all and every
respect answerable. I shall therefore here now add but these few particulars.
1. That this Union of Devils to Men, in this supposed Possession, seems a more
difficult, hard and more unintelligible miracle, than that of the two natures
in Christ: That being but the coalescency of two Natures into one Person, this
the jumbling together of two numerical distinct and subsistent persons into one
Individual; There may in nature, as it were, be some kind of dark Adumbration
of that; some instance in the Misseltoe growing out of, or upon, and subsisting
in the Oak, without any proper subsistency of its own: But how well this
agrees, let the Authors of the conceit well consider (There was, it is
generally known, throughout this Kingdom) not many years since, a Person, that
had another body, living creature, or (if you will) another Person growing out
of his side, but subsisted merely by, and in the other Person, as a Ciens
ingrafted does in the Tree: But best of all, is this the Hypostatical Union of
the two Natures in Christ, adumbrated by the Union of the spiritual and
corporeal parts in Man: For as the reasonable Soul and Flesh is one Man, so God
and Man is one Christ, as the Athanasian Creed has it. There be many
resemblances of this it seems, but not any kind of adumbration as yet found in
nature, how to shadow out the consubstantiation of two perfect, complete and
subsistent individuals in one person: And yet, which is considerable too; 2.
God thought it needful to send an Angel, even one of his mightiest, most
honorable, most eloquent, and most powerful, even the Angel Gabriel, to the
blessed Virgin her self, To persuade her into the belief of the possibility of
that, whereas (they say) That the Union of Devils unto Man, is easily credible,
and generally believed without half that trouble: Strange, That the stranger
thing, should be more easily believed, than the easier! 3. But yet further,
There was great ado, and much trouble about it, To unite Man to God, the
omnipotency of the holy Ghost, and the power of the Almighty God were employed,
and all needful for the effecting of it: Where the Devil (as the Ichneumon into
the Crocodile) can slip into men's mouths with ease as they gape, and possess
them wholly as their own members: And yet again 4. In the Judgment of God
himself, It was needful, That much time, even Thirty years and more, should be
spent, (I will not say, for the subjugating of the Manhood to an obediential
subjection toward the Godhead, but) for the clearer manifestation of the
reality of that Union; yea, and Three or four years of continual Miracles to
boot: Where the Devil can incarnate himself, possess, or enter into a Person,
make him subservient to his will, beck or nodd, and manifest himself
unquestionably to be the Dominus fac totum in the Person, and all that with the
turn of a hand in an instant. 5. I might add God never did that Miracle but
once, the Devil does such as are parallel every way, and Super-paramount to it
every week, and day, for many Thousand years together; so that in truth, the
Devil seems to be the greater Miracler, as out-doing, out-going, out-stretching
the Omnipotent God, in that very particular that he counts his Masterpiece.
God manifested in the flesh, is no such great Mystery, the Devil can, and does
do as great, or greater every day. Oh intolerable opinion! that yields such
blasphemous results; Devilmongers will no doubt disclaim this charge, but they
shall never be able to evade the guilt.

CHAP. VII. It undervalues Christ's Miracles, in that it allows Ejection of evil
Spirits to Devils and Witches.
BUt Secondly, as this Doctrine, in the point of possession, undervalues the
Mystery of Christ's Incarnation: So does it more abuse Christ in the crotchet of
Dispossession. A Devil, nay, a Witch (say they) by the Devils power, can eject
or cast out Devils out of any one possessed: First, out of a Person where there
never was any Devil. But Christ says, Satan casts not out Satan, else his
house should be divided, and his Kingdom could not stand: And yet has and does
it stand ever since, though, at least (as the doctrines of Devils assert) Satan
has cast out Devils or Satan, all the World over, for these Sixteen hundred
years: Thus therefore, this doctrine makes Christ a liar: And which is as bad,
it attributes more power to the Devil, than ever Christ (though he appeal to
his stupend works for the justification of his Godhead) ever exerted while here
on earth. Christ never so much as cast out one Devil; I know men generally run
away with this conceit, because of these notions, cast out Devils, or cured a
Demoniack, or one possessed as we render it: But if we consider, That the
Scripture speaks but according to the mode and phrase of times then, wherein
(according to the conceit of Platonizing Pharisees) all great diseases,
afflictions or distempers, wherein they thought (as they did in all almost)
That there was (...), some extraordinary and supernatural agency; we may, and
will be easily satisfied, That when Christ is said to cast out Devils, they
were but dangerous diseases, uncommon maladies, or extraordinary distempers, or
else (sometimes sins) that are meant.

CHAP. VIII. Christ cast not out Devils: What is meant by Devils, where Christ
is said to cast them out?
CHrist himself, in his return to John's Message, or Quaery, (Art thou he that
should come, or do we look for another?) speaks nothing, but of curing Diseases
and Preaching the Gospel: Not a word of casting out Devils, though in the same
hour, he had cast out one, Luke 7.19. (Whatever is meant by it.) But could he
have satisfied John better, than by saying (Devils also are cast out) if he had
cast out any Devil really? And yet not a word of this, in his Answer unto John
Baptist; nor (which is as remarkable) does St. John (though he set himself upon
that point especially to prove the Godhead of Christ producing many, yea very
many, very great, and stupend Miracles done by Christ) yet does he not so much
as hint at that of ejecting Devils: A great oversight, in such a Person, in
such a business, to neglect such an Argument, if any such thing had ever been!
This would have proved him to be God indeed, and his Power paramount above all
Principalities, and Powers, and Thrones, and Dominions, and so God without
controversy or dispute: But he urges it not, and therefore we may well
conclude (if we will not think, that he betrayed the Cause) That there was no
such thing: Besides, Demonium habere, vel Demoniacum esse, are most properly
and most fitly rendered Madmen. When some said, In furorem versus est, or he is
mad; others said he has Beelzebub or a Devil, (as being in their conceit but
one and the self-same thing). Mark 3.30, 21, He has a Devil or is mad, seem to
be Synonimies, and to interpret one the other. John 10.20. So because of that
mad, wild frantic speech of his (as they accounted it) If any man keep my
saying, he shall never see death: Now say they, We know that thou have a Devil
and art mad: For none (thought they) but a Madman, would have vented such a
wild word, John 8.51, 52. And therefore Maldonat (a Jesuit, and one that
upheld the doctrine of Devils and possession, as much as any Man, for the
maintenance of Purgatory) Alii putant -- ( Alii in the Plural number, 'twas not
one single Doctors, Fathers, Schoolmans opinion, but a number of them): Some
think. That this word, Demonium habere, or Demoniacum esse, modum suisse
loquend^, quo non significarent eum vere habere Demonium, sed motae esse
mentis, delirare, insanire -- To have a Devil was a kind of phrase or form of
speech, by which they did not intend, or mean the Person truly and indeed had
a real Devil within him, but that he was distracted, frantic or mad. Joh.
10.20, He has a devil and is mad. 7.20. Thou have a Devil who goes about to
kill thee, or thou art mad to think so. John 8.48, Say we not well, thou art a
Samaritan, and have a Devil? Why a Samaritan, but because they thought him mad?
The Samaritans held odd, wild, mad opinions concerning God, his Worship and
Religion; the Jews therefore thought them mad, as the Samaritans did the Jews,
upon the account of dissonancy in Religion and Tenants; Wherefore came this mad
fellow to thee? Kings 2.9, 19. And so the Jews thought of John Baptist, because
of his strange food, raiment, life, and doctrine, That he was mad or had a
Devil: They say he has a Devil, Mat. 11.18. It is very improbable, That the
Jews, (who so generally frequented John's Preaching, and heard him so gladly)
thought him to be possessed with a Devil, and yet some of them might think him
to be a little crazed in his intellectuals: Nay, generally it seems the
Gentiles as well as the Jews, thought all these men that held any new, strange,
or unheard of Doctrines in Religion, to be mad. And hence Festus to St. Paul,
Thou art besides thy self, too much learning has made thee mad: Act. 25.24. It
was the strangeness of Paul's Doctrine, that made Festus think him mad; so did
the Jews think the Samaritans to be mad, and possessed with Devils; yea, and
Christ also, upon the same account, for the newness, strangeness, or madness of
his Doctrine (as they accounted it): Demonium habere, or Demoniacum esse, in
Scripture Phrase, is to be mad.

And indeed (...), deriving its pedigree from (...), can hardly signify any
thing else properly, but some such great, extraordinary, and unusual affliction
from God, such as is madness: And so indeed is the Word used by Polybius
concerning Antiochus, (...), he was mad, and Plutarch uses it in the same
sense, and why should we not in Scripture interpret it so too, when both the
word and sense of the Text will bear it? Besides, did ever any of these
Demoniacks mentioned in Scripture ever do any thing or things, act or acts,
feat or feats, that a mere madman without a real Devil, does not, may not do,
and often does? Is there any such act, any such feat recorded of them by any of
the Evangelists? They cried, they roared, they talked foolishly, ran into
mountains, and deserts, and tombs, cutting themselves with stones, brake their
fetters, were mischievous to Passengers; but have not, may not, do not Madmen
do all these things? By their works ye shall know them, says Christ; why, how,
wherefore then, may they not be Madmen, and Madmen merely, that are meant by
Demonium habentes, or (...)? I add this, Christ himself confesses that what he
cast out, that the Children of the Pharisees cast out too, Mat. 12.27. And
argues largely from it, to justify himself and actings: But never did or could
the Pharisees Children cast out real Devils; otherwise Men should be stronger
than Devils, Flesh than Spirits: And yet a stronger than he must come upon him
to dispossess him without doubt; And is Man stronger than the Devil? Can Tom
Thumb with his Rushen Spear, dismount King Arthur and all his Knights? No more
can mere Man dispossess the Devil; especially, if he be so omnipotently
powerful, as Demonologers predicate him. Devils in Scripture are set out as
powers in the abstract, Men as the abstracts of weakness: Now that weakness in
the abstract, should dispossess power in the abstract, is, I think altogether
inconceivable by any humane intellect. Can thou draw out Leviathan with a
fish hook, (said God to Job) or can a Crismer, a Child of a span long, bind
Behemoth with a rushen cord?

In short thus, all that the Children of the Pharisees cast out, were Diseases,
not Devils; all that Christ cast out, was but what the Children of the
Pharisees cast out; therefore all that Christ cast out, were but Diseases and
not Devils. And is it not now, then a most monstrous Apostasy, and most
intolerable Idolatry, and that even to the Devil himself, to attribute such an
excellency of operation to the Devil, which was never exerted by Christ
himself, indeed could not; because there was never occasion for it. Well, this
is one result of the doctrine of Devils, it is an Apostasy from that
fundamental Truth, God manifested in the flesh. This was almost (but it must
not be) forgotten here, That though Christ cast not out any real Devil properly
so called; yet curing Diseases in such a manner as he did, He manifested forth
his Glory and Godhead, as fully, and as much, as if he had indeed cast out real
Devils; but of this in another place. I have spoken fully enough. I shall only
add this here, If they had been indeed real Devils, or infernal fiends that
Christ cast out, there might peradventure have been possibly some probable
ground, of that stupend blasphemy of the Pharisees, viz. He casts out Devils
by Beelzebub. -- In some sort it might be credible, either by some favor,
connivance, compliance, complotment, or else envy, hatred, opposition of
Devils; so that it had been no miracle or argument at all, to prove his
Godhead. That he cast out Devils; a Simon Magus, an Apollonius, yea an ordinary
Witch have done as much: But there could be no compliance, compact -- envy,
hatred -- between Christ and Diseases. The curing therefore of Diseases, in
such a manner as he cured them, was more for Christ's Honor, and the proof of
his Godhead, than (if per impossible, there could be any such thing) the
casting out of Devils or infernal fiends could have been.

CHAP. IX. Christ's Works prove his Godhead.
I Proceed to a Second: The doctrine of Devils detracts, and apostates from
another special excellency of Christ: Justified in the Spirit, in or by the
Spirit: Where by the Spirit no doubt is meant, the might, power or excellency
of Christ, to do great wonders, and stupend miracles, as Mat. 12.27: But if I
by the spirit of God cast out -- Justified in, or by the Spirit as the Apostle
phraseth it, is, declared to be the Son of God by Power, Romans 1.4. A Man
approved of God, (...). by powers, or miracles, Acts 2.22. And God anointed him
with power; which is here called Spirit, Acts 10.38. Virtus potentiaque regis
Messiae nomine spiritus intelligitur, justificatus spiritu, hoc est, virtute
sua qua miracula edidit: Zanchy and all others upon the place. Well then,
Justified in or by the Spirit, is, declared, manifested, and proved to be the
Son of God, by his works, miracles and wonders: By these he proved what he
pretended to be; viz. That he was the Savior, Messiah, and the Son of God: And
this truly is the ground of our hope, the foundation of our joy, the
cornerstone of all our comfort. If he were not the Son of God, if he by his
works did not prove himself to be the Son of God, our hopes are perished, we
are cut off for ever, we may go to Emmaus when we will, we are of all creatures
the most miserable, the most besorted, the most befooled and deluded people in
the World; when we think that our Anchor is well and firmly fixed, it hangs but
in a wave: We believe in Christ, as a God who is able to save us; yet then, he
that we believe in thus, is either no such thing, or (which is as bad) we have
no sufficient grounds to believe it, or at least his own Argument to prove it,
is not sufficient, which must needs make his Godhead suspicious, as not being
Infinitely wise.

CHAP. X. Christ proves his Godhead by his Works.
NOw the proof that Christ brings for his Godhead; That he was the Messiah, the
right object of our Faith, the Basis whereon we might with assurance enough
build our comfort and Salvation, was his works: To these he appeals, To these
he provokes: By these he justifies himself to be God and the Savior of the
World, and by these only, upon the matter, endeavors he to establish us in
that fundamental Truth. If I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works,
that ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me and I in him, John
10.37, 38. And Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, or
believe me for the very works sake, Joh. 14.11. The only Argument, or at least
the commonest he uses is, that of his works; This is the ground that he would
have us go upon, for our belief, comfort and salvation; this is that that the
Apostle urges, Declared to be the Son of God, by power, Romans 1.4. This was it
that urged his Disciples to believe in him at first, John 2.11. The Nobleman
came in to by this means, Joh. 4.53. And they, Joh. 10.41. The Centurion and
the Pagan Soldiers were wrought upon thus, Mat. 27.24. Yea Nathaniel also, Joh.
1.47. And that great number, Joh. 7.31. Shortly (says he) I have greater
witness than that of John, for the works that the father have given me to
finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the father has sent
me. (...), Those very works, Joh. 5.36. 1. It is without doubt a sufficient
clear and plain Argument of Christ's Godhead, that he did such miracles; it
carries its credentials in it self, it needs no concurrent testimony to confirm
or strengthen it, (...), The very works themselves without any more ado, says
he himself often, Joh. 5.36. and 14.11. Yea the Demonologers themselves, (when
out of their mad mood of Demonomany) confess of their own accord, That Miracles
bear the mark of the Godhead in their foreheads: Miracles are the great seal of
Heaven; wherever there be Miracles, there doubtless is Divine Power. 2. It is
an Infallible Argument: We know that thou art a teacher come from God, for no
man can do these miracles that thou do, except God be with him, Joh. 3.2. And
Herein is a marvelous thing, that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has
opened -- Joh 9.30. 3. It is an Argument that leaves men inexcusable, Joh.
6.35. and 15.24. He scarce appeals to any other, but to this often; and if this
be not a sufficient Argument it might make men suspect Christ had not wit
enough to choose a Medium, by which he might prove, what he especially intended,
that he was the Son of God.

CHAP. XI. Christ's Holiness, Aims, Intentions, prove not his Godhead.
I Do not say, that there is no other Argument for this: No, I know there be
many others, as his Cardiagnostical excellency, his infinite love to enemies,
obstinate and desperate enemies, his infallible prophetic Spirit, the Star at
his Birth, the Earthquake and Eclipse at his Death, the strange things at his
Resurrection, and his Resurection it self, as stupend a Miracle as any else
that ever was -- But none, I say, that Christ appeals unto, none that he uses
so much, or so often, as this of his Miracles acted by himself. The Attestation
given him by his Father out of Heaven (which though it were not a Miracle
wrought by him; yet was a Miracle wrought in order to the honor of him, and so
in some sort may be reckoned, as one of his Miracles) he uses too indeed, and
one or two more peradventure; but put them all together, he uses not any, or
all of them, so often by half, as this Argument of his Miracles. I know, some
produce his Holiness, as an especial Argument to prove his Godhead, but this
sure can be no sufficient proof; for his internal Holiness (though it were
indeed infinite, yet) being but internal, and so invisible, it could be no
Argument at all; Idem est non esse, and non apparere; It is a kind of
contradiction, to say an Invisible mark: And for the outward Holiness, it was
not so transcendent, elevate, or resplendent, but many might and did equalize
him; yea he himself equalizeth, if not prefers John Baptist before himself,
for outward Holiness, austerity, and strict conversation: John came in a way of
Holiness, neither eating nor -- The Son of Man is come eating and drinking,
Mat. 11.18, 19. God in an admirable providence, thinking it fit to cloud his
essential Holiness, and to suffer but some small glimmerings of it to shine
forth, that we might not be scared, nor discouraged from an endeavor to
imitate him, and to tread in his steps: Besides, Holiness is not so easy to be
stated, as that Christ's outward Holiness should be an irrefragable Argument of
his Divinity: And if indeed we look upon his outward Actions only, as a man
merely; his Holiness may not appear so exact, as to be a sufficient president
for our imitation. Not to mention his furnishing the Guest with more Wine, when
they had drank enough, if not more than enough before; some of the preciser
sort, would think this was not so fit in another Person: Nor to touch at his
cures, and works on the Sabbath day, which some of our Sabbatarians will scarce
allow of now. I pitch upon his cursing of the fig tree, for not having fruit,
when the time of fruit (as to that tree) was not yet come: As also upon his
permitting so many Hogs (the rightful goods of innocents, for ought we know) at
least, of men, who never injured him or his, (for ought we can collect) to be
destroyed at the intercession of (as some call them) malicious Fiends, or
Devils. Look upon these, I say, and some other Acts of Christ, as the Acts of a
mere Man, and they are hardly justisiable: But look upon them as the Acts of
God (and he proves his Godhead merely by his works) and then no doubt, from his
Prerogative Royal, his Impartial Justice, and absolute Authority, he might do
all this, and more, yet nothing but Goodness, Holiness and Justice, in all his
Actings. Nay more, one year of Miracles, yea one Month, or one Day, or one
Miracle, proves more than Forty years of Holiness: This might be counterfeited,
even for so long time, as Christ lived upon the earth, (as Demonologers say,
and concede) and the hypocrisy not be discovered in all that time; but a true
Miracle is the Work only of an Omnipotent God. A Miracle therefore proves
irrefragably, though but one.

Neither could the ends, aims, intentions, or the issues of Christ's economy
here, be a sufficient proof for his Godhead (whatever some think) these being
invisible to all Spectators and Auditors; and not intelligible possibly in a
very long time: How could these beget, or settle a belief? They might be but
pretended, and not real; they could be only Arguments to the Postnati, not to
these that lived in his own time: And thus the Apostles themselves, at least
some of them, might not be, nay were not, true and well-grounded believers;
since they could not see the ends, aims, intentions or issues of Christ's
undertakings; much less could they be Martyrs and competent witnesses unto us
of the truth of Christ's Godhead; yea or of his Doctrines. Nor do Christ's
Doctrines (some urge this) (though the excellentest and most Divine, without
doubt, that can possibly be proposed to the Sons of Men, either for their Moral
or Eternal Good, or else for the exalting of Gods Honor) be an Argument of his
Divinity, without his Miracles: For (not to say what some usually say in their
Apologies for the Christian Religion, That it is not altogether new, as some
objected) That there is no Doctrine in Christ's Gospel so excellent, heavenly,
and gloriously Moral, as to the practical part, but some Philosopher or other
has given the self-same precepts before his coming, that Christ did, viz.
These transcendent moral ones, of loving God with all, and above all, and our
Neighbors as our selves; forgiving injuries, entreating Enemies like Friends,
Patience, Humility, Martyrdom for the Truth, though without doubt not so fully,
convincingly, incouragingly upon such threats and promises: I say, that there
is one Doctrine of his, would spoil all the receptibility of the whole System
of Religion promulgated in his Gospel, were it not, That his transcendent,
unimitable, unparalellable Miracles (which he wrought) fortified it as an
unquestionable Truth: I mean the Doctrine of his own Godhead, and his equality
in all excellencies with the Supreme Being, from which he expects faith,
obedience, and recumbency from men, for their Salvation, upon himself, as much
as upon the great Jehovah. But this must needs by all rational Men, be
accounted a most high Presumption, Luciferian Pride, yea Blasphemy and
Sacriledg, (and one dead Fly is able to poison the whole Pot of Ointment, one
wild gourd will make the whole broth nauseous and deleterious) and urge, force,
compel them to reject, detest and abominate all the whole Euruclopedy of the
Gospel; had he not sufficiently proved that Doctrine (as sufficiently he did)
by his incomparable Miracles. Did not the Pagans of old, and the Turks now upon
this ground in special, reject his Gospel? And for the Jews it is known by
Children, That they so blasphemed his Doctrine, and persecuted his Person, for
this above all things; That he being but a Man, made himself the Son of God.
This Doctrine of his Godhead, never did, will, can be digested by any, but
such, as by unimitable Miracles (there is no other Argument for this) are
convinced of it: And there was not, there could not a more sufficient Argument
be brought for it, than that: 'twere Miracles that proved this Doctrine, yea
and his Person too; not his Doctrine that proved either his Person or Miracles
to be Divine. For his Person he might justly have been accounted the boldest
Impostor; and for his Doctrine, the desperatest Heretic that ever was, had not
his Miracles justified both. Christ's only or chief Argument, I say, and the
best that can be brought to prove his Divinity, is his Works and Miracles;
justified in or by the Spirit.

CHAP. XII. The Doctrine of Devils nullifies Christ's Argument for his Godhead,
taken from his Works.
BUt now this Doctrine of Devils takes off, abrogates, nullifies this Argument
altogether: Whereas Christ, to prove himself to be the Son of God, says, None
could do such Miracles as he did, his works justify him, None ever did the
like Works; this Doctrine tells us, That Devils, yea Witches by Devils help,
can do as great for matter of work; as many, nay and Millions of Millions more
for number; for time exceedingly much longer, and for places, in many Thousand
Thousand more. Who now (upon this supposition) the greater Miracler? Who the
better Man, who the greater God, God or Baal; Christ or the Devil? Christ
turned Water into Wine, and it was so manifest an Argument of his Power and
Godhead, That his Disciples were convinced, they did, and they thought they
ought to believe on him. Christ cured Men at a distance by his mere Word,
walked steadily on the Waters, commanded the Storms to cease, and was obeyed
presently; cursed the Figtree, and it withered away straight: He fed Five
thousand Men, with five Loaves and two Fishes; raised Men that had been dead,
yea dead four days before: Christ could and did transform himself into a most
glorious luster, both his Body and Garments. -- By such Miracles and stupend
Works, Christ manifested it forth, That he was the Son of God, that we ought to
believe in him, and that thus believing, we should have life through his name,
John 20.31. But this Doctrine of Devils tells us, That a Devil can turn himself
into a Man or Woman, a Rat, Cat, or Dog at pleasure; and that a Witch can be
any creature that she pleases to personate: They can cure Madmen, or any other
sick Persons at distance; can walk and fly in the Air, yea ride in that fluid
element, with Coach and six Horses; can raise Storms of a sudden, and allay
them in an instant; can blast, not only a single Tree, but a whole Wood or
Forest; can turn a Town into Ashes in the twinkling of an eye; with a wry look
can kill as many as he lists, and raise them again at his pleasure. -- Stories
more than a good many, may be produced out of Demonographers for all these
particulars; but what need more, this is a Conclamatum est, an Axiomatical
Truth among the Doctors of Demonology, That a Devil or Witch can, for
stupendiousness of the work do as much as ever Christ did; only the doubt is of
the Shibboleth, or the Characteristical note, How shall we distinguish, how
shall we know them one from another, is not this blasphemy?

CHAP. XIII. This Doctrine attributes greater Works, to Devils and Witches,
than any Christ ever did.
NAy they attribute to their Devils and Witches some things, that do indeed
much exceed the things that are recorded of Christ, of the same nature too:
Christ raised one that was dead four days; the Devil or a Witch, can raise a
Man, though dead four Months, and more, as Cautius -- Nay Four years
(peradventure) as Samuel: The Devil or a Witch by his help, ejects a real Devil
(as it is said) which Christ (as I have proved) never did. Christ fed Five
thousand Men once, with an inconsiderable pittance: the Devil out of a glewish
dew, can and often does, mould up so many various dishes of choice Viands, and
Butts of lascivious Wines, that many Thousands may sill, and feed, and feast
themselves most deliciously; and for a need, can raise a most glorious Palace,
in the midst of a desolate Wilderness, to entertain his guests in state. (and
not suffer them to sit upon the cold Grass) and all in an instant. Christ could
in a short time convey himself from one side of the Channel to the other: Pagh,
this is but a poor trick, A Witch can be at several Places very far distant, at
the very self-same instant; as Pythagoras, and Magdalena, Crucia. Nay again,
Christ indeed did many Miracles, but 'twas Four thousand years after the World
begun, ere he began to do any: The Devil in all Ages, from the beginning of the
World, had done many Millions before Christ was born. Christ continued doing of
such things but Three or Four years, in Person, nor above Fifty or Sixty, by
his Apostles; He and they began later, continued but a short time, and have
been doing such things, even about Sixteen hundred years since: Where the
Devil, as he began many Thousand years before Christ or his Agents did so much
as one Miracle, and will so continue to the end. Christ did a few Miracles in a
corner of the World, a canton of Asia, a nook of Palestine; where the Devil
has, does, and will do his Miracles all the World over. Christ did his
Miracles, among a peevish, foolish, sottish people, (as the World accounted
them) the Jews and his own Apostles: The Devil does his among the Politicians,
the Philosophers, the wizers of the World. Christ did his Miracles a great
while ago, and a great way off, and who can tell whether there were any such
thing or no? We have but heresay, tradition, a few old Books written by his own
favorites, and commented upon by his hypocondriack Friends; where, for the
Godhead of Devils, we may our selves be eyewitnesses, and ear-witnesses of it,
in his Miracles every day; may behold them if we will be so bold (or else our
Demonological Doctors tell old Wives Fables:) few and poor, paltry and
suspicious, are the Miracles of Christ, compared to those of a Witch or Devil;
if we will believe the teachers of this doctrine concerning Devils. But whether
that Doctrine, that yields such undervaluing conceits, in respect of Christ,
be allowable, I leave to the Consciences of Christians to consider.

CHAP. XIV. It nullifies the admiration Angels had for him.
Well, this of that particular; justified in or by the Spirit. The next, is
seen of Angels (...), seen, looked upon, observed and admired of them,
Spectabatur, or spectabilis erat, a very honorable Person; according to that
of St. Peter, The things of Christ were so mysteriously admirable, that the
very Angels desire to look, peep into, or have a glance of them, chap. 1.12.
And St. Paul says, they were such, as in them appeared the manifold Wisdom of
God, unknown formerly to the principalities and powers, even in the heavenly
places; (much more unknown to Devils) Ephesians. 3.10. Yea the Psalmist tells us,
and the Apostle out of him, or rather God himself by them both, That the Angels
generally, all the Angels of God, the best of them (and that in part, for his
works which were infinitely more excellent than theirs) were to worship him,
Heb. 1.6. And yet how so? If Devils could and had been incarnated, could, and
had done, as many, or as great, yea more and greater Miracles, than ever Christ
did any. I might go on, and show, That in all those other particulars, as well
as the former, Men hugely derogate from the Honor of Christ, apostate from the
truth and comfort of the Gospel, when they be so credulous, as to entertain
this Doctrine of Devils.

CHAP. XV. This Doctrine intrencheth upon the incommunicable attributes of the
Holy Ghost.
BUt go we on, and see how, and with what respect, this Doctrine uses the Holy
Ghost: Two glorious and incommunicable excellencies, we Religiously believe, do
belong to that Divine and Infinite Spirit; the first is, a bestowing of a
prophetic Power, whereby a Person, through an extraordinary and supernatural
assistance, is enlightened, and lightened to such an elevation of Spirit, that
he can foretell, not only future and far distant, but even contingent things;
such as depend merely upon the will of Man and God. I mean not, That extatical
or rapturous emotion of Spirit, whereby Men may sometimes conjecture, and
predict (when they have not any absolute certainty of) futurities; however
confident the Diviners may be of their predictions. The other is, the Grace and
Practice of Piety, and Religious Duties, in order to a conformity with the
Divine Will: These are two special and proper effects of, or emanations from
that Infinitely Gracious Spirit. Who-ever attributes either of these, to any
other origin, sacrilegiously steals from that blessed Spirit, a special part
of his Honor, idolizing most basely that Person, Thing or Creature, to which
he attributes them. This I take is undeniable, but both of these (says the
Doctrine of Devils) may be insufflated from Hell. A Person may be very pious in
conversation, Religious in observation of Duties, constant in Reading, Hearing,
Praying privately as well as in public; ready, willing, earnest to instruct
others in the Mysteries of the Creed, and exhort them to the duties contained
in the Decalogue; may be ready to offer them the Cordials of the Gospel in
their Agonies; and in their extravagancies, to terrify them with the severity
of Gods vengeance: This is well enough known by a late example. Such a one
accused for a Witch upon Oath, and hardly escaped the extremest punishment;
but that some of the petty Jury were well acquainted with her conversation.
Yea, 2. A Person may predict things future and merely contingent, and all by
mere insusurration, from the Devil; for the former I have hinted an example:
For the latter I may produce Magdalena Crucia: Nay she may pass for an
unexceptionable example of both. For (says the great Demonologist of this
latter Age) for such things got she the reputation of a very Holy Woman, and a
great Prophetess; and yet conversed with the Devil, as his Wife, for Thirty
years together. Cannot the Devil make Saints too as well as Prophets? Yea
Prophets and Saints too both. Nay, and since Omne efficiens tale est magis
tale, must not that thing which we call Devil, be a most good and godly thing?
Equal to the Holy Ghost, for Holiness and for Knowledge? Whether this be not
such gross abuse, to that Infinitely Gracious Spirit, that comes very near that
grand sin called Irremissible; I leave it to Christians to examine and
conclude: And yet doubtless, mere naturalists would be ashamed to attribute the
excellencies of the Godhead, to the worst of his creatures. I might have
instanced in those gifts mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.5, -- 10. But I
thought fit to pitch upon these abovementioned.

CHAP. XVI. The first Person of the Godhead mightily abused by this Doctrine.
BUt are the Second and Third only thus coarsely handled by this Doctrine? Is
not the first villainously abused too, even the Father of all Power, the
Almighty God, the only Potentate? Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the
Glory. Thus were we taught by one, who (we thought) knew something of that most
august Majesty of Heaven: But this good and godly doctrine of Devils, sets up
one Beelzebub cheek by jowl with the great Jehovah, as his equal, at least for
Power, Might, and most stupend Operations: It fetches Jeroboam, a runnagate
Rogue, out of Egypt, the bottom of the Straights, or rather the Straights of
the bottomless Abiss, to tear away Ten parts of Twelve from David and his Son.
The power of the Air, Earth, Sea, and Hell, and all is Beelzebub's; Jehovah
must be content with the bare Empireal Heaven, and well, if he can have that
free. The Devil keeps Terms, and appears at the general Rendezvous there (as
it is said): And if so, not for any good without doubt, but in hope to get
opportunity to usurp that Province as well as the rest. It is said he can make
and unmake Men, possess and dispossess, kill and make alive, raise storms and
tempests, Euroclidons, Hurry-canoes, make Women and Years fruitful or barren,
send Lightnings, Thunders and Earthquakes, infect with Plagues, Pestilences,
and contagious Diseases, kindle and consume with Fire whole Towns, Villages and
Cities, foretell things merely contingent; stop the Sun in its course, and
restrain the influence of the Moon, and all the Stars -- Is not this a God? Is
he not equal to the great God, the Omnipotent Elshadday himself for Power?
These sure are the proper acts of God, of the great God, and Incommunicable,
Isa. 40.21.43.8. Jer. 10.12. and 31.35. Psalm. 135.5.136.4. -- Deuteronomy. 32.39. and
4.41. Hos. 6.1. Jer. 14.22. Psalm. 104.19. Job 9.7, 8, 9, 10. Isa. 38.8. -- Job
38.39 40, 41. -- These and the like I say are Acts proper to God, and therefore
it is not in the power of Man or Devil to do these, or any such; yea though God
permit, and allow the Devil the utmost power of his nature, without check or
curb.

CHAP. XVII. Of Gods permitting the Devil, and the vanity of that shift.
MEn usually shelter themselves under this conceit, as a secure Asylum for
their abominable blasphemy, (in attributing the proper works of God to the
Devil): Oh! God permits him, and then he can do (yea marry can he) wonderful
and stupend feats. I might in answer return, this Permission is but a mere
invention, a fiction, a Chimera here. But I say, let God permit the Devil never
so much, let him give him the full length of his own cord, and not restrain or
snaffle him in the least; yea cannot the Devil be able to do any of these works
that are proper to God: Permission is not impowering; but a mere liberty of
exerting a^ natural power. If therefore there be not a natural power to do the
works of God; Gods permitting of the Devil, the exercise of his natural power
to the utmost, will not enable or make him the apter to do them: Let loose the
rains to your Horse, give him the greatest liberty can be thought of, without
any the least check, yea urge him too with Switch and Spur, he will never the
more be able to mount up into the Air, to soar aloft, fetch his Cancileers, or
make his stops like a Hawk. Permit an Ass to take the Lute, though never so
well stringed, set and tuned; yet will he never be able to play so much as one
sweet Lesson, or good Tune. Permit you curp, hinder him not, let him do his
best, he will never be able to pronounce an Oration with any elocution or grace,
but be mute as a Fish still. Permission signifies nothing, but the freedom of
exerting the natural power; if there be no natural Power, Permission implants
none: This therefore is to be proved first, That the Devil in, of, by, and from
himself, naturally has the Power of God, and left to himself, can do as
stupend Works as God, yea the same that God challenges as proper to himself.
Can this be proved? He that proves this, proves in effect and truth, by the
same proof, That the Devil has the Power of God too, and in himself, and can
do the Work of God, without any permission from God: And consequently, That he
is God equal for power to the great God; nay, and if he have the Power of God
in, and of himself, he can do the Works of God in spite of God or his
permission; yea, and which is more (yet follows from these premises of
Permission) The Devil can so spite God, that God without the Devils
permission, cannot do his own works, can do no good nor evil, can do nothing:
For though, Par in parem non habet potestatem imperandi, destruendi -- yet may
he have, Potestatem resistendi, oppugnandi, -- if the Devil have in himself the
Power of Gods proper Works, he has the Power of God, and so can do them
without Gods Permission as well as with it; yea as well as God himself can do
them without the permission of the Devil. Is not this good stuff? Yet follows
from the supposition of Permission. Is not this with Manes, to bring in two
Gods, a good and a bad one, and yet of equal force, power, strength and virtue?
Nay, Is it not with Diagoras, To deny all gods? He that makes more than one,
allows truly and indeed none.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Gods delegating his Power to the Devil, and the blasphemy of
that evasion.
OH, Oh! But God delegates, and by delegation enables the Devil with a new
power, above his natural; this is another subterfuge, and a subtle one (as the
Demonologers think) Ans. 1. How is this proved; that of Job may be but
parabolical and adumbrative, not real, according to the Letter: so Learned men
and they Demonologers too, as Calvin and others, are forced to confess. Quaere.
Whether any Devil be so much as meant or hinted at in the Story? I think not,
but of that in another place. 2. It may be but singular and miraculous, and so
not to be extended to a general. 3. 'Twould cross a plain Text, Gloriam alteri
non dabo, God will not part with his honor, nor the credit of his Works to any
other whatever, much less to the Devil. 4. Delegation supposes the Delegator
either not present, or not able to work, or that he is stately and scorns to
work: But where or whence can the Omnipotent be excluded, and what is there can
be done, that the Omnipotent has not a hand in it? And he that takes care for
Oxen, feeds also the young Ravens, orders the motion of a Sparrow, provides
clothes for the grass of the Field -- is not over-stately: Or 5. What is it? Is
God grown so weak, weary, decrepit or unwieldy? we read he is the Ancient of
days indeed, is he grown decrepit, needs he a writ of Ease or Dotage? Is he not
able to manage the great Province of the World any longer, that he must have
his Delegates? Truly the Prophet was of another mind (and so are they all, who
knew or understood any thing of the Godhead) Isa. 40.28. Or else Sixthly,
suppose this too, was there none fitter, none abler, none better to be his
under-agent, than the Devil? Could none of his glorious Angels, nor his own
blessed essential Son serve turn? That the Devil before all the rest, the
Devil, that Stork, that Cormorant, that Viper, that Enemy of God and all his
Creatures, must be pitched upon and delegated, as his Vicegerent for the
management of the World? Oh! in what a sad condition are we, is this World in,
the while? But 7. Does not this suppose the great Jehovah to be a mere
Epicurean Idol, a Lurdan, or an Abby-Lubber, or rather, which is as bad, an
Impotent Weakling? Epicurus indeed thought his God somewhat slothful, somewhat
lazy and foggy; but that he could if he would, manage the affairs of the World
well enough; but for fogginess could not: These make him an impotent God, he
cannot, or at least not constantly; he faints and tires, if he take not his
nap, his ease, his tumble upon the bed, if he be still upon his work, and
business; he must get his Substitute, a Deputy, and (rather than fail) the
worst of Ten thousand; and thus all things, for that time (and how long that
time may be who can know) may (if not must) go against the rocks for him. He
has no Providence (I touch upon this in short, having spoken larger in another
place) and if no Providence, no God, and it is a Miracle if the World, shortly
and suddenly be not, nay, That the World has not long since been jumbled and
brought into his old Chaos, a Tohu and Bohu, yea into a mere Barathrum, a
Tophet, a Gehenna. The Doctors of Demonology, Predicate, Preach and Publish,
That the Devil is the God of this World, the Prince of the Air, the Dominus fac
totum in this lower Region, though most profoundly, idolatrously, irreligiously
all this: But why, how then, do they not worship the Devil, The Devil, Qua
Devil? what have they to do with, or care for that sluggish, foggy, and
decrepit thing that is above? here is a more near, a more active, and more
immediate Prince, King, God, with whom they must transact their business: will
not Demonomany, or Devil-worship be the best Religion, and most rational, the
most necessary, and most provident, if the doctrine of Devils hold true?

CHAP. XIX. It makes Men Devil-worshippers, if fully entertained.
I Will not absolutely, positively, and definitively say it of Demonologers,
That they worship the Devil directly; but some there be in the last times, that
will do so, Rev. 9.20. and will not be reclaimed, for all the judgments, that
have been both upon particular Nations; and Christendom in general. Let
Demonologers look out, abroad, round; but let them look home inward, and to
themselves too: I fear they may find those abominable Idolators nearer home,
than where they look for them. They are not simple or gross Idolators, such as
worship wood and stone; nor Murderers, nor Sorcerers, nor Witches (in the
worst sense of the Holy Ghost) nor Fornicators -- nor Thieves, though all these
in their way, may be said to worship the Devil: But a finer, purer, neater,
sprucer sort of Christians, Protestants or Papists (Angelicks as they would be
thought) may take themselves by the Nose, and say, we are the Men. Is there any
reason, ground, motive or hint, to fasten this to any but them? One Apostle
says, In the latter times, some will obstinately worship Devils, That will be
the great villainy in the latter age; The other says, They will give heed to
the doctrine of Devils: Put both together and this is the result, They that
give heed to the doctrine of Devils, are the great Apostates, and obstinate
worshippers of the Devil, which is the worst and most abominable Idolatry of
the latter times, or ever was in any time. Nor let them think to evade, by
saying, That the worshippers of the Devils in the Apocaliptist, are merely
Pagans, that worship the Devil carnally, visibly, corporeally in an outward
shape, or body assumed. Ans. 1. There is a prate indeed, concerning such
Idolatry; but that this is a mee^ prate, is evident from that I have proved and
shall prove again. 2. The Devil cannot take any carnal or corporeal shape, or
body. 3. Suppose this true, That the Devil could do this, yea and that the
Pagans in Eutopia, do worship him, as so; carnally accoutred, this excuses not
our Demonologers, nor answers the meaning of the Apocaliptical Divine, he
speaks of things and sins, that will be frequent in, with, and among persons,
that live within the pale of the Church: What is it to purpose, To talk by way
of an accommodate interpretation, of Men that now and ever will be mere Aliens,
from the Commonwealth of Christ? 4. As the Fornicators, Thieves, Sorcerers --
are all to be interpreted in a mystical, or metaphysical sense, so no doubt are
Devil-worshippers too, not Persons, that bow down their bodies to the person or
carnal representation of the Devil, or any other way express their reverence to
him corporeally; but that bow down their Souls, Hearts, and Intellects, by
receiving, entertaining, broaching, mentioning and improving Tenants, Doctrines
and Opinions to his Honor.

2. Nor will they escape by saying, That they do not worship the Devil; for
(forsooth) they do not Invocate, Supplicate, or by Prayer make any address to
him. Ans. This will not excuse; for first Invocation, Prayer, Supplication, are
but outward, or at least but secondary acts for the Soul toward the thing
adored: There is a former, primer, higher action, whereby the Soul apprehends,
believes, and applies the great things of the adored; which is worship properly
and in chief: And thus Men may adore and worship, though they never Invocate,
Pray or Supplicate. There be some Deists (I but name the Opinion and leave it
to be discourst of by others) who never did, cared, or thought it fit to Pray,
they acknowledged that God knew their desires, wants, necessities, indigencies;
that he was good, gracious, powerful, just, provident, -- beyond all that they
could ask or think; That they themselves, knew not what nor how to ask, as they
should or ought, and therefore that they cast themselves upon his goodness, for
all things, and thought it needless to pray at all. So may it be with
Demonomanists, they may not Invocate, and yet may they be worshippers of the
Devil. 2. The prime acts of Worship, if not the very essence of it, are either,
first, a Recumbency, Faith, Hope of some good, in, from, or upon some promise,
Psalm. 141.8. Or else, 2. The fear, jealousy, or suspicion of mischief, that may
be expected from him; Deuteronomy. 10.20. Luke 12.5. Or 3. The esteem of his Power,
Magnificence, Grandeur or Augustness, Rev. 4.11.5.12. Or 4. It may be
Credulity, Faith, or Confidence, that is given to his Word, as one that is
(...), Mat. 17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17, 18. Or 5. The receiving, attention, or
observancy that is given to the Doctrines, Opinions, or Teachings concerning
him, Acts 19.17, -- 20. Mat. 17.5. In any of these there is an Adoration or
Worship: If then the Demonologists, though they deny as to themselves all Love,
Faith, or Recumbency, or Hope; yet some of their Proselites by occasion of
their Books and Doctrines do not so, but go to the White Witch, as the Devils
Instrument, or under-Agent for some good; yet if they do but fear him (as by
the high esteem they have of his Power, Policy, indefatigable Malice, and
irresistible Omnipotency to do mischief, they must) or if they cry up and
predicate these his abilities, so as to make others fear, and tremble at him
(and they that make them are like unto them) or if they attribute any
excellencies to him, more than they can justify to be due unto him, without
Sacriledg, and Idolatry in respect of Christ; and God may, if (...), they give
heed, attend, hearken unto, or uphold, mantain, justify, much more if they
disperse, promulgate, or improve the Doctrine of Devils to the Devils honor,
thinking themselves bound in Conscience so to do, as indeed they do; they
cannot come much short of being Devil-worshippers, or the vilest Apostates of
the worst times.

CHAP. XX. Justice, and all Judicial proceedings, obstructed by this Doctrine.
I Need not say the condition of Mankind (if the doctrine of Devils be
authentic) must needs be miserable, it is, it must be unspeakably, and
irremediably miserable; the Devil may swagger, domineer, and play Rex where and
when, upon, or with whom, and that as long, and as often as he lists: He has
an Omnipotent Power, or the Power of God at least, an everlasting Commission to
be renewed everlastingly, as often as he pleases, Who should curb, check, or
control him? But I pass this as to the general, and come to look upon some
special particulars. And here, first, I know not what to say or think of the
Judicial proceedings at Law; I see not how they can be justified as
conscionable: The Grave, Reverend, Honorable Sages of the Law, are sworn (I
take it) to proceed, Secundum allegata and probata: This they are bound to, and
this it is thought is an excellent course of Justice: Yet may it be sure, Summum
jus, the most rigorous and unjustest cruelty imaginable: the Party accused and
sworn against, might act but upon force, violence, and invincible necessity,
Should not this acquit him of all guilt? per minas duces; or (at least)
compulsion, though but by Man, is usually allowed as a good plea: But if a
Person may be forced, compelled, and violently constrained, or hurried, Volens
nolens, by the Devil, a more irresistible, though invisible Power; (the Devil
imperceptibly may enter into a Man, and irresistibly move and force his Hands,
Arms, Legs and Tongue -- whither, and to what he will, says the doctrine of
Devils, in the point of possession) Can he be condemned justly? Can, will, or
dare these judicious and conscionable Persons pronounce sentence against him?
Nay, can they at any time condemn any Man, for any Crime, Villainy, or Piacle
whatever, Murder, Incest, Bestiality, Sodomy, Regicidism --? There must be
sufficient, satisfying and convincing evidence of the fact, as perpetrated by
such a Person, ere they can pronounce him guilty; but this they never have,
shall, or can have, if the Devil can take on men's shapes, forms, habits,
countenances, tones, gates, statures, ages, complexions (as he did Samuels, say
Demonologers, and a Thousand instances more of the same kind will they fardle
up to prove the thing) and act in the shape assumed; Who can with any assurance
swear, who with any confidence believe, or who with any conscience can condemn?
It might be the Devil in Man's shape, and not the Man accused; it is Justice
doubtless, that the guilty be punished, and the innocent acquitted; but here
the innocent must be condemned, and the guilty escape without any punishment: Is
this Justice? I hope the Demonologers who have so long studied the Black Art,
and are by this time well acquainted with the subtilest intrigues, retreats,
and lurking-holes of Satan, know when and where, and how he may be catched; and
will inform the Court how he may be arrested, arraigned, and executed, for his
Villainies. I hope they will not, in compliance with the Devil, everlastingly
suffer the honest Party, to be still condemned, butchered and murdered, for
the guilt merely of that most notorious Malignant. But till then indeed, I do
wonder who will, who can, who dare be a Judge, a Witness, or of the Inquest. Is
it possible that either of them can act in Faith, or with a safe Conscience? He
that justifies the wicked, or condemns the innocent, both these are
abominable, Prove. 17.15. And yet the Judge, the Jury, Inquest and Witness, may
do both these; and that by Rules of Justice, and Command of Gods: Can this
consist with the Truth, Goodness, Holiness, Providence, Wisdom, Justice,
Philanthropy -- of God? For my part I do not see, know or conceive, but that
the Judge, Jury, and Inquest, are all so hemmed in, straightened and beleguered,
with such a necessity of sinning, that they cannot possibly get out (no not by
Miracle) without sin, one way or other: The Judge is drawn into the guilt of
cruelty and injustice, as pronouncing a Sentence of condemnation unjustly,
against an innocent (which his Soul abhors) and yet must pronounce such a
Sentence if he proceed according to evidence; and yet if he proceed not
according to evidence, he sins of necessity the sin of perjury, since he is
sworn to proceed Secundum allegata, and probata: The Witnesses that swear, run
into the guilt of Perjury too; as swearing to a falsity, or at least to a thing
against a Person, that they could not certainly be assured 'twas true, or so as
they swore: And yet if they do not witness and swear as required, they run into
the guilt of concealing Felony, Murder, and possibly some more abominable
guilt; besides the injury done to Justice, and the contempt of the Magistrate,
and the danger of the public. The Inquest too is forced into the guilt of
conspiracy, with both, as presenting upon their Oaths, and Consciences, such a
Person as guilty, (when innocent at least as to them) they could not by this
doctrine of Devils have sufficient testimony of his guilt. And yet on the other
side, if they present not what is sworn to them by competent witnesses, being a
crime, they are forsworn, since when they were admitted, they swore to present
such things. Judges, Inquest, Jury, Witnesses and all must of necessity sin one
way or other; Auribus lupum, they are all me seems like the Israelites in the
Red Sea; the Sea before and the Egyptians behind them; if they went forward
they drowned themselves, if stood still, or went back, yielded themselves to be
Butchered; what course they should take I knew not, and as little know I, how
the offices of Justice should behave themselves in this case: Besides, if a
Villain taken in the very act of Murder, should plead it was the violent
compulsion, or irresistible force of an inhabiting Devil, though invisible to
the spectator, that compelled him; I wonder how he can be condemned, though
taken, as I said, in the very act; if the supposition be allowed, the
justification cannot be gainsaid. St. Paul was so odious to the Pharisees, That
they would with all their heart, have plucked him in pieces, and torn him piece
after piece, one joint from another; but when they acknowledged the Supposition
of his Apology, they could not deny the conclusion, viz. his Innocence, he was
to be freed, they found no fault in him. If a Spirit or an Angel have spoken to
him, we cannot fight against God; and yet what he had spoken was as a Stab, a
Dagger, a Poniard struck into their hearts: Had he murdered a Thousand Men,
they would never have been so violently set against him, as they were for the
words he had spoken. Doubtless by the same reason, or peradventure more, if a
Devil, by the Permission, Commission, or Command of God, or his own natural and
irresistible power, can compel a person to Murder, yea suppose his Father, and
such a compulsion be pleaded; the Man is free, and cannot be condemned justly:
The sin must lie somewhere else, on God, or the Devil at least, Why should the
Man suffer? Acknowledge the Doctrine in the Supposition, and the conclusion,
viz. The Apologists innocence, though a Murderer, yea a Parricide, cannot but
with absurdity be denied. Here the abominable Villain may be excused, above the
most integer innocents might be condemned; and yet which is a strange Riddle,
an intricate Labyrinth, a monstrous contradiction: The Witnesses are innocent,
they depose but what they saw; the Inquest are innocent, they present but what
was sworn to them; the Judge is innocent, he proceeds but according to Proof,
Law, Evidence, and Oath. Doubtless it will need Sphinx to explain those
Enigmata; for my part I cannot: If any Demonologer can, he may do well to do
it, that the Judges, Jury, Inquest, and Witnesses may appear and act at Assizes
with a safe Conscience; for truly things standing as they do (according to
this doctrine of Devils) I do not see why those Judicial proceedings at Law
should be continued. They are without doubt in themselves the most necessary
methods. (For the condition we are in, both for this Life, and the Life which
is to come too, that Man, yea God himself could invent) without the Law and the
execution of it, we should be but like Beasts in the Forests here, and fare
but like Devils in Hell hereafter. And yet upon this Hypothesis of the Doctrine
of Devils, there is no room, no place, no need, no use, or benefit by them at
all; they may do more harm than good, the Officers of the Law may (be they
never so conscionable or incorruptible) nay do but act villainy by a Law; and
yet is this villainy heightened, aggravated, and aggrandized into a greater
dimension of mischief; in that it is done under the pretense of Law, under the
countenance of Justice, under the Authority of God. God, Justice and Law, are
all brought in as Accessaries to the (necessitated) injustice of the judicial
proceedings. But nay, nay, if it be thus, away with all Law, away with Assizes,
away with Judges, away with all Offices, Courts of Justice, and proceedings
according to the Laws: They are dangerous and mischievous things; not to be
tolerated among Christians, nay nor any society of Men. But I stop, and say,
rather away with Witchcraftical Doctors, away with the doctrine of Devils, for
then Men may be able to believe their own eyes with confidence, may be believed
by others upon their Oath, Law, Justice; and judicial proceedings may be of
use, Judges and the rest of the Officers may take their places as heretofore,
and act every one of them in their own Spheres, with a safe, quiet, and good
Conscience: Otherwise they cannot act in Faith, and whatever is not of Faith is
Sin.

CHAP. XXI. Common Society is in danger to be destroyed by this Opinion.
I Have spoken of one mischief that necessarily flows in upon mankind by this
Doctrine, as exterminating all Justice out of the World; I shall speak of
another, a thing as necessary as the former (for which indeed the former was
instituted) that is hugely disturbed and in danger of extermination too by the
same principle: It is that which we call Humane fellowship, or Common Society;
for what kind of society can Men possibly have with any Men (this Doctrine
supposed) with those that they account their good Neighbors, kindest
companions, lovingest Friends, nearest and dearest Relatives? How can they be
assured that they are not all so many incarnate Devils? How can they consult or
counsel them, how negotiate or traffic with them? Trust not in any Brother, is
a needful Caveat, he may be a Brother, but in or for iniquity; nay trust not in
a Father neither, he may be but the Father of Lies, a mere Devil, however he
appear to thee. Nay, how can we say God speed, God save, God bless (which are
but civil Complements of Christian Society) or Good morrow, or Good even to any
one we think our Friend, our good and Christian Friend; he may be but Satan
transformed into his shape, and he that bids him good speed (or in any
respect but seems to wish him well) is a partaker of his evil deeds, John.
2.10, 11. Nay, how can we mere together in Church Fellowship, how assemble in
the Temples for holy duties? It Is possible (by this Doctrine) that we may meet
with none there, but hellish comrades, infernal fiends, or devilish companions?
And I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils, especially in the
Lords service. How dare we venture to hear any Men Preach; the Preachers may be
but the emissaries of the Prince of darkness, cunningly transforming themselves
to our senses, into Angels of light; villainously promoting the designs of Hell
upon our Souls, when we in our delusion, think they are preparing us for the
joys of Heaven? How can Men delight, rejoice, or comfort themselves in their
Wives, how hugg them in their arms, or entertain them in their bosoms, they
may be but complemental Lamioe, Empusa's or Devils, at least may be Succubae to
some lustful Daymons? How can they delight or comfort themselves in their
Children, they may be but the misbegotten Bastards of some infernal Incubi?
What joy, what comfort, what content can Men, any Men have abroad or at home,
in their friends or nearest relatives, yea in their public and more solemn
devotious, if this doctrine of Devils be true and authentic.

CHAP. XXII. It is a Whorish Opinion.
BEsides all this it is a Whorish Opinion, an Opinion that will bolster out,
protect and secure all the whores, queans, baggages (and consequently too,
their salacious stallions) as all the varlets of the Country besides: This
doctrine of Devils were a sufficient apology for them all, thus; I never knew
any Man's body for such carnal lust, I know not what it means, I defy all such
filthiness; it was an Incubus, that has impregnated me unwittingly. What can
be said in answer, if she swear this? This doctrine once obtaining; nor Bedlam,
nor Bridewell, nor Whipping-post could challenge any right to her. But who
should mantain the brood, who pay for nursing of the Bastards? This would be
chargeable and the Parishoners will never endure, that the charge be laid upon
them, and therefore though they did heretofore, yet will not now (if upon no
other, yet upon this consideration) entertain this Doctrine any longer I hope.

CHAP. XXIII. It is a perjurous opinion and destructive both in respect of
Reason, Sense, and Traffic.
BUt which is worse than this; It is a perjurous opinion, an opinion that in a
short necessitates Men to be perjured: Men may, Men must, Men cannot but be
perjured when ere they swear, they cannot swear, no not to a matter of fact
which they saw with their own eyes: They cannot swear such a thing in truth, in
justice or in judgment. They swear they saw such a person commit such an act,
and yet might not that person commit that act which they swear unto, though
they think they saw it? They might be deceived, a hellish Phantasm, a devilish
Apparition, a subtle Deceptio visus, or a perstringing of the eyes might
delude them. There is nothing certain, nothing positively to be sworn without
perjury; the Anabaptists Tenent is most Orthodox, swear not at all, in any
matter, upon any occasion, nor in justice, nor in truth, nor in judgment,
though all these require it: We can be at the best but Scepticks, the best of
us: We cannot possibly ascend higher than a Universal doubting of, and in every
thing.

In respect of Reason.
For (which may pass for another Reason) this Doctrine disturbs our Reason, and
obstupifies it; it takes us off from all ratiocination or Logical inferences;
we think it rational to conclude, That heavy bodies will sink downward, but
this Doctrine will tell us another tale. viz. That an old Hagg, a withered and
decrepit Witch that is as heavy as Lead, will swim like Cork in the Water, or
as a Bird fly in the Air, that most soft, yielding, fluid and unresisting
Element. We according to our Reason used to conclude, That if any Man or Person
be here at this time, in this definite place and circumscribed, he is not,
cannot be at another far distant place at the same instant; yet will this
Doctrine impose upon us, That he may, as I have showed. Our Reason tells us,
That no numerical accident can pass from one subject to another, or inhere in
two subjects; and yet this Doctrine will tell us, That the same grief or wound,
that a Witch receives in her aerial, assumed body, or vehicle, may be found
and felt too (though the Soul be absent) at the same instant, in her dead
Carcass left behind at home by the wall: And many more such fine incredibles,
will this Doctrine teach us, contrary to our Reason. It was reported in the
beginning of our late troubles, of a great and Arch-Covenanter, when pressing
the Covenant most zealously: He was urged with some arguments taken from
Scripture and Reason against the Covenanting way, by a Royalist; That he
answered, we must deny both Scripture and Reason too now, and help Jesus Christ
at this pinch. I did not indeed hear this my self, but it might be true, yea
and his zeal might be somewhat excusable, since 'twas for Christ. But I read I
am sure in many, in most Demonologists, several things that are directly
opposite and contrary, both to Reason and Scripture, and these urged fiercely,
as fundamental points of Religion, and all for the support and maintenance of
the Grandeur of that Prince of darkness, against the honor and interest of
Christ: If any Man can bring any thing of Reason or Scripture in excuse of
this, he may if he will, I would not if I could, indeed I cannot nor any Man
else.

In respect of Sense.
And yet more, It is a senseless Doctrine this. A Doctrine I mean, that takes
away all the certainty or benefit of our Senses: We may think we see such and
such things, such and such persons which yet we see not; think we hear such and
such sounds, such and such discourses which yet we hear not: Think we taste and
eat such and such viands, drink such and such luscious wines which yet we do
not; we may be hungry, and thirsty, and faint, for all our ingurgitating, pour
and cram we in never so much: We have eyes and see not, ears but cannot hear or
know we do so -- Seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling, may all deceive
us according to this doctrine of Devils; And is this Doctrine to be entertained
by Christians, yea or but by mere Men? When it even unmans them, and imposes
such unmanly things upon them, That they must both renounce their Senses and
their Reason, or at least not believe them, which is as bad. Shortly, if the
Devil can delude one Sense, he can another, yea all of them, and if it be true,
Nihil est in intellectu quod non fuit prius in sensu; our senses being
deceived, our intellect must needs be deceived too still; And thus, there is
nothing but deceit and cheat upon us, both within and without; And is this an
opinion that must be entertained by Men that pretend to Reason, yea or so much
as to Sense?

In respect of Traffic.
Besides, I do not know but that that which is so much complained of now, and
justly, viz. The damp and obstruction that is upon Trade, and Negotiation, may
arise from this conceit; for who being of the Demonologists Opinion, unless he
be desperate (if he have not first bought a Wind from a Witch, the principal
Factor under the Prince of the Air) will dare to venture to either of the
Indies, pass the Channel, or so much as venture himself in a sound Boat, until
he have gotten the favor and blessing of all the Witches in the vicinage, yea
in the Hemisphere.

CHAP. XXIV. It is a Butcherly, and Murtherous Opinion.
IT is a Bloody, Barbarous, Cruel and Murtherous Opinion, an Opinion that
Butchers up Men and Women without Fear or Wit, Sense or Reason, Care or
Conscience, by droves; So many in Somerset, so many in Lancashire -- so many in
another County, Ten, Twenty, Thirty at a clap; Inquisitors boast of Hundreds,
yea Thousands, that they have butchered up in a small time, upon the account of
Witchcraft. In the last troubles we had informations (that went all the Kingdom
over) from Diurnals, and other more credible testimonies; That our Northern
Zealots of Scotland butchered up many Hundreds (I am ashamed to write the exact
number because it is so monstrous) in a very short time more than there had
been of all other sorts of Criminals in Fifty years before, upon the conceit of
this guilt; as many more in Jayl, who doubtless had run the same fate, had not
providence prevented it. But of all these that were imprisoned, there was but
one that could be suspected (when impartial and unbiassed persons had the
examination) and the ground of the suspicion against him too, appeared at last
so weak, frivolous, and contemptible, That though (to gratify the humor of
the peevish rabble) he was for a while detained in Prison, yet was at last too
discharged as innocent. I could speak of and have hinted the like in another
place, though not in so great a number, and that to mine own knowledge; and
indeed, if the Oaths of two base Varlets (that will swear any thing to work
their revenge) may be taken, where no reality of fact can appear; Who almost
that is old, decrepit, ill-favored, and friendless can be secure? How readily
will they swear? Imps and Puggs, supernatural and infernal Teats or Biggs,
Conjurations, Compacts, Devils in such and such shapes; How often have they
sworn, Witches have turned themselves into Cats, and in that shape sighting
with, and worsting the greatest Mastives? Into Hares too, and in that shape,
outran the swiftest Greyhounds? How often have they sworn, That after their
falling out with such Persons, such and such mischiefs have befallen them, as
the mere effects of these Persons malice; when all the mischiefs, were but
natural, and sometimes antecedent, to all distastes between the parties. I have
my self known some, who swore such and such a mischief, such and such a disease
betide them, presently upon the saying of such a Person (well, I may meet with
you, I will be quits with you, better you had, or better you had not done this
-- with a Curse peradventure at the end) which yet were antecedent to any such
Curse or threat upon them, being hereditary, or of a longer date than the curse
or threat. Some possibly were concommitant, and others subsequent; But that
among the multitude of hurtful accidents (which all the Men in the World are
still subject unto) some one or other should fall out, in such a juncture of
time, without any relation, or dependence upon the curse, or threat of the
supposed Witch as the cause; he has but a shallow, weak or narrow intellect
that does not apprehend. In the matter of Theft, Murder, Burglary -- there
must be some real thing proved as actually done by such a Person; the accused
had power (it is supposed) to do the fact, and the accuser might have certainty
enough, That it was done by such a Person; but here in this case of Witchcraft,
there can be no such thing certain, it all goes upon groundless and
inconceivable suppositions, surmises, conjectures, guesses, dreams, fancies; no
certain assurance of any real connection of such an effect with such a cause:
And since, this many times serves, it is a wonder to me, That there be no
greater herds, droves, flocks, swarms -- of witchcraftical criminals at every
Assize. But that the Reverend Judges, especially of England, now are much
wiser; (not only than the Proletarian rabble, but than they too, who profess
themselves to be the great Philosophers, and well-studied in the Magic art)
and give small or no encouragement to such accusations; and yet with the many,
if one such cross accident happen to be synchronical, or but subsequent to such
a Curse or Threat; Oh! it is a pregnant proof, a certain evidence, That such a
Witch was the cause; and yet a Hundred such Curses have been vented by the same
Persons and no mischief followed, but they were not taken notice of, but this
only that was attended by some mischief following: But to end this, a wise Man
tells us, That a causeless Curse flies in vain; and if after or upon the
venting such a Curse a mischief happen, must that mischief necessarily be the
effect of that Curse? if 'twere causeless, 'twould bring no mischief: If a
mischief be brought, it was deserved, and then 'twere fitter sure to look to
the hand of Providence for the cause, than to the Tongue of a spightful
Neighbor: Many Trophies and Gratulary Anathema's you may see hanged up in
Neptune's Temple by Men preserved from Shipwreck through his Providence; why
Sacrifice you not to him? said one: I Sacrifice not to him, said the other;
because there are Thousands more, that have suffered Shipwreck, who have
Sacrificed to Neptune, than escaped. One mischief or other among the Myriad of
various Accidents, that we are subject to, may seem somewhat Syncronical to such
a Curse; but there have been a Thousand such Curses, when no mischief followed,
and how then can the mischief be imputed to the Curse?

CHAP. XXV. Other considerable points of Christianity undermined by it.
ANd yet it is much more unfit to be entertained by Christians, that pretend
much Honor to, and expect much, nay all their comfort from Christ. For if the
Devil can delude our sights, foolifie our senses, or take any man's shape upon
him, how are, how can we be sure that Christ's Resurrection was a real Truth?
He appeared after his Resurrection often (as it is said indeed) But might not
all be a mere Delusion, Apparition, Satanical-cheat, or Phantasme without
Realities, not Christ's very person in Truth? for all Thomas his feeling and
handling of him, it might be another body, one of the Thieves peradventure,
that the Devil had taken up; or it might be Christ's body indeed, but acted,
agitated, postured by the Devil; Christ's body, but without Christ's Soul; nay
might not his Birth also be questioned, whether 'twere from Heaven or from
Hell? Might not he be some Incubus-Bastard, for all the fair Tale that is told
of his Miraculous Generation? the voice from Heaven (This is my beloved Son)
might it not be a Delusion too? and the turning Water into Wine a mere Juggle?
-- these are horrid, fearful, and desperate scruples; yet may they come athwart
some men's Souls upon the supposition of this good, and godly Doctrine of
Devils; besides, what shall we Protestants be able to say, to, or against that
monstrous Opinion of the Papists; The gross and carnal presence of Christ's
corporeal Body, corporeally in the Eucharist, the ubiquity of his Manhood, or
Transubstantiation, and the consequents of these? And again if a Devil can
contract a Witch into the diminutive Dimensions of a Rat, Catt, Hare, Flea or
louse he can doubtless too sominisy her, that she shall be able to enter into
any Chamber, Closet, or secret place, be the doors never so well shut, as fast
or close, as art can make them; which was one of Christ's Miracles: and I see
not neither, but that Christ may indeed so minorate his Body, that he may be
easily comprehended within the narrow compass of a Waser-cake: and if a man by
the help of the Devil can be in diverse and far distant places at one time, It
is no wonder, strange thing, or miracle at all, that Christ's Body be in Ten
thousand different or distant places, at one and the self-same instant (Ten
thousand sure as well as ten or two) unless the power of Christ be less than
the Devils.

CHAP. XXVI. It is a Blasphemous and abominably Idolatrous, yea an Atheistical
Doctrine.
I Will add but this, It is a Sacrilegious, Blasphemous, and most abominably
Idolatrous Doctrine: never more, never so much, horrid Sacrilege, Blasphemy
and Idolatrousness in any Opinion or Practice, that ever was in vogue amongst
men. It steals from Christ the honor of his Godhead, and of his Miracles he
wrought to prove himself the Son of God; from the Father, the glory of his
incommunicable Attributes; and from the Spirit the credit of these special
Operations for which we Adore him. And is not this Sacrilege, Sacrilege in
the highest; from the highest, and from the Holiest too? For Blasphemy, it
intimates, that Christ had not wit enough, to choose an Argument, nor power
enough to do a Work for proof of that, which he especially intended to prove,
viz. His eternal Power and Godhead. The Devil can do as much as he did, as God
does or did by his stretched out Arm upon Pharaoh; yea or the blessed Spirit
can do, even in his most Spiritual and Heavenly way, as I have showed. And for
Idolatry, it teaches not peradventure the Worship of Saints and Angels, nor of
Sun, Moon, Stars, or Host of Heaven, nor of Stocks and Stones, nor of Leeks and
Onions, nor of Crocodiles and Serpents, nor of Crepitus ventris, and Deae
cloacinae -- (which were the lowest Degenerancies of the most besotted
Heathens.) But of something worse lower and baser; It teaches the Worship of
the very Devil himself in his utmost Devilship, as he is a most malicious,
envious, and villainous Devil: when Men attribute these works, that power, and
these excellencies to the Devil, which he deserves not; but are proper to God,
is not this Worship? in their most devout Worship of God, what is it that they
do, or can do more, than heartily, zealously, and religiously ascribe these
great, stupend, and wonderful things to him? and are not then the great
Philosophers, Doctors, Professors, that write and stickle so much to uphold the
Doctrine of Devils, are they not I say, the (...) the (...) the (...)? This may
be taken by way of question, but this me seems, I may affirm positively, that
of all the strange, wild, mad Heterodoxes, that were ever invented, broach't,
or suggested by the Conclave of that infernal Association, none ever was, is,
or can be more Abominable. All other desperate Heresies, what ever, how ever
desperate in themselves, had yet some pretense, sucus o^ gloss upon them, to
make them look seemly: as either God's glory, the comfort of the Church or the
benefit of Mankind. But this has none of these, no pretense of either of
these, nothing good in it at all, nothing that is good, commendable or
tolerable: It is mere Devil, rank and entire Devil, generally Universally,
Catholickly, and throughout from Top to Bottom, from Head to Foot, Root and
Branch; and all the result (if not the design of it) is, to bring in the
Demonomany, and to exalt the Grandeur Magnificence, augustness and Kingdom of
that Prince of Darkness: I need add no more, this is enough if we be
Christians, if Deists, nay if but rational Men: I might have added it as a
Rebellious Doctrine; some Exorcists upon the account of it, (as I have shown)
instigate to Rebellion; we conquer Devils, can flesh and blood stand out?
follow us. --

It may be thought, I have been too violent and bitter against this Opinion:
Answ. It is the cause of God: all the three persons are immediately concerned in
it: their honor, and Godhead ly at stake: the comfort of the Church, the
preservation of Men's lives, and the Salvation of more Souls depend upon the
truth opposed to it: and should I be mild, should I gently stroke or claw such
a desperate Opinion, that strikes at all, and would if possibly stabb both God
and Man to the Heart, I might justly fear a sharper reproof, than that to Ely.
His fault was but a connivance in respect of his Sons; he preferred them before
God; and should I prefer the Devil's honor, before God's glory, the Churches
good, and the safety of Men's lives and goods and Souls too?

CHAP. XXVII. Ex. 22.18. Considered, and the Objection taken thence answered.
THe objections against the opinion that I defend, and for the maintenance of
the Doctrine of Devils are, as the Spaniards used to say of the Portugals, few
and poor, scarce considerable indeed, but that by vulgar Error they are
generally received as Demonstrations. I shall touch therefore now but one (the
rest as many as I could meet with, yea and this too) I have answered
sufficiently, and at large in another place. It is this. The Scripture
intimates, that there are Witches, and it allots death, as their punishment.
Exo. 22.18. Ergo, There are a sort of persons, that act strange and stupend
things, through a power derived to them from the Devil; or, the Devil can
empower such persons with a kind of Omnipotency. Answ. Truly this follows not
at all, not any thing like it: but that Witches there are, is without question;
and more than a good many, what ever is meant by them: what is the
Scripture-Witch, and what is that Witch, the vulgar counts a Witch, that is
the question: as for the word (Witch) which the Scripture often uses, Josephus
(a great Rabbi, a learned Doctor, and an Eminent person among the Jews, and
therefore knew doubtless the meaning of his own Country Language, his Mother
Tongue, and the terms of the sacred Text, as well as any Man else can be
supposed) Translates it Poysoner, and very rightly according to the natural
genuine and proper signification of the word; the word (Casaph) in the first
prime and original sense, signifying one that hides, covers, or disguiseth
one thing with another: so do Poysoners cover a delitorious Dose with some
delicious sweet (...) seems to be either from (...) Litera similitudinis nota
and (...) Medicue (1) Quasi, sicut, velut medicus: and what more consonant to
this Etymon, than a Poysoner, Philterer, Jugler, Cheater, or Deceiver; one that
mixeth, compoundeth, binds things together as a Physician; though he do it to
a good end, they to a mischievous: the Sugar must cover the Poison: so the
cunning-subtile seeming-good words, tricks, feats, glosses -- must hide the
villainy intended by such Varlets; or else the word is from (...) Mutans,
alterans, adulterans faciem, apparentiam, speciem vel externam rei formam, one
that alters, covers, changes or disguiseth, the face, form or outward
appearance of things: and may not this be very well rendered Jugler, Philterer,
Deceiver, Poysner -- better than Witch (1) One in compact with the Devil? for
what do such Varlets else, but alter, change, cover, hide and disguise the
out-ward face of things, and their villainous intentions with fair fucus,
shows and glosses, That the Villainy they intend to act may not appear or be
discovered? Poysoners then are of two sorts or kinds, Spiritual and Carnal: the
one in respect of the Soul, the other of the Body: the Carnal, the Scripture
speaks little or nothing of; nor shall I as being nothing to the business in
hand. The Spiritual Poysoner may again be twofold, Moral and Intellectual, in
respect of life and conversation; That, this, in respect of Doctrine or
Opinion: he that inveigleth any person to any lewd, debauched, lascivious or
wicked Act or Conversation, by promises, persuasions or any other means, ways
or tricks, is a Spiritual Poysoner Morally; such are Bawds, Setters, Panders,
and corrupters: and of such the civil Law interprets, Magus: and of such (if
the coherence will prove any thing, as no doubt it will much) is the word Witch
to be understood, Exo. 22.18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. (1) A
Bawd, a Pander, a moral Poysoner, or an enticer to such wickedness, as is there
spoken of before and after that verse, and so may the word fitly be
interpreted, Na. 3.4. Mal. 3.5. in a spiritual sense, Spiritual or Moral Bawds,
or Enticers to Idolatry. 2. A Poysoner intellectually, or in respect of
Doctrine is one that seduceth, enticeth, enveigleth Men into Idolatrous or
Superstitious Worship, Doctrine or Opinion, these the Scripture calls
Witches, or Cashaphim too, Deuteronomy. 18.11. 2 King. 9.22, 21, 6, 9. 2 Chro. 33.6,
9. and not only when by promises, persuasions, subtle contrivances, or
fallacious Arguments, they seduce them from the Truth into Errors, but also
when they use any cunning Feats, Tricks, A^ts, Juggles, Power or Force, to draw
or continue Men in wicked practices or Opinions, these in Scripture are called
Cashaphim, as Es. 47.12, 13. Jer. 27.9. Ex. 7.11. It is true, that the
Magicians of Egypt were great Naturalists, and thence might very well be called
Magi, or wise Men, but as they abused their knowledge in things natural, by
pretending (if at least they did so pretend) that they acted by a Supernatural
assistance, and so could equalize Moses (though they did but Juggle and play
the Knaves in the dark) their end and aim too being but to continue Pharaoh in
his Idolatry, oppressing humor, and Tyranny, they were but Spiritual
Poysoners, Imposters, Juglers, cousening Knaves or Cashaphim; and do not they
that Cheat, Deceive, Poison Men in respect of their Souls, deserve the name and
punishment of Poysoners, Juglers, Cheaters, Imposters -- as well as they, who
only do mischief to Men's Bodies? Are they not Cashaphim Poysoners, Imposters,
Juglers -- properly? can there be any sitter term given them? By one of these
senses, may the word Cashaph, or Witch (if Men will needs stick to that word)
wherever used in Scripture, be fairly interpreted: but it is no where all the
Scripture over so much as once intimated, or hinted, That the Witch or Cashaph,
by any compact with, or power derived from the Devil, ever wrought any kind of
feat, carnal or corporeal thing (to say no more here) whatever, neither does
there any word, term, notion, circumvolution, paraphrase, sense, or coherence
with the Text, any where yield any such thing. Strange this, if the Scripture
intended any such person as was in compact with the Devil, and as strange, that
such a word should still be used, that signifies nothing, but a Poysoner,
Jugler, Cheater, Cousener, Imposter, or mixer of some good (or seemingly good)
things with bad, that the bad might slip down the glibber, being sugared over
with the good in a spiritual sense. The Holy Ghost in the old Testament often
mentions, such Cheating, Cousening and knavish impostors, in respect of
spirituals (as I have showed elsewhere) under the term Cashaph, which the Holy
Penmen of the New Testament render (as Josephus did that in the old, yea and
the Septuagint too) (...) or (...) a Poysoner, Cheater, Impostor -- one that
mingles or covers his Poisonous Doses, with some delicious sweets, Rev.
18.23.21, 8.22, 15. neither use they any other word for such a Varlet, except
it be (...) or (...), which they one way or other interpret to be a Cheater,
Poysoner, or Imposter, as I have said, Act. 8, 9.13, 6. -- 16. 2 Timothy 3.13. to
which may be referred Gal. 5.20. Idolatry and Witchcraft, Witchcraft as the
knavish trick of seducing, and enticing to Idolatry. (...) or (...) in the
New Testament never used, but in relation to Idolaters, or Idolatry, nor
Cashaph in the old. And indeed why Cashaph should be rendered Witch (though I
care not for terms, so the meaning be right) and interpreted one that works by
a power derived from the Devil by compact, I cannot possibly divine, unless it
be because this word is often joined with Shoel, Ob, which is usually
translated a Consulter, or dealer with familiar Spirits; whereas too that word
signifies no such thing, but a Seeker or an Enquirer at Oracles, Heathen
Oracles, expecting answers from them, as elsewhere I have showed: and indeed if
Consulter or dealer with familiar Spirits were the right sense of Shoe, Ob, I
wonder why that word was not produced for proof of Compact with the Devil,
rather than Cashaph. In that word, peradventure at first sight, according to
the common Translations, a Man might think it likelier to find the name and
nature of a Witch, than in the other, though indeed in neither according to the
vulgar conceit of a Witch: but shortly, as soon may the witchcraftical Doctors
prove, that because Men did suppose a Pegasus or winged-Horse in the Heavens,
there are such strange Animals with us here below too upon the Earth; as that,
because there are Witches talked of in Scripture, therefore there are and were
undoubtedly certain Men and Women, called Witches, that by a power derived to
them from the Devil, upon Compact can do strange things among us now, our
Witches (according to the general supposition) differing from the
Scripture-Witches, as much as our Horses do from that imaginary Horse in the
Heavens. Our Witches are supposed to do strange things above the course of
nature; the Scripture-Witch can never be proved to have ever done any such
thing. 2. Ours do by a supernatural power: (as it is said) The others did all by
natural means what ever they did. 3. Ours are said to have power from the Devil
by Compact, whereas no Compact with the Devil, nor power from him, can be
proved of the Scripture-Witch. 4. The Scripture-Witch did what he did in
public, feared not the light at least, 2 Kin. 9.22, 21, 6. where, what ours
do, is scarce intelligible, as being done in secret, and in the dark still. 5.
The Scripture-Witch might easily be discovered and known, Deuteronomy. 18.14. whereas
no sufficient tokens, marks, diagnosticks have been yet produced, nor ever will
(I Am confident) by which ours may be known, and discovered for such, nor will
it ever be proved, that there are, were, or can be such as the vulgar dream of,
except by the desperate perjuries of malicious Villains, or the confessions of
miserable, besotted, and irrational old wretches, or peevish dreams of
melancholic Hypocondriacks, which are no way sufficient to convince any Man,
though but of ordinary and common understanding. Shortly there is nothing in
the word or notion (Mecashapha) Exo. 22.18. nothing in any other Text, nothing
in any antecedent consequent or coherence, that any Text throughout the Book,
nothing in any feat, or work attributed to the Cashaphim in Scripture, that
intimates or hinteth Devil, or compact with a Devil, or that needed the Devils
assistance for the effecting of it. This word therefore, or any conjugate
thereof cannot, I think, signify in any sober Man's judgment, a person in
compact with the Devil: for, as for the seats that were done, if any such seats
were indeed done by those Juglers of Egypt, in opposition to or Emulation of
Moses, they are three or four times (that is all the times, that any thing is
said to be done there) attributed to the Hartummim still, not to the Cashaphim
at all: whereas Ex. 22.18. speaks only of the Cashaphim, not at all of the
Hartummim; yet these too, did but Juggle as I have showed fully in another
place.

But whether they were the Hartummim or Cashaphim, all is one, they were but
knaves both one and all: and all but Juggl's, whatever they did, as I have
shown in another place. And as for these Hartummims; Learned-Men think them to
be One Species, Kind, or Order of the (...) or of Wisemen; as the (...) or
Magicians, Another. And for the Word, they think it a Stranger to the Hebrew:
but others conceive it a Free-Denizon of that Language, and derive it from
(...), Foramen, a Hole, as (...), Obiurare, occultare, claudere, etc. But it
may, peradventure, derive its Original from (...) perfecti, excellentes, or
exacti; and (...) Sculpere, formare, effigiare, etc. And so the Word signify's
the Masters, Chiefs, or Principal Hieroglyphers. The Egyptians had their
Sacred Pictures, Representatives or Eidyllions, under which. they concealed their
more Myste^ious Knowledge or Doctrins both of their Divinity, and Philosophical
Conceits. The Makers, Carvers, or Gravers of those, were in high Esteem among
that People, for their Skill in, and Employment about, their Sacred Things.
These, we may well think, among the rest of his Wisemen, were, by Pharaoh,
called to be consulted, and to contend with Moses about Miraculous Feats. Now,
it is possible, yea, very probable, that these Men, having the Art or Knack of
making, graving, or carving the Pictures of Men, Beasts, Serpents, Reptils,
etc. had the Feat also of coloring, painting, and fucussing of them also: and
so, might easily (especially in the Dark, or by their Juggling Feats, as the
Text intimates) make a Rod look like a Serpent: Water (if any true and real
Water at that time, might be gotten; Moses before, having, as the Text expressly
says, turned all their Water into Blood) seem to be, or look like Blood: or,
make a Piece of Wood, in Shape and Motion resemble a Frog, yea a Toad. I have
my self feen one so Artificially contrived and ordered for Form and Motion,
that at first sight, it might easily be mistaken for such a Reptil. But, when
it came to smaller or lesser Things and Corpuscles, as Flies and Lice (the
Painting, Coloring, or effigiating the like, they were not formerly acquainted
with); and to things of another Nature (and a greater number of them also
expected): Their Weakness, and Knavery, or (as the Apostle styles their
Juggl's) their Foolery was manifest to all Men. The Hartummim, I say, might be
some Knavish Painters; who had the feat, dexterity, or knack of Coloring and
Casting a seemly Glass upon things. And, because that the Priestly Order might
be e Secretioribus unto Pharaoh, the Mecashaphim might be the Counselors for
State-Matter but (sure) Subtle and Politic Orators, who with fallacious
Arguments, cunning Pretenses, and plausible Rethorick, could so disguise Truth,
and flourish up Knavery and Falsehood; that Falsehood should seem Truth, and
Truth but Falsehood. And so are justly called Meeashaphims, Colourers, Changers,
or Perverters of the Faces of Things; as the Others, justly Hartummims, from
their Painting, forging, Coloring, or fucussing of Things. But both, mere
Jugglers, though in several Ways; the One in and by Words; the Other by, and
upon Things.

CHAP. XXVIII. Some Motives for the drawing off of Men from this Doctrine,
proposed.
I Shall add a few Particulars more for the preventing the growth of, and
longer adhesion to this gross, blasphemous, and Abominable Doctrine. 1. Then I
would persuade Men, that they would be indeed, and in truth, what they profess
to be; Deists, and not Demonomanists, Worshipers of God and Christ, not Adorers
of the Devil. All Idolatry is Abominable, but this most, as being not only
Simple Idolatry, or mere downright Atheism in the Positive; but Idolatry and
Atheism too, in the Superlative: For, if they were (...) that worshipped the
Heathen-Gods, i. e. Men Famous in their Generation for the Invention of many
useful things, but deify'd by the Pagan Superstition, Ephesians. 2.12. They then
that Worship the Devil are (...) the most Transcendently Atheistical, as
Worshipping the worst of things that can be imagined. The ascribing of great
Works, Titles, Honors, Excellencies, etc. to a Person, is Worshipping, Rev.
4.18. But if it be more than the Person or Thing deserves, it is Idolatrous;
and may, nay does, come within the Compass of the Highest Atheism, if done to
the Devil. Adore, Magnify, Exalt, God; the Works, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and
Providence of God: This will keep you safe from being infected with the Leaven
of this Doctrine; Thus shall you preserve your Selves, Deists, and Christians,
and only thus. Adore Christ Jesus, as the only Potentate, the Power that only
does great Wonders: If you Adore Him not thus, you make Him but an Idol, or a
Trifle; We have no Ground, Reason, Motive, or Command, to Worship, or Believe
in Him, but as He is the Great (...) of the World. If I do not the Works of my
Father, believe me not; but if I do, believe me for the very Works sake, John
10.37. Upon the Account of His Power and Miracles we may, and must believe in
Him, and we may safely enough; if His Works and Miracles deserve it not, (as
being not Unparallelable) dis-believe Him: And sure, Men do not, will not,
cannot believe in Him, (whatever they pretend, and prate) I say cannot believe
in Him; if they believe the Doctrine, or Omnipotency of Devils, the Belief of
this takes off utterly the Belief of that: If Men believe, that the Devil can
and does, as Great, or Greater Works than Christ, they cannot believe in
Christ. No man can serve two Masters, is the saying of a very wise Judicious
and Critical Person, (as I esteem him): and truly I believe, that it is simply
impossible for a Person, to believe, trust, rely, and to have full Considence,
Dependence, and Recumbency upon any Power, as Superexcellent, and
Unparallelable for Comfort, Health, Security, and Salvation; and yet at the
same time to believe, that there is another Numen, equal, if no^ Superparamount
to the former, for Power, Subtilty, and indefatigableness to do Mischief, and
Villainy. Me-seems, indeed, that besides the Blasphemy, Sacr^iedge, theism of
the Demonomanists, there is a Contradiction and Nonsense too, in then Opinion.

2. I would persuade Men to consider, how by this Doctrine they are drawn not
to sin singly, but are fore't as it were to pile, heap, load up one sin upon
another, a new, or another, to a former Villainy. And should they be such David's
as to add sin unto sin? thirst unto Drunkenness? One Mil^stone hanged about the
neck, is heavy enough to drown any Man; but two or three, or more will sink him
into the bottom of any unfathomable Abyss: There are without doubt degrees of
Sin here, and will be of Torments in that insernal Tophet (a greater Damnation
and utter darkness, Rewards double, the dreggs of the Cup we read of) according
to the Dimensions and Aggravations of the Sins, shall the Torments be
aggrandized: add not therefore Murder to Atheism, and Idolatry: though these
two cry loud enough for vengeance; yet has Murder a Stentorean voice, and
will reach farther. Blood-guiltiness, the guilt of innocent blood has a shril
voice, that will pass up unto, and through the brazen gates of the highest
Heaven. Thy Brother's Blood cries unto Me from the Ground; especially if acted
by a Law, under the pretense of Justice. We have a Law, and by our Law he ought
to Dye, when they would condemn the innocent, cried the Jews, but did this
excuse? will thou have any thing to do with the Stool, Seat, Chair, or Tribunal
of wickedness, that imagines mischief by a Law? they gather themselves
together against the Soul of the Righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. But
the Lord shall bring upon them their own Iniquity, and shall cut them off in
their wickedness; yea the Lord our God shall cut them off, Psalm. 94.20. --
Bring upon them their Iniquity -- cut them off in their own wickedness -- yea
the Lord our God, (God will take the matter into his own hands, and shall cut
them off). It is a terrible Threat, and deserves serious consideration, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. A Man that marries his
Mother, and so thinks to justify his Incest, is much more criminal, than he
had been merely by his single Villainy in lying with her, say Casuists: Because
he pretends Divine approbation for his abominable Villainy: and doubtless, Law,
Religion, and Justice drawn in, to countenance a Murder, do but aggravate: all
these, yea, and God himself the Author of all these, being thus brought in as
Accessory, yea, and these being the public acts of a Nation or Kingdom, the
whole Kingdom or Nation is involved in the guilt of the Villainy: and this seems
unpreventible where this Doctrine is entertained; they must needs think they do
God good service when they Murder the Innocent.

3. Follow not a multitude, though, in long Tract of time, they have beaten out
^broad plain easy path before thee: Kingdoms, and People, and Nations, as well
^s single persons may be under great mistakes, and gross Errors for many
years. So was the Church in respect of Millenisme, Arrianisme, Pelagianisme,
Pope's Supremacy, Communion under one kind, Transubstantiation --

So also in this particular, concerning this Doctrine of Devils, It has
generally prevailed in most Churches, in most places, for many Hundred years,
amongst most Men: yet is it a gross Heterodoxy, and Abominable Apostasy from
the Doctrine of the primitive Church, in the Apostle's time. That it was
counted an Abominable Error, is plain by this Text; and in aftertimes about the
year 310. the Council of Ancyra concludes peremptorily, at least against that
part of it, which attributes so much power to Devils: Quisquis ergo credit,
posse aliquam creaturam aut in meltus aut deterius Immutari, aut Transformari
in aliam speciem, nisi ab ipso Creatore, qui fecit omnia, procul dubio
insidelis est and Pagano deterior. From this truth has the Church deviated,
and fallen into the contrary Error, for these Twelve or thirteen hundred years.
It is not ground enough, to embrace a Tenent, because of the many, that embrace
it, or the long time it has been embraced, the several places where it has
obtained, or the several Doctors that have maintained it. Ad legem and
prophetas, To the Law and to the Testimony. If Men's Tenants, Practices or
Opinions agree not with these, reject them. Number or multitude is no
justifiable excuse, or sufficient precedent; and yet I like not self-conceited
singularity: Prove all things, hold fast that which is Good, is an excellent
Rule.

But I must add here: Though a Church, the whole Church, to a very few, may
thus generally be erroneous, even in such a point; yet may it not be straight
un-churched, or become presently an Abdicate, Reprobate, or Anathematized
Church, for an Error or two, though gross ones: we had scarce else a visible
Church in the World, for many Hundred years: God gives more grace: Every
error, mistake, or heterodoxy, though great enough, does not nullify a Church,
if it be not obstinately, wilfully, and wickedly persisted in. If the whole
Church sin through Ignorance, there may be an Atonement, Lev. 4.13. A Church, a
whole Church may be under the Guilt of some great Sin, and yet be the Church of
God still: Gross and Heinous Sins, may not be Grounds enough for Separation;
and therefore our Schismatics have no Justisyable Warrant for their Schism,
from the pretended gross Sins of this Church, and State. Is there? can there
be? can they wire-draw any of our National, or Ecclesiastical Sins, into
greater Horridness, than this Sin has? And yet had God his Church still; nay
and even they also were of His Church that Embraced that horrid Heterodoxy:
Nay, they themselves are Guilty, most of them, of this most Horrid Heterodoxy;
and yet will they reckon themselves of God's Church. How then, or with what
Face, can they Anathematize, or Unchristen another Society, whom they cannot
accuse of any Crime, so horrid as this? Doubtless the Sins of this Nation are
High and Horrid, peradventure, never more: the Lord of His goodness, change our
Minds, reform our Extravagancies, and rectify our Conversations, according to
the Pattern, and the great Exemplar, the Lord Jesus Christ. We had need beg
this Heartily, lest, according to the Transcendency of our present sinful
Condition, our Judgments be Transcendent, and of the Superlative Dimension. We
may well fear this, though we have already, and do now yet suffer so much; yet
may we justly sear more: His Wrath may not be turned away yet: but His Hand may
be stretched out still; yea, He may Plague us Seven times yea and Seven times
more still; yea and likely will: God will be Conqueror one way or other,
either in our Conversion, or Confusion. Can we kick against the Pricks? Are we
able to contend with God, or are we Stronger than God? Shall an Earthen Pot
contend with a Brazen Mountain? Sure, sure, it will be bitter, exceeding
bitter, in the end; bitterer and bitterer, still, till the End; and
peradventure without End. Let us prevent this, by our Compliance with, and
Conformity to the Divine Will of God; and, the Good Lord grant, that
Magistrates, Ministers, and all others, in their several Places and Stations,
may do their parts. There is not, has not been, cannot be, a more Gross,
Blasphemous, or Abominable Villainy; nor more Injurious, both to God and Man,
than this: nor Fornication, nor Intemperance, nor any other of those Raging
Sins of this Age. This therefore, especially, over, above, and beyond all else,
should they jointly set themselves against. The Magistrates are God's
Ministers, Deputies, and Vicegerents, and should they not Act for God? for God
against the Devil, not for the Devil, against God? Sure, Ministers are God's
Ambassadors, and should proclaim, publish, and declare His Greatness, Majesty,
and Power; not Traitorously give away these Jewels of His Crown, to His
Adversary, Competitor, or Rebellious Vassal. All the rest are God's
Leige-Subjects, and Menial Servants, or Soldiers under His Banner; and should
they not Fight to uphold His Crown and Dignity? should they be content, tamely
to yield up His Royal Prerogatives, to be usurped by that Villainous Traitor of
Hell? Truly, nor Magistrate, nor Minister, nor People, can do God a greater
Dishonor, nor the Devil better Service, than by maintaining this Doctrine of
Devils. Once, this cannot be denied, the Holy Ghost speaks expressly against
it; whosoever therefore speaks for it, sets his Mouth against Heaven, against
God, against the Holy Ghost: What would we expect more than the Word, the
plain, and express Word of God, for the settling us in or against a Doctrine?
When the Lord has decided the Controversy, and settled the Question, should
men's Moots, groundless Opinions, small Arguments, and whilde Winter-Tales,
unsettle us? And this brings me to another Particular, for the eradicating, or
at least stopping of the farther Growth of this Root of Bitterness.

4. Let the Apostle's Advice take place; Refuse Profane and old Wives Tales,
(...) Avoid, Oppose, Abhor, Deprecate, as thou would some great Mischief, or
Reject, as a Man does his Wife, when he gives her a Bill of Divorcement: there
is more in it sure, than simple Refusing: Refuse, as Fearing, Loathing, and
Detesting: But how comes this Advice in here? How falls the Apostle upon this
Prohibition of Tales and Fables in this Place? Brings he it in (shall we think)
by Head and Shoulders, without any Agreement or Coherence with the matter in
Hand? Doubtless he is always seasonable, in all his Prohibitions, Charges, and
Caveats; but especially here, when he speaks immediately from the Mouth of the
Holy Ghost, against the Villainy which the Holy Ghost had expressly, (...), in
plain terms declared his mislike of; and probably, the means to prevent and
avoid it. And I am very confident, that there is no man, that can give any
Reason why, wherefore, or upon what account this Charge should be brought in
here, unless to intimate that Profane and old Wive's Tales would be a great
Motive, means and occasion, by which men should be brought under the Cheat of
seducing Spirits, and into the Mischief of being bewitched with the Abominable
Doctrines of Devils: And therefore, St. Paul advises Timothy, that, As he
would avoid being cheated by seducing Spirits, and the desperate Doctrine of
Devils, so he would avoid Profane and old Wives Tales. If thou give no heed to
these, no danger of the other: But, but-little hope of escaping the other, if
thou give any heed to these: This is plain out of the Text, all: And indeed,
how pernicious and dangerous such Fables may prove, for the Poisoning of Men's
Souls to the abhorring of Truth, and for the bewitching of them unto most
Idolatrous Opinions, we may easily learn, by these two most Monstrous
Heterodoxies, Purgatory, and Adoration of Images; both grew from this Root, as
I have intimated: and so this Doctrine of Devils has too the same Original:
And this, if any man will but observe, and consider seriously, he will easily
find, that this Babel of Confusion, is built merely upon the Sandy Foundation
of Tales and Fables. There are Stories writ, and Laws enacted, concerning
Witchcraft, Compact, and Converse with the Devil: But, search the Matter to
the bottom, trace the Hare to the Form, follow the River up to the Fountain;
and you will find, old Wives Tales, and Profane Fables, seconded by Romantic
Inventions, and Poetical Fictions, to be the Original of all. Some Old,
Crazie-Brain'd, Doting, Melancholical, Hypocondriack Dreamers in the Paroxysm
of their Distempers, seem to see strange Sights, Creatures, Goblins, Devils, as
they think; this they report, with Confidence; the Rabble is credulous, and
believes straight; the Diurnallers are willing to swell up their Pamphlets,
unto Volumes; Philosophers (to show their Wit) undertake to prove all credible,
yea necessary: Others in their Simplicity, with an abundance of Zeal, and
little Wit, (thinking God's Honor is concerned), predicate it: The Shavelings
contrive an advantageous Trade out of it: and thereupon (deluding the Civil
Magistrate, with fair Tales, and goodly Pretenses) the Inquisition-Office is
Erected, where the Masters of that Tyranny, for the seeding of their
Unsatisfyable Covetousness, by intolerable Courses, Tricks, Artifices, and
Torments, extort, and Register, what madd Confessions they please, from
ignorant, simple, besotted, affrighted, friendless, and tender-skin'd Persons.
And now who dares deny, question, or doubt? the Holy House has concluded it,
in one place, and so it must be thought a precious Truth, and be brought into
Vogue in all places; and yet not so much as one wise or honest Man, ever saw,
heard, or knew any such thing. I should have added, That Malicious Varlets,
understanding that, by their Oaths, they might aggrandize their Revenge to the
utmost in the most shameful and most painful Death, of their Adversary, would
not stick to venture the peccadillo of a Perjury, to gratify their Mali^^; And
thus they wrap it up: But, the (...) O^iginal of all was, a^ I said, Old Wive's
Fables, ^^ad Dreams of (...), pro^^e Stories, bo^rowed of Heathens: and those
the Apostle might especially aim at, in this his Caveat; for, What are all
those Wild Taler, among Christians (now, and heretofore) of Witches,
Conjurations, raising of Devils, etc? but the Revived Fables of the Heathens
(under other names) concerning Tis^phone, Megara, Hecal^, etc. and done by
their means; of like (...) are pretended now (...), because such Lies, Fables,
and Tales, were (...) chiefly, and most used by the Priest of (...) or Beel; to
bring that-Id^l's Worship into request. The word (...) and (...), disser not
much. This once: That such Stories may do much Mischief, this way, the
Holy Ghost himself here intimates, by this Caveat, Reject these Old S^ories,
formerly much used, concerning B^^l, or Baal. And are such Stories sufficient
grounds for Christians to (...) such a Doctrine on, that is so (...) and
intolerable, both (...) God and Man? Truly, if (...) seriously consider, how
(...) the Father, and all the (...), are concerned, How (...) ^^usequence, if
not directly (...) ^bused and blasphemes^ (...) ^ne of Devils, 'twould terrify
any (...)-Soul into an abhorrency of it. Never let it be thought, That these
Consequences are mere fal^ lacions Infirmities, from the Demonologer's
Doctrine: I appeal to any Man, that has any Wit, Reason, Intellect,
Understanding, or Sense, whether all these absurd, and Abominable Consequences,
that I have hinted at, here, and els-where, do not liquido, without straining
or wringing, genuinely, properly, naturally flow from their Premi^^^, and if
the Premises be naught, the naughtiness of the Conclusion may not be charged on
him, that ^ogically, according to right, not fallacious Ratiocionation, infers
them: So that, if Men have any care of God's Honor, or their own (...); if
they will not prefer the Devil before God, Christ, and all that is called Good,
or Sacred; if they will not be the worst of Idolatons, that (...) were, or can
be imagined, (...) Murder, the obstructing of all Judicial Proceeding, the
destroying of Humane Society. Natural Comfort among Men, and the large Bed-rol
of other Gross Enormities); if they be not for Hell, more than for Heaven; for
the bloody old Dragon, (that must be bruised under our Feet), than for the
Brazen Serpent, that must be lifted up; If they will not maintam a Doctrine, by
which, the most malicious and mischievous Machinations of desperate Villains,
against their Innocent Neighbors, may be countenanced and encouraged; If they
will not be accounted, nay if they will nor really, and in truth, be, in
themselves (and not merely upon the account of other men) Renagad^^s,
^^nouncers, Apostates, from the Fundamental and Architectonical Truths, of
Christian Religion, they will not entertain this Hellish Doctrine; nor (if by
mistake they have heretofore been bewitched into the Conceit of it is Truth,)
will persist in it. I have discharged mine own Conscience, and am Innocent, as
to the Blood of any Person, that shall dye, merely upon the Accusation of this
Guilt, hereafter.

CHAP. XXIX. An Objection, That Christ's Miracles are no Good Argument to Prove
his Mess^^ Ship, or Godhead, but the Prophecyes that went before of Him, in
the Scriptures; or at least not those without these.
THere is indeed another Conceit retrived by a Learned Man, (which I lately met
with) fortified both by the Reverend Names of some of the Ancients, and also
with a piece of Scripture, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a surer Word of Prophecy, etc.
Which he applies, or rather opposes, to Christ's Miracles, as though they were
not convincing enough to prove him to be the Son of God, unless the Prophesies
that went before, of the Miracles that should be Wrought by the Mess^^, and his
Miracles, be found Consonant, and Agreeing. By Prophecy he understands, not
only Verbal Predictions, of the Prophets, concerning Miracles, to be done; but
the Types and Figures; a^ also the Stories, and Events, recorded in Scripture.
All those requisite to be known, for the inducing of Men to believe, That the
Miracles of Christ did prove his Godhead. Answ. It is not denied, but other
things, besides His Miracles, may be, and are, Arguments of the Godhead of our
Blessed Savior, as His Spiritual (...), the Star, the Attestation from Heaven,
etc. as before, and Prophe^^ (...) the fest: but this (...) the (...) Christ's,
Miracles alone, by themselves, do prove it sufficiently etc. John (Chap.
20.31.) says they do, and Christ (as after) says (...) and I hope that we may
believe either of the^^. 2. This Scripture does not prove the thing in (...),
viz. That Christ's Miracles needed the Assistance of Prophess to prove what he
was: But only, (...) Prophesyes were a good Argument, (...) a better to some
Men, than (...): This is the most. (...) Knowledge of the Propheti^^^ (...) the
(...) be hard to say, (...) Matthew. 8: the Syroph (...). 15; the Chief (...),
with his party of Soldiers, Matthew. 27. had believed upon good ground; or that
their Faith of Christ's Divinity was right (though they be commended for it) as
not being rightly settled or grounded well in them: They were (before they saw
his Miracles) mere Heathens, and ignorant of the Prophecyes altogether; Yea, I
might doubt, Whether the Apostles Faith at first, were right, when they
believed only, upon the Evidence of that first Miracle, which he wrought in
Canaa of Galilee, John 2.11. Nay, it might well be doub^ed, Whether their Faith
were Salvisical, all his Lifetime, until his Death; notwithstanding that of
Matthew. 16.16. ^ohn 6.68, 69. For, it seems, they were not very well versed in
the Verbal Predictions, touchless in the Types, Figures, S^^^^, and Events
recorded in Scripture; but were ignorant unlearned Men, as to these things,
until Christ, after His Resurrection, opened their Intellect, that they might
understand the Histories as well as Mysteries of the Text, being before very
ignorant of both. 4. If Christ's Miracles were not sufficient by themselves, to
prove His Godhead, without the Prophecyes, that is, unless, not only the
Verbal Predictions of the Prophets, but also the Types, Figures, and even the
History and Events too recorded in Scripture; yea the External Testimonies (as
Sacrifices, Oracles, and their Cessations, to perfect the proof) do come in
also; then none, but great Scholars, Helluons Pololo^^rs, Subtle Allegorizers,
Men of Rab^inical Fancy, or of Origen's Humor, can certainly be assured, by
this Argument taken from his Miracles, That Christ was in ^^ed the Messiah, or
Son of God. Men of ordinary Knowledge, of common Capacity, of small Reading,
narrow Intelligence, etc. though never so firm Believers, sincerely Pious and
conscientious Observers of the Will of God, since they cannot pierce into the
Mystical Types, Obscure Figures, ^nigmatical Hieroglyphics, cannot be (...)
with the External Testimonies, nor Chymically distill plain Histories, into
Allegories, (notwithstanding they can, and do read, understand, and believe all
the Verbal Predictions of the Prophets; yea, and notwithstanding, they may do,
or might see Miracles upon Miracles; all the Miracles that Christ ever did, a
Thousand Miracles, one after another; yet can they not with assurance conclude
Christ's Godhead, by, or from His Miracles. And yet Christ uses this Argument,
To prove His Godhead; uses it often; uses it more often, than any other,
than all other Arguments, that to that purpose he ever used; uses it as an
Irrefragable Argument, Joh. 10.37; uses it as an Argument, that leaves Men,
who are not convinced by it, inexcusable, Joh. 18.24. And this Argument,
Medium, Motive, or Mean, without any other, by and of it self alone, was very
many times (we find) sufficiently convincing; uses it over, above, and beyond
the Testimony of the Baptist, as a much better Argument; though he were the
greatest of all the Prophets, that ever were; the greatest that was born of
Women, for the cleerness of his Description and Indigitation of Christ's
Person: And therefore as credible in His Testimony, as any of the Verbal
Predictions of any of the Prophets; and yet prefers Christ, the Argument
taken from his Miraculous Works, before the Testimony of this, John 5.32, 33,
34. It must be therefore of more Strength, than any Verbal Prediction of any
Prophe^^s, whatever. He used indeed, too, His Father's Testimony, as another
Argum^^t of His Divinity, not as a Medium to fortify this; and then too, brings
in ^hes Argument (the other is not brought alone without this) as an equal
Concurrent with it. Yea, he uses this Argument alone, singly, by it self,
^dozen times, at least, without any other anne^t, either out of Verbal
Predictions of Prophets, Types, Figures, Histories, Events, or any such like,
to confirm or justify it. He uses it thus, singly, upon several Occasions,
unto several Persons, severally disposed, to and among Friends and Foes,
Believers and Unbelievers, Neophytes or Young, and Mnasons or Old Disciples;
Uses it as a sufficient Answer alone, to those quarrelsome Jews, who were
ready to snarle at any thing he said; i^ possible there could be any Exception
taken at His Words, upon the very Question, Whether he were the Christ or not^
Joh. 10.21, 25. Christ, I say, used this Argument often, and diverse times, upon
diverse occasions, to diverse persons, of diverse opinions, etc. And it cannot, I
believe, be proved, That he ever used any other Argument, for the Confirmation
of this His Argument: Nay, it had been a kind of weakness in Him, to have used
this Argument, singly, so often as he does; (and the Apostles too, Act.
2.22.38. Romans 1.4. etc.) had it not been in, of, and by it self, sufficient
singly: But it seems, That Christ's Answer to John's Disciples is, by some,
thought to intimate, That His Miraculous Works, needed at least the Assistance
of the Verbal Predictions of the Prophets, to prove His Godhead or
Messia-ship, because some Words or Things forespoken by the Prophet ^say, are
included in the Answer of Christ to the Baptist, Esaias 3^ 5 with ^uke 7.21.
Answ. 1. They were another sort, a diverse kind of Mirather, that Christ speaks
of, different from those in the Prophet. The Prophet speaks of Spiritual
Operations upon the Soul, by Grace, which are rather proper Works of the
Spirit, than of Christ: These that Christ speaks of, were outward, c^rnal, and
upon the Body merely, and might be done by mere Power, without but wing the
least sprinkling of Grace, upon the Subjects. And how these former should be a
clear Prophesy or Diagnostick of the latter, is not so plain; or these latter
be proved by the former, to be a Diagnostick of the Messiah. 2. Christ's Answer
sent, was not so, especially, if at all directed to John for his own sake, or
information (He was fully enough before assured of Christ's Messia ship, and
Godhead); but to, and for His Disciples, who in all likelihood, were as bad
Proficients under John, and as ignorant of the Scriptures, as were Christ's
Disciples under him. And these before his Resurrection knew little of the
Scriptures, or of the Verbal Predictions of the Prophets, much-less of Types
and Figures, etc. A mere Prophetical Word to them, especially without citing
the Prophet, and the Place too, would, yea could be but little edifying or
convincing. 3. Christ, nor hints, nor tells them of Prophetical Predictions, at
all, sends them not to reading of the Prophets, nor asks them, What they had
Heard, Learned, or Readd in them. There is nothing in the Passage, intimated to
this purpose: But, he sets them to employ their Eyes, and Ears, and Thoughts,
upon what Christ had newly done, and was doing; Tell John what you have Seen
and Heard done by Me, now. 4. The things in Christ's Answer, do but in a
slender manner agree with the Words of the Prophet (to which Christ, by the
Objection, is supposed to send them): the prophecy speaks indeed of opening
the Eyes of the Blind, unstopping the Ears of the Deaf, making the Lame to
Walk, and the Dumb to Speak, etc. Christ's Works then in hand, were, besides
the former, Cleansing of Lepers, Raising the Dead, and Casting out Devils;
harder things to all Humane Apprehension, and Sense, than those other in the
Prophet. And was it likely that Christ did? Or was it a Prudent Course, that he
should send them, for Conversion and Conviction, to a Prophecy, where the
easier things only were in some sort, predicted, not the harder? Why sends he
them, I say, for proof of the easier things, to the Predictions of the
Prophets, not of the harder? Were the harder convincing enough of themselves,
when once seen, and heatd without any proof, from the Predictions of the
Prophets? Why then no need of proving the easier? Qui potuit ad majora, potuit
etiam ad minora, These proved Him to be Messiah, sufficiently enough, of, and
by themselves: What need more? If he sent them to the Prophets, for proof of
the easier, That these were sufficient Marks to know the Messiah by; then are
the harder needless, in vain, and to no purpose, instanced in; which is not
tolerable to think. Or was it, That the Prophets had no better Fredictions of
the Messiah, but of the easier only, not of the harder things, to be done by
him, (though these doubtless were in special, the Chief Marks of the Messiah)
Why then there would seem to be some Defect in the Prophetical Predictions, as
wanting some of the special Characteristicks, by which the Messiah might best
be known? Or, if they were full, and without any Defect, as to their
Description of the Messiah, or the Marks of him; then was not Christ so well
advised, to send them to these obscure, and subordinate Marks, when there were
better and clearer? Or if the Predictions of the Prophets were full and
sufficient, but yet contained these Harder Things, that Christ instanceth in,
Why then it follows, That these Harder Things did not belong to, nor did prove
the Doer, to be their Messiah expected, but some thing higher, better, and more
august, as doing greater and harder things, than were, should or could be
expected, to be done by their expected Messiah. Which should be so hard for
them to believe, That they should rather, upon such a Pretense of Christ, have
believed him to be a Jugler, Deceiver or an Impostor, as pretending to greater
things in show, but did and could do nothing Really, Answerably, and in Truth?
For, that there could be a greater Miracle R than their Expected Messiah, they
thought it impossible. The Conceit, Apprehension, and Belief that they had
entertained (and that justly) out of the Predictions of the Prophets urged them
to think, that all Comparison with, much more prelation of any p^^tion, above
their Messiah, for any excellency of Operation, would be entertained as
incredible and odious* Certainly the Cleansing of Lepers, Raising the Dead,
Casting out of Devils* could hardly be concluded from the supposed Text of the
Prophet, or any other single Text, yea or diverse; nay not from all the
Prophetical Predictions, put together; I mean in special, that Work of Casting
out Devils in the Demonologers Sense. This must be found (if found at all) in
the Dark Types, Aenigmatical Figures, and Allegorized Histories, or the
External Testimonies, not in the Verbal Predictions of the Prophets, sure. But
it would seem very strange that Christ, who was the Light of the World, and
came purposely into the World, to lighten our Darkness, and theirs too, should
send such dim (...) sighted Persons, to Types, Figures, Histories, etc. (to
name no more) for the Chief Diagnosticks, and Characteristical Marks of
Himself. Marks ought to be plain and obvious, (when from them so inveloped with
Obscurity, and Thick Darkness, he could hardly be found-out by the most
Sagacious Persons, or clearest Intellects;) besides (not to mention, That such
a difficult Way of coming to the Knowledge of their Messiah; especially after
so many Verbal Predictions by the Prophets, must needs cast a huge Damp, as to
their Comfort, upon the spirits of his Expectants;) This might seem very
Inconsonant to the Verbal Predictions of many Prophets, which foretell an
easy and clear Way of discovering all necessary Truths (of which the Knowledge
of the Messiah must needs be One) under the Gospel; The Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, Esaias 11.2, 3. etc. Write the Vision, make it plain upon
Tables, Hab. ver. 22. They shall not every one teach his Neighbor, saying,
Know the Lord, but they shall all know me, Jer. 31.34. The Word is very nigh
thee, in thy very Mouth, Deuteronomy. 30.14. How could this be, if, notwithstanding
Christ's Miracles, he could not be known to be the Messiah, not only, not
without the Verbal Predictions of the Prophets, but not without the hardly
attained, and, when attained, hardly assuring knack of Enucleating or
Exentricating the Types, Figures, Histories, etc.? Might it not be objected,
That this were but as if a man were sent to seek the proof of Notum per
ignotius? as that, When unskilful Fellows, see the Sun shining at Noonday, they
should not, could not, assure themselves of its shining, unless they could find
it in the Predictions of Astronomers; who (ex concessis suppositis, and
postulatis) from obscure Mediums (as to the Vulgar) have concluded it, That the
Sun should or would shine, such a Day, at such an Hour? Nay, might it not be
objected, by Aliens and Infidels, That this were but to make, draw, or
conclude, Quidlibet ex quolibet, Since out of mere Aenigmatical Types, Figures,
Histories, some queint Wits, Chemical Ingenies, Mercurial Intellects, will
easily extract any thing, and make it seem Plausible? Quaere, Whether they
might not squeeze or wring-out of some Types, Figures, Histories, and Events,
recorded in Scripture, Mahometism it self, as well as the Luxuriant Fancies of
Rapsodical Rabbis, have (through the Alimbecke of Allegories, Caballistical
and Massoraitical Criticisms, out of Metaphors, Words, Phrases, and Aetymons,
pounded, and strained) distilled that Gallimawphey Mish-mass, of most
Monstrous, Absurd, Ridiculous Conceits and Practices, which they call the
Religion (but better the Extravagant Superstition) of the besotted Modern Jews.
5. If the Predictions of the Prophets, concerning the Miracles to be done by
Christ, were so necessary, That his Miracles were no sufficient Proofs of his
Godhead, without the Attestation of these Predictions; then, without doubt,
were all those Miracles Predicted, or at least ought to be (and if ought, were,
no doubt) that were sit to be Acted by the Messiah, for the manifestation of
his Person, what he was: But there are no Predictions in the Prophets (take
them in their utmost Latitude) of some Miracles that Christ did, exgr. His
turning Water into Wine, His Cursing the Fruitless Fig Tree; But to omit all
the rest, not of his Casting out Devils, properly so called. And therefore
Christ did not at all Cast out such Devils; neither was it fit he should;
neither, if he had, would it contribute any thing, to the proof of his
Godhead; nor was it indeed a Miracle, or (which is enough for my purpose here)
then it was not necessary, That the Miracles that Christ did, should be
confirmed by Predictions, That by them we might believe that Christ was the Son
of God: And yet the Casting out of Devils, in any Sense, sure (and as I think
in the Demonologer's Opinion too) was a Miracle; yea in my Sense, predicted by
the Prophets also, but not in theirs. If it be said, That the Predicting of
some of these, that the Messiah would and ought to do, was a sufficient proof
for the Doer of these Miracles, That he was the Messiah, or the Son of God, (I
mean only by his own Power) I grant; for wherever some, or but one Miracle is
done, by a Person Authoritatively, there without doubt is the divine Power or
Godhead, visibly. But this helps not the Demonologers at all, since they
grant, yield, and plead, That some others, both Devils and Men, can, nay have
done the very selfsame Miracles that Christ did; yea that were predicted of,
and were to be done by, Him. Either therefore these Thaumatourgical Devils and
Men have the Divine Power resiant in them; or else, The doing of Miracles, yea
though the very same Miracles that were predicted by the Prophets, of the
Messiah, was not indeed sufficient to prove Him to be the Messiah, who was the
Doer.

I would willingly know what the Learned Man thinks is signified, by that Word
of the Apostle [A more sure Word of Prophesie]; What? more sure, than those
Miracles Christ did openly, before them all, and they saw with their very Eyes?
Or, more sure than that very Attestation, which they heard from the Mouth of
God himself, immediately, with their Ears, erect and attentive? If so, Then
were not these Eyes, and these Eare-Testimonies which they heard and saw, fully
convincing; did not arise to a full Assurance of Faith: There might be Dubiety
in the Apostles themselves, as to the things they declare unto us, for our
Salvation; Notwithstanding all that they ever heard or saw, concerning Christ;
or at least their Informations were subordinate, and inferior for Certainty, to
these Evidences the Prophets (and they from the Prophets) had. But truly I may
as well believe, That the Prophets might as easily be mistaken in their
Informations, and Predictions, (which were mostly proposed to them, in Dreams,
Trances, and Dark Representations, upon their Imaginations only,) as the
Apostles should want any thing, or Degree, of the Highest Certainty imaginable,
in those things which they heard and saw: And upon the account of Assurance by
these means, propose to us to be believed as Salvifical: We have but a doubtful
and unsettled Ground of our Faith else; Why then, might not the Apostles, and
all Believers since, be mistaken in their Reading and Inextricating of the
Prophecy, and Verbal Predictions, Events, Figures, etc recorded in these
Scriptures, as well as they were, or might be, in those things that they saw,
or heard, etc? Or, if they were infallibly assisted in the one, Why should we
doubt of the other? I conceive therefore, that the (...), A more sure Word of
Prophecy, need not be interpreted, either by the Comparative, or Superlative
muchless. If it be referred or opposed to the Miracles of Christ, which the
Apostles saw him exsert, (there is no Intimation in the Text, that, That sure
Word of Prophecy, is at all Referred or Opposed to Christ's Miracles, there
being not so much as a Hint to his Miracles in all that Chapter;) or to the
Attestation from Heaven, which they heard. But in the Positive, only, thus; We
have also, a Sure, or an Excellent, or a Confirming Word of Prophecy, besides
Christ's Miracles, (if that may be put in) and the Attestation from Heaven.
But, a surer, firmer, stronger, or better in the Comparative or Superlative,
than these, I much doubt of it, whether this may be right; especially if we
consider what Christ Himself says, Joh. 5.36, 37. I have greater Witness. --
The Works that I do -- and the Father Himself, etc. And yet I will not deny,
but that, (...), whether in the Comparative, or Superlative may well stand
still, if it be referred to the Jews in general, to whom St. Peter wrote, (who
were, likely, but weak-Believers as yet) the Prophesies to them, being the
surest, and certainest Assurances, that they could possibly expect, or have:
Especially, Surer than the mere Testimony of the Apostle, an ordinary Man, as
they might account. But if referred to the Apostle, or Apostles; It must be
understood only, in the Positive. The Apostles could not, by any Prophesies,
whatever, have any surer, or fuller Testimonies of Christ's Godhead, than
they had by seeing his Miracles, and hearing the Approbation given him by God
Himself. And therefore though (...), we have a more surer Word, etc. may seem
to referr unto, and to include the Apostle himself; yet since he comes in
afterward with (...), etc. Ye do well, That you give heed, etc. it seems, That
he speaks not Distributingly, in respect of himself, or the other Apostles, who
saw and heard as much as he did, but of the Jewish Nation Collectively; or
especially of these, that were (...), Strangers at home, and dispersed
throughout, etc. and consequently might not be acquainted, so well, with, at
least, had not seen the Wonderful Miracles of Christ. Such Men, no doubt, could
not do better, than Give heed to the Prophetical Word, till a better clearer
Evidence, or stronger Ground of Faith appeared to them. Ye do well that ye give
heed to it, as to a Light, shining in a Dark Place, until the Day dawne, and
the Day Star arise, etc. Or, till ye be better s^ttled, instructed,
enlightened, and established in the Doctrine of Christ.

But, in (...); Prephestes to the Jews were an A^^^^ance, (...). That a
Messiah, or Savior was to Come. 2. That coming, He should do great Works or
Mir^cles ^. That by the Works, he should do, they might know him to be the
Messiah: but until he came and did such Works, they were in the dark still;
though the Prophesies were a kind of Candle to them. But when Christ was once
come, and had done these great Works, and they saw them, then, The Day dawned,
the Light appeared, and the Sun shone brightly: Then no longer need, or use of
a Candle; For, as They said to their Neighbor; Now, we Believe, not because of
thy Word; but because we have heard him our selves: So might the Jews say, Not
because we have some Glimmering Light of the Prophets, but because we have seen
his Works (which by, of, from, and through themselves bear witness, That he is
the Son of God) do we believe him. What need of a Candle? The Sun it self
shines; and when the Sun shines, th^^ they that walk in Darkness, and in
(...) ^^addow of Death before, may see as plainly, clearly, and distinctly, as
they that formerly could see, indeed, somewhat better, by their Candle. The
Gentiles too, might know Him, then, to be the Messiah, or Son of God, by his
Works, as well as the Jews, with all the help of their Prophesies. For, as the
Prophesies told them, That the Messiah should do such Works, as no man else
did, or could: So, right Reason it self taught the Gentiles, That none could
alter, or act besides, above, or contrary to, the course of Nature, as Christ
did, but God. God, therefore, Christ must needs be, since he Acted thus, as I
have showed elsewhere, and is evident, Joh. 4.50. -- Matthew. 27.54 --. Luke
17.16. -- 18. Act. 13.12. Act. 14.11. Act. 17. and 28.6. When they once
apprehended the Work to be miraculous, they presently conclude, That a Divine
Power was the Agent.

But this is enough, for this Objection: For, there is indeed nothing of weight
in it, at all. The Proposition is, Christ's Miracles of themselves (as He
himself testifies) prove his Godhead. The Objection is, We have a surer Word
of Prophecy. I ask, surer, than what? What, than his Miracles? How does? how
can? this appear from this Text, 2 Pet. 1.19? How is it possible, That the
surer Word can be opposed to Christ's Miracles, when there is not so much as
one Word, Syllable, or Hint, in all this Passage, Chapter, or Epistle, nay in
either of the Epistles, that points to Christ's Miracles at all; much less to
an Opposition or Subordination of them to the prophesies, in point of proof,
for the Evidencing of his Godhead? But, let it be granted, That the Prophesies
are a surer Word of proof than Christ's Miracles; yet will it not follow,
That Christ's Miracles are no sufficient or sure proofs: Proofs they may be,
yea sure and sufficient Proofs, (which is enough for my business) though they
be not so sure and sufficient Proofs, (to grant that too), as the Prophecyes.
But, what needs more? Take sure Word either in the Positive, or Comparative;
yet being here not referred to Christ's Miracles, but to some thing else, and
that too in respect of some Men only, (that were not well acquainted with his
Miracles, or possibly, did not yet believe he had ever done any such Miraculous
Works,) it can be no argument at all, That Christ's Miracles alone, were no
sure or sussicient Argument of his Godhead.

I fear the Learned Man was so bewitched with that most Monstrous, but most
Absurd and Ridiculous Legend of Doctor Dee's Conversing with Spirits; because
he had retrived it from Dust and Rottenness, where it ought to have perished
Everlastingly; unless in Providence it be reserved as a Monument of the
Impudent Knavery, some Desperate Varlets will venture on: or of the Monstrous
Credulity, some besorted Melancholicoes may be inveigled into:) That he
Strains, or Tuggs, might and main, Hook and Nail, to make his Devil, if
possible, Aequipollent, to Christ our Savior, if not Superexcellent for Power
of Miracles, and most stupend Operations, above Him.

CHAP. XXX. A Reply to the Objection, against the Book called, The Case of
Witchcraft, Debated.
THat it is Passion, or Prepossession, That engages the Learned Man, to be so
earnest for the Power of Devils, seems clear, to me from the petty Cavils, he
has against that Judicious Book called, The Question of VVitchcraft, Debated;
(Debated, not Stated; but with Modesty enough, if not too much, Debated) a
Book, that contains more good Reason, true Religion, and right Christianity,
than all those Lumps, and Cart-Loads of Luggage, that has been Fardled up, by
all the Faggeters of Demonologistical VVinter-Tales, and Witcheraftical
Legendaries; since they first begun to foul clean Paper. His first Attempt is,
To prove against that Ingenious Author that Casaph signifies in Scripture,
(Witches, i. e. such Persons, as acted by a Power derived to them from the
Devil, and not mock-Miraclers, Impostors, or Juglers; because most, if not all,
Translaetors, (and he reckons up many names) so interpret it; but he leaves-out
Josephus, and the Septuagint, who being Natural Jews, and Great Scholars to
boot, counterballance all the other great Names: Especially, since they were
Persons that lived long before this Doctrine of Devils was hatched; and so more
likely, to be more Vnbyassed Interpreters, than those who lived, after the
World was bewitched with that monstrous Opinion. Josephus, without doubt, was
as Ancient, as any of his Interpreters; nay, they mere Youngsters, in respect
of him, all. And for the Septuagint, they were at least 350. Years Elder than
his Eldest Interpreters; who yet by his own Confession, page 180. interpret
Casaph by (...), i. e. Veneficus. Besides, whatever his Interpreters were,
they had but the word, Casaph, the Etymon, and the use of that Word, or the
Coherence of the Text, To guide them into the Interpretation of it: And all
these have we now, as well as they; 1. For the Word, we may say it boldly, It
does not in, of, or by it self, signify a Witch, i. e. One that is in Compact
with the Devil; for, neither is Compact, nor Devil included in the Notion of
it. But only, a Covering, Changing, or Altering the outward Face, or Appearance
of things, which may be done many ways, without the Intervention of Devils;
Yea, cannot be done by any Assistance from them. 2. For the use of the word,
Josephus, and the Septuagint, interpreting it Poysoner; it is more than
probable, that this was the most usual Sense of it. 3. For the Coherence of the
Text, it is never any where used in Scripture, where the sense of the Context,
does not plainly Determine it, to Impostor, Spiritual Poysoner, Jugler, or
Deceiver, rather than to Witch, in the Demonologist's Sense, all the Scripture
over; as is plain, if any man, do but unbyassedly consider the several places,
where the word is used, as I have intimated before. Yea, when the Learned man
comes to give the Words of the Interpreters, they are but these, Magus,
Maleficus, (or Veneficus, for that is the Word he proceeds on, in his Descant)
and Praestigiator, etc. which are so far from intimating his Witches, as Latro,
in Latin, is from signifying a Regicide; or (to use his own Terms) as far as
Lapis is from signifying a pumice; or Panis, a Wafer-Cake. The Words, not any
of them, in any sort, intimating the Thing they are produced for.

First, Magus, is properly, a great Naturalist, or a Person well skilled in the
Courses and Operations of Nature: improperly, and by Abuse, a Fellow that
pretending to do great things, (in cheat) Supernaturally, with much Artifice,
and Cunning, makes use only of some Natural Operations, that be somewhat
unusual, and not ordinarily known, to deceive the Simple. 2. Venesicus is a
Poysoner, and cannot well be haled in, to signify any thing else, at least not
one, that by a power derived from the Devil, can, or does do, strange things;
No more than Beneficus, or Salvificus can signify a Person, that by Influence
from an Angel, can work Miracles. It is true, because some of these Villains,
with so much Cunning, and Artifice, exercised this their Wickedness, That
ordinarily it was not conceived, how they could effect their Mischiefs, without
the Intervention of some Supernatural Assistance. Veneficus, might abusively,
be usurped for one that dealt with Evil Spirits. But as there, nor are now, nor
ever were, any such Persons: So, nor did, does, nor can that Word, properly,
signify any such thing; and therefore the Poets, themselves, the first
Finders, Makers, and Fathers of Witches, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Lucan, Tibullsu,
Homer, etc. bring them in still as gathering, mixing, and compounding,
Poisonous Herbs; and such deleterious stuff; by which they acted their
strangest, and most stupend Mischiefs. And because, vulgarly, it was not known,
how their strange Effects were produced, It was thought generally; especially
by the Rabble, and possibly by some others who were looked upon, by themselves,
and others too, as Wisemen, (as the Effects wrought now by the Magnetic
Powder, and the Weapon-Salve, are by some, who reckon themselves no mean
Sciolists) that they acted altogether, by the Assistance of some Demons, when
they wrought any unusual Feats. But Poysoner is the signification of the word
Veneficus; and the Practice of those that were so called, was Poisoning; as I
could instance in all the forenamed Poets, and others, besides these: But I
will here only make use of Lucan, as he is Translated into English, that it may
the better be understood by the vulgar. Sextus Pompeius comes to that notorious
Cheat or Witch, Erichtho, to understand the fatal Issue of the Pharsalian
Battle; which she (in some sort) cheatingly undertakes to discover; and having
found a Carcass fit for the purpose, (you must permit Poets, to fancy what
Fooleries they please, especially when they speak of Witches) she falls to her
Witchcraft; but how? Mark!

Pectora cum primum ferventi sanguine supplet,
Vulneribus laxata suis, taboque medullas
Alluit, et virus large lunare ministrat;
Huc quicquid fato genuit Natura sinistro,
Miscetur; non spuma Canum (quibus unda timori est),
Viscera non Lyncis, non dirae nodus Hyenae
Defuit, and Cervi pasti serpente medulla;
Non puppim retinens Euro tendente rudentes
In mediis Echineis aquis; oculique Draconum,
Quaeque sonant faeta tepefacta sub alite Saxa;
Non Arabum volucer Serpens, innataque rubris
Aequoribus custos pretiosae vipera conchae,
Aut viventis adhuc Lybici membrana Cerastae.
Englished thus.

Then with warm Blood, opening fresh Wounds, she fills
Its Breast; and gore to the inward Parts distills:
Of the Moon's Poisonous Jelly, store she takes,
And all the hurtful Brood, that Nature makes;
Foam of mad-Doggs (which sight of Water dread),
The pith of Staggs, with Serpents nourished,
Was mixed there; The dire Hyena's knot,
The spotted Lynx his Bowels wanted not;
Nor that small-Fish, whose strength, though Eurus rise,
Can stay the course of Ships; The Dragon 's eyes.
The sounding Stone, that brooding Eagles make
Warm in their nests; The Arabian nimble Snake,
The Red Sea Viper, precious Gemms that kept;
Skins from the alive Lybian Cerastes stripped;
The Phaenix Ashes, laid in Arabie:
With these when vile and nameless Poison she
Had mixed, and leafs filled with Enchantments strong,
And Herbs which her dire Mouth had spitt upon,
What Poison did she on the World bestow!
Poison, I say, was the thing which she, and all the rest of them made use of,
for the doing of the strangest Feats, that are reported to be done at any time,
by any of them. From this their course, are they properly called Veneficae, or
Poysoners, and from nothing else; though they sometimes also used horrid
Words, fearful Execrations, and hellish Curses, To amuse their Worshippers; or
else, possibly: To cast themselves into Rapturous Trances.

3dly. For Praestigiator, it is merely a Jugler, Impostor, Cozener or Deceiver;
a Knave that deludes by Glosses, Fucusses, Artificial Feats, Tricks, and
Slights, etc. Quum fucatur atque praelinitur, sit praestigiosum. A. Gellius.
lib. 7. cap. 14. And he was a notable Critic upon words: Indeed our Opponent
descants much upon this Word, as though Prastigiator, and Perstringitor were
all one; and would needs make it to be a Dazler, or holder of men's Eyes, by the
Devil's help: And for this there is a VVinter-Tale hinted at, and that is the
Proof. But to say no more of such a Foppery, but what I have said often; If the
Devil can delude one of our Senses, as that of Seeing, he can all our Senses,
as well, and as easily, as often, as he will. And thus we should not be any thing
the wiser, but the simpler; notwithstanding all the helps we can have, from
any, or all our Senses: And if our senses may generally be deluded, so may our
Intellects, if not, must: The Intellect, for information, depends upon the
Senses; at least, for all its knowledge in, or of, Material, and External things.

The 2. Snap is, That (...) does not in any good Ancient Author signify
Impostor: And yet St. John, a pretty good, and a pretty Ancient Author too,
uses (...) for Cheat, Delusion, Imposture, or Spiritual Poisoning, Rev. 18.23.
And (...) for such Varlets, as make use of such Knaveries or Impostures, Rev.
21.8. and 22.15. He speaks doubtless of those Delusive and Cheating Courses,
that the Anti-Christian's did, or would use, to inveigle the World, into their
Superstition and Idolatry. And has not, will not, is not, the Antichristian
Superstition, upheld by Juggles, Impostures, or Spiritual Poysonings, more than
by any thing else?

Thirdly, Whereas it is said by the Debater, That Kings, Princes, Priests,
Philosophers, and such Persons only, are in Scripture called Mecashaphim, or
Witches; The Opponent (indeed) denies this; but proves nothing to the contrary;
nor can it, indeed, be proved, That this Term in Scripture is ever applicable
to Inferior Varlets, Contemptible Wretches, or Decrepit old-Haggs: But this is
nothing to the purpose, and as little is that which is brought-in concerning
Julian, and some Popes. For, that many things concerning them, on both sides,
have been mere Lies, and Scandalous Calumnies; I thought till now, that no man
of Judgment would deny, or doubt of. Julian, and those Popes, counted them
Witches, that were not of their Faction; and they that were not of their
Faction; called Them, viz. Julian and the Popes, Witches, and Sorcerers. I was
about to make a Question of it, Whether there were any Truth on either side?
But no need of a Question, when there was mutually such Spite, Malice, and
more than Vatinian Hatred between them: There was small hope (sure) of much
Truth, in their Philippical Invectives, one against the other. Thus far the
Learned man gets no ground of his Adversary, but rather sticks in the mire. Oh!
but then, Fourthly, (this is a deadly Thrust, and he crows as Conqueror) The
Sadduces denied Angels too, as well as the Being of Witches, and Devils; there
can therefore, nothing be inferred from their Negative, in this Particular.
Answ. True; they denied both Angels and Devils; and it was without doubt their
great Error, that they did so. And yet was it not, possibly, so great an Error
in them, To deny the being of Permanent Angels (this some think is not so
clear, evident, and convincingly deduced out of Moses, without the Assistance
of some other Scriptures; and the Sadduces acknowledged no Scriptures, Divine,
but the Pentateuch) as to deny The being of evil Spirits, or Devils;
especially, 1. If (as it is said) there be in Moses, (the Word of Moses being
the Word of God to them) such a plain Word, as clearly signifies Devil, and
Dealers with Devils. 2. If there be such a Law, so plain in Moses too, That he
that ran might read, and understand it: (Sure Capital Laws ought to run in such
plain Characters, that the Crime and Punishment might be intelligible at first
sight) against such Dealers with Devils. 3. If the Practice of Dealing with
Devils, had been so general among the Jews, both in the superior and inferior
People too. 4, If there were such a number of Demoniacks, or men possessed with
Devils, at all times, in every corner of the Country, throughout the Land of
Judea, and the Countries adjacent. And, 5. If there were such a standing,
constant, settled course, order, practice, exercise, or office, of Exorcists;
who could, and usually did, Castout Devils, as easily as an Ape cracks Nuts. 6.
If they could hear Devils talk, discourse, and dialogize within the possessed
Persons, cry, roar, howl, bellow, screetch, as they were dispossessed, and
could know them certainly to be Devils, by their unimitable tones, noyses,
shreeks, lamentations; as easily as they could know and distinguish a Lion by
his roaring, from a Sheep, that could only bleat (all these gallant fine pretty
Fopperies do Demonologers, predieate concerning their Devils). 7. If it were so
evidently clear to men of common sense, That they were indeed, and really,
Devils that were cast out (the Exorcists commanding the Devils to do something
that might sensibly witness the Presence of a Supernatural Power, as Doctor M.
C. p. 77. Cred. and Incred. in Not.); though the Demonologers have not given us
to understand, as yet, of what shape, form, figure, or color, these Ejected
Devils were; or what kind of sound, tone, noise, smell, touch, or taste, at
their Ejection they yielded; or at what hole, or passage before, or behind,
they came out,); Then I say, it had been unlikely, very unlikely, and most
improbable, if not altogether impossible, That the Sadduces (being such Wise
men, some of them, and such a considerable number, that they might amount to a
third, or, at least, to a fourth part of the People among the Jews, at most
times, for many successive Generations;) should have disbelieved the being of
Witches, or Devils, though they did deny the Existency of Angels. Of which they
had not half so many, or half so good, Convincing Arguments.

It is almost impossible, to conceive, That there should be in England, a great
number, as, at least, the third part of the Kingdom, wise, discreet, and
intelligent Persons, in every other thing; yea and they Magistrates, and
Officers of Justice, some of them, very often, if not at all times, and that
for many Generations past, successively still, and at this present too; who
should, (notwithstanding they knew the Laws, Customs, and Statutes, of the
Nation (all written in plain English, and Intelligible Terms, against Whores
and Thieves); had heard the Proofs, and those upon Oath, by honest and sober
men, brought against; and had been present at the Voluntary Confessions, made
by such Varlets, of such their Villainies; had been informed by men of
unquestionable Credit, That there were not only, some base People, but also
Persons, Eminent in Authority, who practiced themselves, invited, and
countenanced others to, and in these Villainies; nay, had seen as much with
their own Eyes, as could be sworn against, or confessed, by such Varlets; and
had seen their Execution, etc: I say, is it possible, to conceive, That there
should be such a Race of men, for so many Generations together, who being fully
informed thus, of the Practices of such Rogues) should believe, That there, nor
are, nor ever were, nor can be, any such Persons, as Thieves or Whores in
England? Is it possible to conceive this? Suppose we, That there was once one
Anaxagoras, a singular, Self-conceited Fanciful, Wilful, and Paradoxical Fellow
in the World, who would not, or could not believe, That the Snow was White, as
he pretended; yet, That there should be a Race, a Generation, an Innumerable
Company of Men; that for many Ages, one after another, Successively, should
disbelieve matters of Fact, so openly, notoriously, convincingly, attested to
them, by Oath, Confession, Judicial Sentences, by their own Ocular Vision,
auricular Hearing, and by the Attestation and Detestation of their God, (whom
they think it a piacle to disbelieve) is not at all, in any sort, to be thought
Credible. Men cannot believe, or disbelieve, what they please, especially in
such things as come under Sense. When the Sun shines, men, especially men in
their Wits, and that have as clear Eyes, and Ingenies, as any other men, cannot
but believe that it shines: And truly it was as evident, as that the Sun
shines at Noonday, That there were Witches, and evil Spirits, (that enabled
those Witches) if it be true what the Demonologers say of Witches; among the
Jews. And therefore either the Sadduces did not, yea could not, possibly,
disbelieve Witchcraft (which is absolutely false); or else Demonologers invent,
suggest, and obtrude, many gross, groundless, monstrous, and incredible Lies,
upon the People, (which is undoubtedly a Truth). The Argument drawn from the
Opinion of the Sadduces is unanswerable, by all the Demonologers in
Christendom, (and I think there are very few without the Compass of that
Circle) if they will stand ingenuously to their own Positions, to their
Principles, Comments, or Interpretations; and not use Witchcraft indeed, that
is, Tergiversations, Subterfuges, and Cheating Evasions.

5. To that which is said by the Debater, That the Scripture-Witches acted
openly, our Supposed-Witches but in the dark. It is remooted, indeed; There was
a Law among the Jews, by which Witches, i. e. Persons that acted by the Devil,
were to be punished with Death. Answ. But this rests yet to be proved. 2. That
that Law was repeated more than once, that is often. Answ. This is not at all
made to appear, nor can it appear; The Law meant, no doubt, is that, Ex. 22.18.
but much mistaken in the Interpretation; and never any where else at all
repeated, that I can find. There is indeed, Lev. 20.27. another Law for the
putting to death of the Shoel. Ob. and the Iddeoni; that is, (as our
Translation) Those that have Familiar Spirits, and Wizzards. But that does no
more prove, That the Law against the Cashaphim is more than once repeated, than
if a man should say, Because there is one Law, in England and no more but one,
and that one but once mentioned, That the Capuchins should be put to death; but
another, That the Jesuits should be put to death too: That, therefore, there
be more Laws in England than one, and that one twice at least repeated, for the
destroying of the Capuchins: The Capuchins no more deserting from the Jesuits,
than the Cashaphim did from the Shoel. Ob. and the Iddeoni. 3. Many were put to
death by that Law, for acting against it. Answ. But it will never be proved,
this, of many; nay nor that so much as one man ever acted, or was destroyed
among the Jews, for acting by a Power derived from the Devil upon Compact.
Whatever besotted Rabbis, and Rabbinistical men prate, I know not, I pass
not, I care not; There is no Text for it. 4. They acted this Villainy closely
then, as now, as it is said of some of them. An. 1. But this is not proved,
except it be by a confident Question, [Who can believe otherwise?] Kings,
Queens, Princes, Priests, Philosophers, etc. acted it openly; there could,
therefore, doubtless, have been no great danger; then, at least, when those so
openly acted it; had the Inferiors acted it so too. 2. If they acted it so
closely, How were they then found out, or discovered? There was no Inquisition
then established: There were no Witch-finders, nor, muchless, Witch-makers,
among the People, then, as there are now; and some of them sage Philosophers,
learned Critics, and great Divines. 6. The Argument, That the Opinion of
Witchcraft is Derogatory to God's Honor; as setting up many Gods is slubber'd
over, with that weak, silly, if not blasphemous Evasion, viz. God's Permission
in respect of Devils; and the Passage in Job brought in, to Countenance it. But
to reply to this, in short; The Devil, with all his Devilship, though God give
him Rope enough, as much as he can wish, cannot possibly do those Works, which
he Attributes to him, as being Acts properly belonging to God, as God; and for
the Interpretation, that he brings, viz. That the Messengers were Incarnate
Devils; The Sabaeans, and the Chaldaans, were men Possessed with Devils, or so
many Devils in the shape of men; it is doubtless so gross a Wildness, that the
most blindly-Obedient Papists, or Paynims, besottedly credulous, would be much
puzzled to give any Credit to it. Truly, he might as well have brought in the
Wildest Tales of Apuleins in his Golden Ass; or the Legends of those
Conventiclers, in the Second Council of NICE; or the Monstrous Figments of
those long, gray-bearded Fellows, that Lucian mentions, in his Philopseudeus.
(Apuleius was a great Platonist; the Nicene men, grave Seigniours, and the
others Eminent Philosophers, of the most predicated Sects, throughout the whole
World.) Could any of these lie? And yet all these as Credible, as the Wild
Conceits of the Learned man here. Oh! but Seventhly, Men generally, yea
Physicians and Naturallists; and the best (who are best able to judge) have
concluded, There are Witches. Answ. As great Naturallists, Physicians, and
Philosophers too; yea, whole Schools, Colleges, Professions, Sects, (not
single Persons only) have thought the contrary, and that upon better Grounds;
This I have showed already in several places sufficiently. Nay, our Learned
Antagonist himself, even here too, tells us; That not only several
Naturallists, and expert Physicians in particular, but the Arabs generally (who
were as great Naturallists, and Physicians as ever any part of the World, could
boast of) have denied Witches. Yea, I believe there are within this Kingdom,
at this very present time, a considerable number of Excellent Physicians (and
ere men can come to be Excellent Physicians, they must be good Philosophers,
and Experimental Naturallists, first) that will count it Scandal, to have it
reported of them, That they ever were (at least sicne they came to their Aome,
in that noble Profession) so puzzled in any Discase, as that they could not find
out, or at least guess at, the Causes, Nature, Symptoms of it; and all as
Natural, yea, and prescribe hopeful Methods, Indications, Courses, and Means,
(the Disease being Naturally curable, and Application seasonably made) without
slying to that absurd Asylum of Ignorance, Laziness, Superstition, or (possibly
some thing worse) Witchery, or Possession.

The last Attempt against the Ingenious and Ingenuous Debater, is, A joining
with the Papists (whose Interest is much concerned, and most of their
Superstitions upheld, by this Doctrine of Devils,) to mutilate, and circumcise
that Ancient Council of Ancyra; and not that Council only, but all other
Councils else, besides, according to his Reasonings: For, says he, In these
Collections, (that is of the Councils in general) different Pieces, of
different Times, and Authors, are patched up together; and that this is sure
enough, is acknowledged by all men. But if it be thus, What Esteem or Credit is
there to be yielded, by any man, to any of those Collections, or Councils, now
extant? Men, at least, may cut off, thus, what Collops they will, at any time,
when any things in those Councils make against their purpose. We must of
necessity have a new general Council, merely to make up an Index Expurgatorius,
that we may know, what Canons, Paragraphs, or Clauses of Canons, are Genuine,
and what Spurious. Delrio, and Baronius, were, I confess, Learned men; and our
Reverend Doctor, as Learned; yea, I think more Learned than either, or both of
them: And yet, since all Three but Demonologists, they must (unless they give
better Reasons for their Defalcations of Councils, than yet they have) pardon
me, if I dissent from them. It is considerable, what this Learned man says
himself, in answer unto Gassendus, who pretended, That the Writings of Epicurus
were falsified, and interpolated by the Stoics, etc. If we take this Liberty
(says he) we shall not know, what to say of any man, what he maintained, or
believed, by his Writings; what Plato, what Aristotle, what any Fathers, or
Heretics, etc. if it will serve, to say, These Writings are Spurious,
Adulterated, and Corrupted. Cred. and Incred. in things Civil. page 108. Apply
this to the Councils, and what can any man know of any Canons made by, or in
them? Besides, I would willingly know (if this passage of the Ancyran Council
be a Spurious Interpolation, or an Adulterous Addition) Who were, who possibly
could be the Authors of this Knavery? Not the Papists without doubt, either by
their own Act or Connivance; (for this interpolated Passage, as it is called,
makes against their Superstitiom much); and if not by them, then was it before
any Cheats of theirs in this kind were ever ventred on: And consequently the
passage must need be very ancient; and so ought to be reverenced for its great
Antiquity, as being, probably, as ancient, as that very Council, or rather
(which is more probable) a genuine Canon of it. Not that I think, That every
thing which we find faggetted up together, by the Collectors of Councils, under
that Apostasy, (which almost overwhelmed the whole Christian World) must
presently be received as Canonical. No, no: Thus might we swallow the greatest
Gobbets of Superstition, instead of the fattest and sweetest Viands the Gospel
proposes. But, That we well weigh, consider, and examine all things, duly
observing the occasions, why; the times, when; and by whom; the Councils were
called. What the Fathers were that sat; What they wrote; What the Historians
of those times record; What Opinions were then rife, frequent, and most
praedominant; What was the phrase, style, or manner of Speaking or Writing,
which was thought best to befit the Gravity of Councils, at that time, etc.
Thus, no doubt, may we easily know the Spurious from the Genuine, separate the
Precious from the File; and by such Observations we may easily find, That this
Canon or Paragraph of the Ancyran Council mentioned, was Genuine and
Legitimate. To end all this, That the Learned man intended, rather to cavil
with the Judicious Debater, than to settle his own (supposed true) Opinion
(though indeed a gross Error), is evident by that which has been said; and yet
may appear farther from his snapping at the word Ingenious, instead of
Ingenuous, which might be the mistake of the Transscriber, or of the Press, or
but error Pennae, in the Debater; or, it might be, he had a mind to commend
Delrio for his Ingeny or Wit, not his Modesty. Is this a Candor, befitting the
Gravity of such a Reverend Divine? But, possibly, the Learned man had a mind to
the Quibble of a small Critcism, in this passage; and then he must be allowed,
1. To have his Vagary. 2. In that he undervalueth, or rather traduceth, the
Debater, for a small Linguist, and a smaller Historian; and yet he shows as
much skill in the Languages, as was needful for his purpose; and as much
Authentic History, as possibly could be expected, upon the occasion. 3. Had he
a mind to it, or the occasion required it, he could, I doubt not, have shown
much more: but he was not for extravagant Rambles, as most Critics are;
Vaingloriously to ostentate their great Reading, and subtle Conjectures, upon
small, or no occasions. 4. But might not this be the Meaning: He was not
acquainted with, nor so Credulous of Legends, Winter-Tales, and Monstrous
Fables, (falsely called History) as some others are. And yet had he showed less
both of History, and Language, it were nothing to purpose. He has shown so
much solid Reason, and real Christianity, for the settling of a Truth necessary
to be settled; for the upholding of Christ's Honor; that all the Demonologists
except by Snaps, and Snarls, will never be able to answer. But let it be
supposed, That he was so smattering a Linguist, and diminutive Historian, Why
then, it follows (the Vnmatchableness of his Antagonist being considered) that
Magna est veritas, and praevalet, Christ gives the Sticklers for His Truths,
(though but Babes) such Wisdom, and Irresistible Power, that all the Wit,
Subtilty, and Learning, of their (not to say His) Adversaries shall never be
able to answer. His Strength is made manifest in Weakness. It will be but great
Weakness, To insult upon the Weakness of the Opponent, since this Case is
Christ's, who is Irresistibly Strong.

CHAP. XXXI. Some other Arguments, brought for the Proof of Witchcraft,
Answered.
SInce the sinishing of that above, I have with much ado, gotten another Book,
(Cited in the Former) called, Credulity, and Incredulity in Naturals* as the
Former was, In Spirituals, in Divine Things: wherein the Learned Author
prosecutes the Business of Witchcraft, directly, and at large; tanquam pro
focis, and aris; in which, indeed, I find much Reading, much Learning, much
Piety; but as much, or more, of Cr^dulity, than of all the rest. The Proofs for
the Author's Opinion are many Stories, and some few Reasons, but no Texts of
Scripture; at least, none that he dares trust unto. It were endless to go over
all, and needless too; since I have already answered the chief Substantial, and
Vital Parts of all his Reasons, Tales, and Texts. And yet, since the Author is
a Person whom I justly honor, for many Excellent Endowments; as his great
Learning, Piety, Loyalty, and Sincerity; I cannot choose (lest I should seem to
slight him) but say something to some of his Proposals. The first Story he
brings for the Proof of Witchcraft or Supernatural Operations by Devils, is
taken out of Boden. page 32, 33. Answ. 1. Boden, as I have showed, is a
Suspicious Author, as to this business; and our Learned man gives ground
enough, for the consirmation of this Suspicion, page 169, etc. 2. Men of
Bodin's Religion, have not been very dainty, in abstaining from such Witchcraft
as this is, viz. When they could not confute their Antagonists alive, to blaze
abroad, That at their Death, or a little before, they Recanted, forsooth. Thus
many Conscientious, and Invincible Protestants, that opposed their Superstition
till Death, have been scandaled, That at, in, or a little before Death, they
Apostitated unto Popery. They of the same Superstition, will not be backward,
To use the same Artifices, for the same Ends, etc. 3. The Physician might
himself (seeing Bodin so much bewitch't with that wild conceit of Witchcraft)
tell him this Story in a Jeer, to make him Ridiculous. Witty Knaves have used
such kind of waggeries. Did not John Pipin put such a trick upon his Friend,
Anthony Mizaldus, and many other Learned men of France? Credul. and Incredul.
in Naturals. page 175 But 4. I say, besides all this, if Spiraculum cellae may
be taken for the Breathing or puffing up of a Blast of Wind from the bottom of
the Cellar, (as, for ought I know, it may, I have not Bodins Book) then this
story is but mere Wind. But I must take the Story at the worst, at the second,
or peradventure at the third or fourth hand, as it is framed for the business:
The Relation speaks of Digging and Breaking of the Earth in a Fault, or
Cellar, where the Pretended Hobgoblins seemed to be most frequent, and
troublesome, (it is called, Haunting). Upon the Digging of the Earth, there was
a kind of Whirl-VVind, which ascending up from the bottom of the Cellar, put
out the Candles, battered down part of a Neighboring House, the Chimney, and
Porch of the same House; and (which is most notoriously considerable, as a part
of a Supernatural Operation by a Devil) brake a Stone-Pitcher, and a
VVater-Pot, which a Woman was then carrying. This is the Sum of the Story,
except a few Flowrishes to set out the Accident, as a thing miraculous, if
possible. But what need men go to a Devil, for the answering of all this? I
will not say, There is Contradiction in the Story; but it seems to clash with
it self: when the Woman carried her Water-Pot, through the Streets, it is
probable, 'twas Daylight; but yet it seems to be Night, when they were forced
to use Candlelight, in their Digging, etc. But I pass this, and say; Wind,
when pent up in some close Vault, Hole, Cave, or Cavern, under a Cellar, may,
nay must, make, ordinarily, some great noise, and cause Shaking (making the
Candles sometimes give a Tremulous ^ight) of the Earth, there-abouts, as is
most notoriously known in Earthquakes. But when the Wind in such Vaults
enclosed, gets it self a little vent once, it is hurried with an Impetuous
Force; over-turning all things, that stand in its way, until it get it self
into the open free Air. Where was the Miracle? Was it, That the House was
never haunted afterward, by Devils? Nor was it before. But, the Wind getting
out, the noise or sh^^ing of the Earth, or whatever else seemed troublesome,
vanished with a Powder: Or was this the Jest? The Devil could not get up out of
the bottom of the Cellar, until the ground was broken for him, to let him out.
Oh pitiful poor impotent Goblin! Had it been one of those Omnipotent Devils,
(our Demonologists dream of) it might have gotten out sooner, no doubt, if it
would, before the Digging; or after the Digging might have staid there still,
notwithstanding the Digging: And yet the Digging it was, it seems, that let the
Devil loose, from that Prison, where he was (whether he would or no)
irremediably confined, and damned; but that a bold Physician, upon the
confidence he had of a cheating Gypsy, ventered to digg there. But I wonder I
hear of no mischief that befell the Physician, the young Girl, Boy, or Jugler.
Devils, when Conjured, use not to march off, so innocently, but that they leave
some mark, or at least filthy stinch of Brimstone, on the Actors about him. But
truly it seems, This was a good honest grateful Devil (if Per-impossible a
Devil): One that was glad he was snapt, and therefore could not find in his
heart, to hurt his Deliverer, or any person that any way contributed to his
Deliverance. But as for the Chimn^y and Battellments, that hindered his Escape,
or obstructed his Passage, he ( I mean the Turbulent Wind, from the Concavity
of the Cellar) executed his Wrath upon them at full. And for the Nail of the
Boy, and the Girl, that was the Seer, it agrees well with that Stone, and
Mirror, which that Gypsy Kelly, in Doctor Dee, used to cheat Fools withal.
This is the full substance of the Story. Spectatum admissi risum, etc? It seems
to me to be a very ridiculous Winter-Tale; and such are, if well examined, all
the rest, that are brought by Demonologers, to fortify their Opinion.

The first Argument is, Consensus generis humani, or The Universal Consent of
Mankind (a large Word) for his Opinion. This is the great and grand Topic of
the Demonologists. But I have already, in another place, answered more than all
that, that is here said, amounts unto; by showing, first, That there never was
for some Thousand of Years any such Conceit, muchless general Consent of
mankind, nor ever since, for Witchcraft; nor, if there had been, was it a
sufficient Argument to prove the truth of the Opinion, by instancing in a
Foppery, that has as generally been received (and more) as this Opinion of
Witchcraft; and yet no Reality, or Truth, in the Figment at all. I shall add
another, That every man may be doubly provided, for the baffling of this
Objection, when ever they meet with it; An instance it is, of a thing (if any
such thing there be, or were) that came under the Dijudication of Sense, and
yet nothing but Fiction, and Cheat in it, though generally believed, as de
side: I mean the Miracles and Wonders that are, and have been, reported, to
have been done, at the Tombs, Dormitories, and Sepulchers; or before the
Shrines, Images, and Pictures of Saints, and Martyrs; or by their Relics, as
by the Arm, Leg, Foot, Head, Hand, small Finger, or little Toe, etc. by the
Nails, Hair, and such Excrements, etc. Yea, but the Cast Clouts, Tottered Rags,
and Old Shoos, of Saints. Oh! What Volumes? what Cart-loads? what Dung-hills of
Legends, to this purpose, and all for many hundred Years believed, all
Christendom over, which then (when these Miracles came in Vogue) was the
greatest and best inhabited part of the then known World; the most part of
Europe, Asia, and Africa, resounded with them, (and now yet tootaking in
America)? That Extent is not any way lessened. And all these obtruded upon, and
believed by, Christians, as unquestionable Truths, as true as Gospel, yea and
truer too. For, for these Things sake was the Gospel laid aside, the Reading of
it superseded, yea forbidden, and the Legends brought in, to be read in
Churches, and Preached out of the Pulpits, as more true, more edifying, and
more for the setting forth of God's Glory: And, which was more, Their Shrines,
Chapels, or Temples, so enriched with Gifts, Presents, and Oblations, That an
Ordinary King's Exchequer, could not countervail the Wealth of one of them: Nay
though the supposed Saint, were not, Majorum Gentium, but a Diminutive, indeed;
nay, but a Rebel, or a Traitor, as Thomas a Becket; whose Monument was so rich
in Jewels of Inestimable Value, That two great Chests were filled with the
Spoils thereof: So heavy, and so capacious, That no fewer than eight men were
needful to carry each of them out of the Church. Thus one records it: Another,
thus, There were no less than Twenty-six Wain-Loads of Gold, Silver, and
Pretious-stones found in it: And (which was Ten thousand times worse and more).
There were some times, an Hundred Thousand Worshippers, (upon the account of
the Miracles fained of him) attending at his Chapel: And yet none of these
Miracles true: no, none of them: no, not so much as One; though averred,
attested, and sworn, by many Reverend, Holy, and Religious Friars, Monks, and
other Shavelings, of unquestionable Sincerity, among the People; and therefore
generally believed. For, it is incredible, That the most Wise God, should
exsert the Power of His Omnipotency, for the advancing of the Honor of
Dead-men, of Wicked-men, of Abominable Reprobates, (some of them) so high; as
that their Skeletons, Dead-bones, and Excrements; their Chairs, and Chains, yea
their Cast-Clouts, Rotten Rags, and Old Shoos, should work such Miracles; when
he never honored the Persons, while alive, with any such Miraculous Power:
Especially, since these pretended Miracles, did in their very nature, and
tendency, tend directly to the bringing in of Superstition, Idolatry, and the
shameful undervaluing of the Miracles, and Wonders, wrought by the great God,
and His Blessed Son Jesus, as the very Pretense actually did. Now, that I may
extend the Credulity of this Dream, to as vast Limits, as any Demonologer can
extend the conceit of Witchcraft, I add, That all this infatuated conceit
concerning such Miracles, was but a mere Relickt, or Apish-imitation of Pagan
Dreams, and Heathenish Adorations, in respect to their ancient Heroes,
Demigods, or Demons Did they not all of them, as far as Paganism extended,
(and that was far enough) fancy and believe Miracles, and Wonders, to have been
done by those whom they accounted Heroic Persons, and had deify'd after Death,
for their Gallantries, Inventions, and Glorious Acts, done by them when alive?
Hence it is, That we hear of such strange Things done by Jupiter, Apollo, Mars,
Juno, Pallas, Hercules, Bacchus, Castor, Pollux, yea Romulus, and Apollonius.
In other Countries they had other Names, Terms, and Titles, for their
Devil-Gods; but the same Superstition, and besotted Credulity of believing
Miracles done by them, after their departure hence, to their own places. And
this, As at other places, often; So, at their Shrines, before their Images, or
Pictures, in their Temples, most frequently, where the Priests resided; who
were (indeed) the Persons, that did the Feats, and had Face and Knavery enough,
to venture upon the Juggle of a Miracle, That they might continue to receive the
Rich Presents, and Oblations, which made up Treasuries so hugely vast, as is
almost incredible, as appears by those huge Masses of Wealth, belonging to
Jupiter Hammon's, and Apollo's Temple at Delphos. Who was the Author, or first
Inventor of those Prodigious Romances, (but most Monstrous Fictions) it matters
not much; but when once such wild Figments were published abroad, concerning
one of their Idols, in one place; That he, or it, had done such and such Feats,
there was a general Entertainment, and Invention of the like monstrous Fables,
throughout the Pagan World. These also in this place must invent too some
strange things, in honor of their Idol, as well as others had of theirs in
another place. And thus it went round. Nay, the Mahometans too, (though but
Vpstarts, in respect of the former Superstitionists), sneakingly creeping into
the World, but of late, when one would have expected, That after the Detection
of so many Knaveries in this kind, throughout the World, everywhere, mankind
should have been grown w^ser; yet think this a notable politic Trick too, to
draw in Disciples to the entertainment of their Alchoran: And therefore they
report of great and strange Miracles done (and these must too be believed by
every Massulman, upon pain of some most fearful mischief) not only by Mahomet,
when alive, or at Mecca and Medina-Tal-naby (where his Tomb is said to hang
most miraculously to this day) but at other places also, many are now, yet
still, daily done by their Syets, and their other pretending Religionists; but
really Hypocritical Impostors. Now, put all this to^^ther; the Dreams of Turks,
Pagans, Christians, all of them in a sort, (except some few Protestants of
late, and some honest men of old) I might have added the modern Jews and
Persees too) concerning Miracles, pretended to be done by their dead Saints,
are, and have been so generally received, entertained, and believed, as a point
of Faith too; that it may be accounted Consensus humani generis, as well, at
least, as this Dream of Witchcrast, and better too: this being not half so
generally received as that. And yet as in that; so, in this nothing but
Fancies, Lies, Fables, Fictions, Delusions, Cheats, Impostures, etc. Nothing of
Truth; nothing of Reality; nothing of likelihood, in either of them. Truly,
these three, Purgatory, Witchcraft, and the Miracles done by Dead-men, (I mean
not any of those recorded in Scriptures, done by the intervention of the
Omnipotent, either mediately or immediately) and by their Images, Pictures,
Statutes, Skeletons, or Relics, may justly be yo^ked together, with the Fable
of the Phoenix's, rising again out of her own Ashes, when she has burned
herself; The Uninhabitableness of the middle Zone; The Suspension of Mahomet's
Tomb in the Air, by Gimmetry; The Congelation of Words in the Northern
Climate, to be Articulately heard again, in the next Thaw, at the return of the
Year; The Singing of Swans before their Death; The Melody of Sirenes; The
Mer-Maids half Fleshy Women, and half Fishy Serpents; with many many more such
Incredible Fictions: fitly to be placed in the nineteenth Predicament, among
Non-Entities, and Chymaera's; if not in the Twentyeth, among Impossibilities;
there being no Truth, or likelihood of Truth, in any of them.

The next Quibble (because it is such a pretty one) may not be omitted; It Is
this: Mr. Scot's Fore-name, (the Chief and First Anti-demonologist, of this
Nation at least) begins with R. [Reginald]; but there was a Learned Doctor's
Surname, that began with that same Letter too, [ Raynolds, forsooth]; who was
of a contrary Opinion to Reginald; (but sure never confuted him.) Frgo,
Reginald must be supposed a Sot, as well as a Scot. Oh gallant! as the
Wheel-Barrow goes ramble the Ramble; so Peter Sherk owes me Five shillings. To
that of Wind, Snow, Hail, Rain, etc: the Keepers, Sellers, and Stillers, of
these, with the Tales to that purpose, in the general; for the Substance, I
have said enough; no need of adding any more, here. And for Magical Statues,
made to conjure Mice, Rats, Serpents, Crocodiles, etc. I say, If any such
Effects (as are pretended) followed from such things (which I much doubt of)
attributed they must be, no doubt, to Natural Causes; since all the Statutes,
Palladiums, Tellesmans, and the like, are supposed to be made, by the art of
Astrology, which is a mere Natural Science. For, the Magical Seals, etc.
whereby men might be preserved Shot-free, and consequently Stick-free,
Cane-free, Spurn-free, Kick free: The Answer is ready; it is so Incredible a
conceit, that it needs no Answer; unless it be that we may grant, They have as
much Power to secure Men, as Agnus dei, Consecrated-Banners, Hallowed Swords,
have to procure Victory, and to make men invincible. But, for Josephus's Herb
Baaras, so excellent, forsooth, for the Dispossessing of Devils; though enough
has been said in another place, for the general: And though our Reverend
Opponent, himself, does answer this, his own Objection, in Particular,
sufficiently, page 76, 77: Yet, will I add a word or two more here: In the
Parish where I now live, there were, in my time, Seven Women in one Morning,
that were cured of their Hysterical Fits, merely by smelling to a Bottel of
Water, compounded by a Practitioner in Physic, for that Infirmity. In this
Disease, as also in the Epilepsie, it was supposed of old, That there was (...)
some Supernatural Operation, though now both be acknowledged merely Natural.
Now, if Josephus's Physician, by the Application of his Baaras, (which is
reckoned to be no other, than the single Piony; but acknowledged to be of
singular Virtue against the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness) did cure the
Disease; (as he that by his Bottle cured the Hysterical Women, or peradventure
did but avert the Paroxysm). What wonder in it? What more than Natural? And
though our Physicians do not, now, absolutely cure that Infirmity, by the
application (merely) of that Herb, whether Seed, Root, Leaf, yet reckon they it
of special Virtue, for that purpose. The Epileptical Fits may be stronger, or
the Piony not so excellent, for Virtue, in this, as in that Climate. But this
without doubt, if the Jewish Physician by his Baaras, or Piony, cured men of
the Epilepsie, or but stopped or averted the Violence of the Fit, it was but a
Natural means he used; and therefore, but a Natural Disease that was cured: No
Devil cast out, but only an Infirmity, removed, as in another place more sully.
I add but this, The Cure of the Epilepsie, by Baaras or Piony, was by Josephus,
and others at, before, and after, his time accounted, a Disp^ssessing of
Devils; But what was then or could be the Possessing of Devils, but the
Sickness of the Epilepsie, or some such kind of Disease? Imight have added,
That ^^osephus is suspected to be too large, some times, in the Commendations
of his own Countrymen, and of others also, to whom he bare any special
Assection: but this needs not here be added; enough has been said to take off
the utmost Venom, that can be imagined, in this Objection.

Our L^arned Opponent insists much upon Charms, for the Proof of Witchcraft;
and would needs prove by Tale upon Tale, That Charms, if they have any
Operation at all, must needs have it, from the Intervention and Assistance ^f
the Devil. Answ. 1. Yet he himself grants, That it has been an old and famous
Question, Whether there be not of, in, and by Charms themselves some
Operations? page 100: 2ly, he cites many Authors, Modern and Ancient; and among
the rest Galen too; whose Opinion he values very much; who ascribes Virtue to
them, page 100, 101, 102. 3ly. He allows of Natural and Speciphick Operations;
but then, That words should not sometimes, upon some things, especially living
and sensible Creatures; have some Specific Operations, is hard to say. 4. He
justifies the Truth of that Fable of Arion, and the Dolphin's Delight in
Music, and in the name Simones, or the Sound: But, Why then may not Beasts and
Birds, Catts, Ratts, Dogs, Serpents, etc. delight in some kind of Sounds,
Tones, Tunes, Whistling, etc. and yet detest, abominate, and run from others?
It might therefore be but a Natural Incantation, which John Young, and some
others might use: A mere Feat or Trick of Art, that they had gotten, To call
and calm, To stir up, and still again, To draw to, and fright from them,
Beasts,, Birds, and the like. It is an ungrounded word to say, 'Twas Diabolical
Magic. 5. I have showed That there might be sometimes, from some persons, upon
easy and impressible spirits, some Effects wrought by mere Words, and Natural
Charms. 6 I read of a kind of Bird, that is taken by Cringes, and Complements,
or certain poppet-Motions of the Body: at Schelling too in Holland, they
usually catch (as it is said) the Dog-Fish, by putting on of Beasts Skins, and
by leaping, capring, and dancing in them, to draw the Fish unto the Land, to
catch them: Why may not other Creatures be allured with tunes and tones, as
well as those Animals, with Antic postures and gestures. It is sufficiently
known, that some men have an Art of Faculty of taking Plovers, and other Birds,
by whistling such a tune. This draws the Birds into their Dangers: And he that
said, Fistula dulce canit voluerem dum decipit auceps, had some such meaning:
But if David by a Sweet Lesson upon his Harp could (as Demonologists conceive)
charm the Evil Spirit in Saul, into a quiet stilness, yea, Secession, etc. I
wonder, Why they should doubt, That a man by Art, upon observation of their
Natures, should work some kind of Effects, by Tunes, Tones, Singing, Whistling,
etc. upon inferior Creatures? Men may, without doubt, have a greater Power,
Command, or Art, to allure order or charm (if the Word may be allowed) Beasts,
or Birds, and Reptils, than men have to bewitch Devils, or Dispossess them,
with a fit of Music. Did not Sancho Pancha, Don Quixot's renowned Squire, by
his cunning Dexterity, of Braying like an Ass, set all the Assinicoes in the
Mountain a Braying too; and yet was Sancho, no doubt, an honest true Trojan;
never dived deep into the Mysteries of the Black Art, I dare warrant. 7. I may
add, That some times, though the Charms or simple Words, may have the credit;
yet may there some secret means (and those merely Natural) be closely and
imperceptibly used or applied; and so the Effect be attributed merely to the
Charm, when another and more proper means deserved the Commendation. And this
may be observable, not only in living Creatures, but inanimate also. Suppose
the head of a dart should stick so fast of cross in some Soldiers Bone, that
all the Chirurgions, with all their best Art and Skill could not without much
Danger and Torment to the Party, get it out: If now some Inferior Person or
Woman (never taken notice of, for any Chirurgical skill) under the pretense of
a Charm, (nothing preceptibly applied or used besides the Words) should in the
way of a Hocus pocus, having in his Sleeve a Magnet of excellent Operation, by
the virtue of it (so concealed) draw out the Iron, (as without doubt, is
naturally possible, yea and has been experimented in a similar case, as very
good and able Physicians publicly declare): It would seem somewhat wonderful
indeed; yet not at all be Diabolical. There are a thousand Secrets in Nature of
excellent use, and Operation; yet known but to a few, yea but to a very few,
persons, and those Comtemptible, for any other Art, or Science, or Excellency;
as those of Sympathy and Antipathy, occult Qualities, and specific Virtues,
who yet by Observation, Tradition, or Empiretical Way, have luckily gained the
Knowledge or Knack of using them. Must their use of things, in this kind, be
counted Witcherast, or Diabolical Operation, straight? We know but in part, yea
but a very little, even the wisest of men, of the most Obvious things, that are
before us; muchless the wonderful Effects of these occult and specific
Qualities, that are abstrusely locked up in the Secret Cabinets of Nature. It is
therefore high Presumption, and the limiting of Nature, yea even the God of
Nature, to the short scantling of our weak Apprehensions; to say, That no such
things, as seem wonderful to us, can be effected in a Natural way; because we
(forsooth) understand not the Reason. An able Physician told me this Story: A
Gentleman of London, being desperately sick, two of the ablest Physicians about
the Town were sent for, to advise, direct, and order him: Who finding the
Person (as they thought) in an Irremediable Condition, became exceeding angry,
asking Whether they thought them to be gods, that they had sent for them to
cure a dead-man? Presently stinging out of the Room, they would immediately be
gone; But being by much earnestness importuned, they consent at last to take
their Dinner, first: In the mean, a neighbour-Woman coming to visit the
Sickman, asked how he did, and what the Physicians said of him* which having
heard she felt his Pulse, viewed and observed him more narrowly, than at sirst:
and, Do the Physicians (quoth she) say that there is hope? Pray, entreat them
to view the Person once more. With much importunity they are at last won, to
give another Visit, or rather the last farewell. When coming up into the
Chamber, the Woman asked them again, their Opinion: They return, he was past
Cure; How! past Cure (quoth she)? I Will undertake to cure him my self; Withal,
set her Spectacles upon his Nose: Yea, I will cure him with this, without any
more trouble, or farther application. Then, they cried out, She was a Witch, a
Witch: Nay (quoth she) but. Are you not Dunces? Do you not perceive that the
Crisis is past, the strength of Nature has overcome the Malignity of the
Disease? No need of much Art, or Help: Nature it self will do the work, without
Art, though not with so much Ease and Speed. Which having heard, and examining
the Patient again, a little more narrowly, They subscribe to her Judgment; the
Success was answerable. Mere Ignaroes, (as they are accounted) may unty the
knot, sometimes, which the greatest Artists are puzzled at. I could instance
farther in one of the greatest Scholars, this last Age has known; who brake
his Heart (as we call it) with Grief, because a Mechanic had confuted him, in
a particular point of the Mathematics. Bernardus non videt omnia. This is
enough, in answer to all that which is said in the Treatise of Cred. and
Incred. Yet I cannot forbear to say, I honor the Author very much for his
Piety, Loyalty, great Learning, Modesty, etc. If any man could possibly have
bewitched me, unto the Belief of Witchcraft, this reverend Person of all others
was most likely to have done it. If he be offended at any thing that has been
said, I am sorry; But God grant he have not more cause of Sorrow, when at his
Appearance before the great Tribunal, he shall be challenged for equallizing
Beelzebub, the God of Flies, with the Great Jehovah, for most Stupend and
Miraculous Operations.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey.
Folio.
THe History of King John, King Henry the Second, and the most Illustrious K.
Edward the First; wherein the ancient Sovereign Dominion of the Kings of Great
Britain over all persons in all Causes, is asserted and vindicated: With an
exact History of the Popes intolerable Usurpation upon the Liberties of the
Kings and Subjects of England and Ireland. Collected out of the Ancient Records
in the Tower of London, by W. Prin, Esquire; of Lincoln's Inn, and Keeper of his
Majesty's Records in the Tower of London. A Description of the Four parts of
the world, taken from the Works of Monsieur Sanson, Geographer to the French
King; and other eminent Travelers and Authors; to which is added the
Commodities, Coyns, Weights and Measures of the chief places of Traffic in the
world; illustrated with variety of useful and delightful Maps and Figures. By
Richard Blome, Gent. Memotres of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings and Deaths of
those Excellent Personages that suffered for Allegiance to their Sovereign in
our late intestine Wars, from the year 1637, to 1666; with the Life and
Martyrdom of King Charles the First. By David Lloyd. The Exact Politician, or
Complete Statesan, etc. By Leonard Willan, Esquire. A Relation in form of a
Journal of the Voyage and Residence of King Charles the Second in Holland.
Mores hominum, the Manners of Men described in sixteen Satyrs, by Juvenal;
together with a large Comment, clearing the Author in every place wherein he
seemed obscure, out of the Laws and Customs of the Romans, and the Latin and
Greek Histories. By Sir Robert Stapleton, Knight. A Treatise of Justification.
By George Downham, Dr. of D. Fifty-one Sermons, Preached by the Reverend Dr.
Mark Frank, Master of Pembroke-Hill in Cambridg, Archdeacon of St. Albons,
etc. To which is added a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, Anno 1641. and then
commanded to be Printed by King Charles the First. Bentivolio and Urania. in six
Books. By Nathaniel Ingelo, D. D. The third Edition, wherein (...) the obscure
words throughout the Book are interpreted in the Margent, which makes this much
more delightful to read than the former. De Jure Uniformitatis Ecclesiasticae,
or three Books of the Rights belonging to an Uniformity in Churches, in which
the chief things of the Laws of Nature and Nations, and of the Divine Law
concerning the Consistency of the Ecclesiastical Estate with the Civil, are
unsolded by Hugh Davi^, Ll. B. late Fellow of New College in Oxon. An English,
French, Italian, Spanish Dictionary, by James Howel. Observations on Millitary
and Political Affairs, by the Honorable, George, Duke of Albemarle. The manner
of Exercising the Infantry, as it is now practiced in the Armies of his most
Christian Majesty.
Quarto.
A Letter from Dr. Robert Wild to his Friend, Mr. J. J. upon occasion of his
Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. Together with his Poetica
Licentia, and a friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist. The
Dutch Remonstrance concerning the Proceedings and Practices of John de Wit,
Pensionary, and Ruwaert Van Putten his Brother, with others of that Faction;
Translated out of Dutch. Index Biblicus: or, an Exact Concordance to the Holy
Bible, according to the last Translation, by John Jackson, Minister of the
Gospel at Moulsea in Surrey. The Christian-Mans-Calling: or a Treatise of
making Religion ones Business: wherein the Christian is directed to perform in
all Religious duties, Natural Actions, particular Vocations, Family directions;
and in his own Recreations, in all Relations, in all Conditions, in his
dealings with all men, in the choice of his Company, both of evil and good, in
solitude, on a weekday, from morning to night; in visiting the sick, and on a
dying-bed, by Geo. Swinnock. Mr. Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Joh.
Gospel-Remission; or a Treatise showing that true Blessedness consists in the
pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Buroughs. An Exposition of the Song of Solomon. By
James Durham, late Minister in Glasgow. The Real Christian: or a Treatise of
Effectual Calling; wherein the work of God in drawing the Soul to Christ, being
opened according to the Holy Scriptures; some things required by our late
Divines, as necessary to a right Preparation for Christ, and a true closing
with Christ, which have caused, and do still cause much trouble to some serious
Christians, and are with due respects to those worthy men brought to the
balance of the Sanctuary, there weighed, and accordingly judged: to which is
added a few words concerning Socinianism. By Giles Firmin, sometimes Minister
at Shalford in Essex. Mount Pisgab: or a Prospect of Heaven; being an
Exposition on the fourth Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the
Thessalonians. By Tho. Case, sometimes Student in Christ-Church, Oxon, and
Minister of the Gospel. The Virtue and Value of Baptism. By Za. Crofton. The
Quakers Spiritual Court proclaimed; Being an exact Narrative of a New high
Court of Justice; also sundry Errors and Corruptions amongst the Quakers, which
were never till now made known to the world. By Nath. Smith, who was conversant
among them fourteen Years. A Discourse of Prodigious abstinence. occasioned by
the twelve Months fasting of Martha Tailor, the faim'd Darby-shire Damsel;
proving, that without any Miracle the texture of Humane bodies may be so
altered, that Life may be long continued without the supplies of Meat and
Drink. By John Reynolds. A Grave for Controversies, between the Romanist and
the Protestant, lately presented to the French King. Jacksons Recantation, or
the Life and Death of a Notorious Highway man, wherein is truly discovered the
whole Mystery of that wicked and fatal profession of Padding on the Road. A
Sermon delivered at the Funeral of right Honorable Charles Earl of Warwick,
Sept. the 9th. 1673. by Anthony Walker, Rector of Fyfi^ld. The Retired man's
Meditations, or the Mystery and Power of Godliness, presenting to view the
riches and fullness of Christ's person as Mediator, or the Natural and Spiritual
man in their proper distinctions, etc. by Henry Vane, Knight.
Large Octavo.
A Sober enquiry into the nature, measure, and principle of Moral Virtue, its
distinction from Gospel Holiness, with reflections upon what occurs
disserviceable to Truth and Religion in this matter; in three late Books, viz.
Ecclesiastical Policy, Defense and Continuation, and Reproof to the Rehearsal
Transprosed: By R. Ferguson. A Collection of Sermons Preached at the Morning
Lecture in Southwark, and elsewhere: By N. Blakie. Gramatica Quadrilinguis; or
Brief Instructions for the French, Italian, Spanish, and English Tongues, with
Proverbs of each Language, fitted for those who desire to perfect themselves
therein: By J. Smith. M. A. The Works of Mr. James Janeway; Containing these 6
following Treatises; Heaven upon Earth, or the Best of Friends in the Worst of
Time. Death Unstung; a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Thomas Mosely, an
Apothecary, with a Narrative of his Life and Death; also the manner of Gods
dealing with him before and after his Conversion. A Sermon Preached at the
Funeral of Thomas Savage. Invisibles, Realities demonstrated in the Holy Life,
and Triumphant Death of Mr. John Janeway. The Saints Encouragement to Diligence
in Christ's Service, with Motives and Means to Christian Activity. Mr. Janeway's
last Legacy to his Friends, containing twenty-seaven famous instances of Gods
Providence in and about Sea-dangers and Deliverances, with the names of
several that were Eyewitnesses to many of them; whereunto is added a Sermon on
the same Subject. A Brief Exposition of the Epistles of St. Paul to the
Gallathians and Ephesians, by James Ferguson. The Life and Death of that
Excellent Minister of Christ, Mr. Joseph Allin. Also his Christian Letters,
full of spiritual instructions. Published by several Ministers. Memorials of
Gods Judgments, Spiritual and Temporal: or, Sermons to call to Remembrance. By
Nich Lockier, Minister of the Gospel. A Plat for Mariners, or the Seamans
Preacher; delivered in several Sermons unto Jonah's Voyage. By R. Ryther,
Preacher of Gods Word at Wappin. The Gentlewomans Companion; or, a Guide to the
Female Sex: containing Directions of Behavior, in all places, Companies,
Relations, and Conditions, from their Childhood down to Old age: With Letters
and Discourses upon all occasions. Whereunto is added a Guide for Cook-Maids,
Dairy-Maids, Chambermaids, and all others that go to Service: The whole being
an exact Rule for the Female Sex in general. The present State of Russia, in a
Letter to a Friend at London; Written by an Eminent Person, residing at the
Great Tzars Court at Mosco, for the space of Nine years: Illustrated with many
Copper Plates. The fulfilling of the Scriptures: or, an Essay showing the exact
Accomplishment of the word of God in his Works of Providence, Performed, and to
be performed; for confirming the Believers, and convincing the Atheists of
these present times: Containing in the end a few Rare Histories of the Works
and Servants of God, in the Church of Scotland. The Morning Seeker; showing the
benefit of being good betimes; with Directions to make sure work about early
Religion. By John Rither. A Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church-peace
and Unity; with the Occasions and Reasons of present Differences and Divisions
about things Sacred and Religious. By John Owen, D. D.
Small Octavo, and Twelves.
The Life and Death of Mr. Thom. Wilson, Minister of Maidstone, in the County
of Kent. Drawn up by Mr. George Swinnock. Hieragonisticon, or Corahs Doom;
being an Answer to two Letters of Inquiry into the Grounds and Occasions of the
Contempt of the Clergy and Religion. The Comparison of plato and Aristottle,
with the Opinions of the Fathers on their Doctrine, and some Christian
Reflections; together with Judgment on Alexander and Caesar, as also on Seneca,
Plutarch and Petronius, out of the French. Observations on the Poems of Homer
and Virgil: a Discourse representing the Excellency of those Works, and the
Perfection in general of all Heroic Actions, out of the French. Mysterium
Pietatis; or the Mystery of Godliness, wherein the Mysteries contained in the
Incarnation, Circumcision, wise Men, Passion, Resurrection, Assension of the
Son of God, and coming of the Holy Ghost, are unfolded and applied. By W.
Annand. Fellowship with God, or 28 Sermons on the first Epistle of John, chap.
first and Second. By Hugh Binning, late Minister in Scotland. A Token for
Children, being an exact account of the conversation, holy and exemplary lives
and joyful deaths of several young Children. By James Janeway. The
Mercury-Gallant, Containing many true and pleasant Relations of what passed at
Paris, from the first of January, 72. till the Kings Departure thence. An
Explanation, of the Assemblies shorter Catechism, wherein all the Answers are
taken abroad in, under Questions and Answers, the Truths explained, and proved
by Reason and Scripture; several Cases of Conscience resolved; some chief
Controversies in Religion stated, etc. By Tho. Vincent. The Experiences of
God's gracious declining; with Mrs. Elizabeth White, as they were written with
her own hand, and sound in her Closet after her decease. A serious Caution
against Impenitency, under Gods Correcting-Providences. By James Sharp. The
Christians great Interest: or the trial of a saving interest in Christ, with
the way how to attain it. By W. Guthry, late Minister in Scotland. The History
of Moderation; or the life, Death, and Resurrection of Moderation, together
with her Nativity, Country, Pedigree, Kindred, and Character, Friends, and also
her Enemies. A Guide to the true Religion: or, a Discourse directing to make a
wise choice of that Religion Men venture their Salvation upon. By John Clappam.
A most Comfortable and Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul. By W.
Cooper Bishop of Galloway. Justification only upon a satisfaction, or the
Necessity and Verity of the Satisfaction of Christ, as the alone grounds of
Remission of sin, asserted and opened against the Socinians. By R. Ferguson.
The Canons and Institutions of the Quakers, agreed upon at their General
Assembly, at their new Theater in Grace Church Street.) A Synopsis of
Quakerism: or, a Collection of the Fundamental Errors of the Quakers, By Tho.
Danson. Blood for blood; being a true Narrative of that late horrid murder
committed by Mary Cook upon her Child. By Nath. Partridge, with a Sermon on the
same occasion. Six several Treatises. By Nich. Lockier, Minister of the Gospel.
A Discourse written by Sir G. Downing the King of Great Brittain's Envoy
Extraordinary, to the States of the United Provinces: Vindicating his Royal
Master from the Insolences of a scandalous Libel, Printed under the Title of
[An Extract out of the Register of the States General of the United Provinces,
upon the Memorial of Sir Geo. Downing, Envoy, etc. [And delivered by the Agent
de Heyde for such, to several Public Ministers. Whereas no such Resolution was
ever communicated to the said Envoy, nor any answer returned at all by their
Lordships to the said Memorial. Whereunto is added a Relation of some Former
and Latter Proceedings of the Hollanders: By a meaner hand. The Assemblies
works in 12, with the large and smaller Catechisms. Scotch Psalms alone, or
with the Bible.
THese are to give Notice, That the Psalms of David in Meeter are newly
Translated, and Diligently Compared, with the Original Text and former
Translations, more smooth and agreeable to the Text than that of Tho.
Sternhold, John Hopkins, or any other Extant in English; and do run with such a
fluent Sweetness, that the Ministers whose Names are here under Subscribed,
have thought fit to Recommend it to all with whom they are Concerned; some of
them having used it already with great Comfort and Satisfaction: These Psalms
are to be sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry, at One
shilling Four pence Price.

John Owen, D. D. Tho. Manton, D. D. William Jenkyn. James Innes. Thomas
Watson. Thomas Lie. Matthew Poole. Jo. Milward. John Chester. George Cockayn.
Matthew Meade. Robert Franklin. Richard Mayo. Hen. Langley, D. D. Thomas
Doolittle. Thomas Vincent. Nathaniel Vincent. John Ryther. William Thompson.
Nicholas Blaky. Charles Morton. Edmund Callamy. William Carslake. James
Janeway, John Hicks. John Baker.

