AN ORATION Spoken in the GRAMMAR SCHOOL OF CHRIST'S-HOSPITAL: BEFORE The Right
Honorable the LORD MAYOR, the Right Worshipful the PRESIDENTS, the TREASURERS,
and the rest of the Worshipful GOVERNORS of the Hospitals of the Renowned City
of LONDON, Sept. 21. 1675.

London, Printed by William Godbid, 1675.

AN ORATION Spoken in the GRAMMAR SCHOOL OF CHRISTS-HOSPITAL.
Right Honorable, Right worshipful, And our most worthy Patrons,
IT was the custom among the Romans upon their solemn Festivals to complement
the Assembly with a florid Oration, and recite the worthy Acts, both of their
warlike Heroes and Noble Senators, the better to stir up others to emulate
their Virtues, and by their acquired Glory, to persuade them not to degenerate
from so worthy Ancestors.

A'nd truly this Septembers Festival deserves such a commemoration, wherein we
have the happiness to behold the pleasant Faces of You our Honored Patrons,
whose Worth and Merits call upon us for our best Elogiums and thankful
Retributions. We are the Sons of Charity, whose fruitful Womb, we hope, will
produce a constant succession of such, that shall testify their gratitude, and
pay their due Observance on their bended knees, to all that are the Authors of
their present being.

We come this day before You as your Debtors, not to discharge the Principal,
but to beg your acceptance of our poor Mite of Thankfulness, as your due
Interest. It is fit, that Orphans should, on such a day as this is, freely vent
their thanks to God, and this Renowned City, wherein most of us have drawn our
first breath, and found mercy in the day of our distress and sorrow.

But who is able to undertake so lofty a Subject, which requires a sublimer wit
and strain, than such a poor Orator as I am can attain to? Yet rather than
Londons Praise, and our Patrons Merits shall be concealed, I my self will
venture to blaze them forth, that the whole Kingdom may see them in their
native luster.

My Work (Right Honorable) is cut out before me parted into two Rivulets, viz.
to make this renowned and famous City the Subject of our praise, and boldly to
assert, That She surpasses all others in her Acts of well-disposed Charity.

All places almost abroad sound forth her worth and honor, and admire the
Splendor of her Magistrates, the Dignity of her Senators, the wealthy Coffers
of her Citizens; whilst at home we please our Eyes with the beholding her
goodly Symmetry of her Piles of Building, her Mannor-Houses, spacious Halls,
her Royal Byrse, her Courts of Judicature and goodly Temples, all raised, as we
see, out of heaps of Ashes, to the admiration of all Spectators.

You are (most pious Senators) Citizens of no mean City, one that is the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, and the best Emporeum in the World for Trade and
Commerce. A City that may above all others display her Banners, and set up to
public view the Trophies of her memorable Acts and glorious Achievements.

A goodly sight indeed! to see her like Jerusalem compact, and watered with dew
from above; while Love and Concord embrace each other, free by Divine Goodness
from the Injuries of Fate, and guarded by her wooden Castles, floating upon the
Ocean, at whose Ports both the Indies take it as a kindness, that they may
unlade their wealthy Traffic, and be admitted to a free Commerce.

But it is not my design to launch forth too far in the praise of Londons Glory
and deserved Grandeur, I leave that to the skill of those, that can by a
skilful Pencil pourtray its beauty and just splendor.

Give me leave, I beseech You, (Right Honorable) to applaud the Excellency of
her Acts of Charity, which indeed heightens her honor, and sets forth her
truest luster.

London is no Monopolist of her Wealth and Treasure, but like a free Emperess
has provided her pious Almoners, that scatter abroad her Largiaries with a
free hand to the poor and needy. It is a Noble Pattern that she strives to
imitate; and what our Royal Edward of blessed memory first designed, that does
Londons Heroes endeavor to complete, by consulting the Interest of the poor by
impotency, the poor by casualty, and the thriftless poor.

And in this London outvies all other Cities, in her equal distribution of her
liberal bounty.

No more need the Lazar lament his pain and smart in Londons streets, seeing
God has provided Balm in this our Gilead, to heal his wounds and alleviate his
pain and anguish. St. Bartholomew and St. Thomas freely set open their Gates,
to admit all Cripples and diseased persons: And these good Samaritans are ready
at all times to pour in Oil into their wounds, and bind them up with pity.

London has provided a salve for every sore, and a plainster large enough for
the greatest maladies. She has prepared a Bethesda; Charity is the Angel that
moves the waters, and makes them sanative to all that step in for cure.

Nor shall the Lunatic or raving Madman any longer affright us in the streets,
by their ghastly looks and discomposed language, and direful execrations. For
charitable London has provided a Bedlam to restore them to their senses. This
word Bedlam, me thinks, strikes terror to my senses, and the dismal tone and
accent of it fills me with horror. What heart indeed is so flinty, that is not
dissolved into tears, at the view of such spectacles of misery? It is your
Honor (Right Worshipful) that you condole their misfortune, and have consulted
of late a more convenient place for Air and room for their reception: Not a
Bedlam, but rather a Palace, for its beauty and splendor.

Vagrants, begone! and no more infest the Air of London with your noysom
breath. It is pity, that such a verminous brood should swarm and poison our
streets. If you appear any more, there is the Mittimus of the Justice, and the
compulsion of a Beadle, that shall conduct you to a Bridewell, where you shall
meet with the lash, and be taught the Lesson of Industry.

It troubles me (Worthy Sirs) that your Charity, which knows no other Aspect,
than of pleasing smiles, should be thus constrained to wrinkled frowns, by
making those idle packs to taste of the bitter potion of correction, that they
may prevent worser evils that attend them.

It is the praise of those that are under your Economy, that they apply
themselves to Industry, and pursue those Arts, that will in time gratify their
labor. That Morality and Sobriety which they have learned under your
discipline, will make them wise and prudent, while others, that are headstrong
and rebellious, justly reap the fruits of their folly, by smart and shame.

But I will leave these Patients to concoct their physic: Time perhaps, and
due inspection over their carriage, may at length perfect their cure.

Bravely have You done, (Most Noble Senators) that You have so freely espoused
the Cause of the poor, and pitied their misery. To your honor be it spoken,
that your zeal to God's Glory, and your love you bear to this famous City,
prompts you to be emulous, and to outvye each other in promoting Charity.

And now let the bold Atheist retract his error, and begin to admire a Deity,
whose power no one can confront with safety, nor equal His goodness. Let him
but observe the Series of Providence, and gracious supply, that is made for us
little Frey, who are present here this day, as lively monuments of His mercy,
and then he will be convinced, that there is a God that governs the world, and
sustains it by His power.

You are (Right Honorable and our Most Worthy Patrons) Gods Delegates and
faithful Trustees for poor Orphans, whose native bounty and goodness excites
you to Acts of mercy toward the Fatherless and distressed Widow, whose naked
backs are clothed, hungry bellies replenished, and supplied with all
necessaries, both for soul and body.

An Orphanotrophium indeed! wherein charitable London has showed her bounty to
the full, in furnishing us with those advantages, that may make us useful to
succeeding Ages.

Farewell our doubtful cares and pressing sorrows, which once overwhelmed us
like a mighty torrent. Our fears of want are prevented, and we seated in quiet
habitation, where your bounteous liberality bids us hope to better our
fortunes. Ah, that we were wise in improving our opportunities, that are handed
to us! We will through God's help set spurs to our diligence, that we may by
our good proficiency commend the care and faithfulness of our Worthy Tutors.
From our Souls we thank You (Most Worthy Patrons) that you have taken such care
for our education, that whatsoever Employment God shall dispose us unto, we may
so apply our selves, that we may excel in them.

As for us, we are Muses Soldiers, and Minerva's Attendants: Our Studies are
our Warfare, and in time we hope to prove good Combitants; seeing Your Worships
furnish us with all Accomplishments for use and benefit.

Yonder is our Armory (Thanks to that Noble Hand that lately founded and
completed it:) There have we Arms, offensive and defensive, to assail our
Opponents: I mean a Library, furnished in some measure with Books to
accommodate us in our Studies, where some of us are admiring Cicero's
Eloquence, and fitting our selves for Academical Studies; others conversing
with the Mathematics, that they may the better understand the Speculation of
the Heavenly Bodies, and survey the Globes of the World so accurately, that
they may traverse the Ocean, discourse of Countries and their several Climates.

But I fear (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and our Most Worthy Patrons)
lest while we are boasting of our warlike provision, we may meet with a sudden
Engagement, and thereby hinder the End of your Solemn Meeting. Let me, I
beseech you, sound a Parley, and I have done.

May all the Affluence of the milder Heavens be accumulated upon famous and
renowned London.

May Her Noble Senators, our Pious Patrons, and Worthy Citizens, be blessed with
Plenty, Peace, Health, and Safety.

Long live our Gracious Sovereign and Noble Queen, with all the Branches of the
Royal Stem.

Long may this Kingdom flourish, and be preserved from Civil Jars and Foreign
Invasions.

Benjamin Long, Orphan.

FINIS.

