THE Voyages and Travells OF THE AMBASSADORS Sent by FREDERICK DUKE of
HOLSTEIN, to the Great Duke of Muscovy, and the King of Persia. Begun in the
year M.DC.XXXIII. and finished in M.DC.XXXIX. Containing a Complete HISTORY OF
Muscovy, Tartary, Persia. And other adjacent COUNTRIES. With several Public
Transactions reaching near the Present Times; In VII. Books.

Whereto are added The TRAVELS of JOHN ALBERT de MANDELSLO, (a Gentleman
belonging to the Embassay) from PERSIA, into the East Indies. CONTAINING A
particular Description of INDOSTHAN, the MOGUL'S Empire, the ORIENTAL ISLANDS,
JAPAN, CHINA, etc. and the Revolutions which happened in those Countries,
within these few years. In III. Books.

The whole Work illustrated with diverse accurate Mapps, and Figures. Written
originally by ADAM OLEARIVS, Secretary to the Embassy. Faithfully rendered into
English, by JOHN DAVIES, of Kidwelly. The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, and Thomas Basset, at the Mitre near
Temple-Barr, and at the George near St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1669.

The Complete History of MUSCOUY TARTARY PERSIA and the East INDIES Translated
by I.D


To the Right Worshipful, The GOVERNOR and FELLOWSHIP of ENGLISH MERCHANTS,
for discovery of New Trades, in MUSCOVY, RUSSIA, etc.
Right Worshipful,
HAd these been the Travels of some private Person, I should have contented my
self with a personal Dedication thereof. But being the account of a Solemn
Embassy, sent to two of the greatest Princes of Europe and Asia, upon so
Public and Noble a Design as that of the Silk-Trade, carried on with vast
charge and many difficulties, for several years, the address of my Endeavors
herein is most properly due to that Body of Merchants, to whom the advancement
of our Trade into those Parts is particularly recommended. It is not unknown to
you, what opposition this Negotiation met withal from the several Parties
therein concerned; and consequently, you can best judge, what advantages may be
made thereof, in order to the Interest of this Nation.

The Travels of particular Persons have their benefit and delight; but those of
Ambassadors have this further recommendation, that they contain such
Discoveries, as having been made to Them, out of a deference to their Public
and Sacred Character, were not to be expected by any others, Traveling only
upon a Private Account. They were first published by Adam Olearius, a Person,
by his near Relation to the Embassy, (whereof he was Secretary) his Knowledge
of the Mathematics, but particularly his Acquaintance with the Languages of
the Countries, through which they Traveled, perfectly accomplished for a Work
of this Nature.

What he writ of these Travels in his own Language, the German, was so kindly
received, that it soon after Traveled into several others, which gave some
encouragement to the ^endring of them into English; the more seasonably at this
time, in as much as this Kingdom, especially this City, begins to disperse its
Industrious Inhabitants, and spreads the Wings of its Trade into the most
remote Cantons of the World. Which that it may do, till its Wealth at home, and
Honor abroad, be so highly improved, as that this Corner of the Universe may
give Laws to the Noblest parts thereof, shall be the constant and earnest wish
of,

Right Worshipful, Your most humbly devoted Servant, JOHN DAVIES.

TO THE READER
HISTORY has this advantage of Philosophy, that it instructs more
efficaciously; this, of Romance, that it is more divertive; inasmuch as
Examples make a deeper impression than Precepts, and Truth Instills into
rational minds a satisfaction, which they find not in Fables. But Travels have
this over and above, that they do both incomparably better than History. For
as, on one side, a man, reflecting on the Policy and Morality of diverse
Nations, deduces thence useful Lessons of Prudence, and delightfully surveys
the strange Circulations of humane Nature; so, on the other, he finds the
greater divertisement in the Relations, out of this regard, that he
participates of the Pleasure, which charms the Travelers, but not of the
hardships, hazards, and inconveniences wherewith they are attended.

The Travels into Muscovy and Persia, published by Adam Olearius, have been so
well received by such as were able to judge of the worth of that Piece, that I
dare presume, others will take it kindly, to find, in this Edition, what he had
promised the World in his first. The abode he had made at Moscou and Ispahan,
and the knowledge he had acquired of the Language of the Country, had, as he
affirmed then, brought him acquainted with the mysteries of their Religion; but
printing his Book in some have, he omitted many things, which he should
otherwise have inserted. He has since done it at leisure, so fully, that it
seems to be quite another Relation, in as much as, considering this Revision,
what is now published is both a more curious, and more complete Piece. They
will find that he has added thereto the Maps of LIVONIA, MVSCOVY, the
CASPIAN-SEA, PERSIA, and the INDIES, and, what may be justly accounted the
greatest curiosity, the Course of the Great River WOLGA, whereof there had been
little seen in these parts before, and without which, it were impossible to
track the Travellors through all those remote Countries. Besides which, there
is, in this Edition of ours, a Map of CHINA, and several other pieces of
Sculpture, for the further satisfaction and entertainment of the Reader.

There is no necessity of repeating here what the Preface of the first Edition
entertained the Reader withal, concerning the occasion of the Embassy, sent by
the Duke of Holstein into Muscovy and Persia; the endowments and worth of that
great Prince; the noble design he had framed to himself, for carrying on the
Silk-Trade by Land; the difficulties, or rather impossibilities, which happened
in the prosecution thereof; the insolent, rash, and extravagant carriage of the
Ambassador Brugman, his treacherous designs, and unfortunate end: But I cannot
forbear giving some account of the Illustrious John Albert de Mandelslo, the
Hero, of the Travels into the East Indies, which title I give him, in regard
there are in his Travels some miraculous adventures.

MANDELSLO, a Gentleman well born, had his Education at the Duke of Holstein's
Court, to whom he had been a Page. Hearing of an Embassy intended for Muscovy
and Persia, he would needs be one in it; and as if he were that Virtuous Man,
who looks upon the whole World as his Country, he would not depant, (...) he
had obtained his Prince's leave, to see the other parts of Asia. During his
abode at Ispahan, he got acquainted with some English Merchants, who, speaking
to him of the Indies, raised in him a desire to go thither. The King of Persia,
to engage his stay at his Court, proffers him a Pension of ten thousand Crowns;
he slights the favor of so great a Prince, gets on horseback, with no great
Sums about him, and sets forward on his Journey, with a retinue of three German
Servants, and one Persian, who was to be his Guide and Interpreter, but forsook
him, when he stood in most need of his service and assistance. It was also a
very strange Adventure, which made him find civil entertainment and hospitality
at Surat; made him subsist at the charge of others; conducted him by Land to
the Great Mogul's Court; brought him safely back again to Surat; preserved the
ship he was in after so many tempests near the Cape of Good-Hope; and
miraculously delivered him at his first arrival into England, when he was given
over for irrecoverably lost in the very haven, as may be seen near the end of
his Travels.

To these Mandelslo had a particular inclination, and knew so well how to make
his advantages thereof, that Olearius himself makes no difficulty to confess,
that he met with, in his Notes, many things, which might have been added to his
Relation, and have found a kind reception even among the more Curious, had he
been as forward to have his Travels published, as he had been to prosecute
them. But Mandelslo, instead of giving the world that satisfaction, and
continuing with his Friend, who might have furthered him in his design, left
the Court of Holstein, where he found not employment proportionable to his
merit, and betaking himself to another Profession, he got into a Regiment of
Horse, commanded by a German, who, purely by his Military accomplishments, had
raised himself to one of the greatest dignities of France. He had therein the
Command of a Troop, and, being a person of much courage, and endu'd with all
the qualities requisite to the making up of a great man, was likely to have
raised himself to a more than ordinary fortune, when coming to Paris to pass
away the Winter, he there died, of the small Pox.

Being at Surat, in December 1638. he made a kind of Will, concerning his
Papers, which he put before the beginning of his Relation, wherein he desired
his Friend Olearius, not to suffer it to be published, in regard he had not had
the leisure to digest it into order, or if he did, that he would rather regard
therein his reputation after his death, than the friendship they had mutually
promised one another, and faithfully improved, during the four years of their
joynt-Travels.

Mandelslo was no great Scholar, but could make a shift to understand a Latin
Author, which helped him much in the attaining of the Turkish Language, wherein
he came to a considerable perfection. His Friend taught him also the use of the
Astrolabe, so that he was able to take the Longitudes and Latitudes that are in
several places of his Book, and without which it had been impossible for him,
to be much skilled in Geography, which makes the most considerable part of this
kind of Relations.

Olearius has indeed been very much his Friend, not only in reforming and
refining his Style, which could not be very elegant in a person of his
Profession, but also in making several observations and additions thereto,
printing it in Folio, in a very fair character, and adorning it with several
pieces of Sculpture.

Olearius's kindness to his Friend, in enriching his Relation, with many
excellent remarks, taken out of Emanuel Osorio, Maffaeus, and the chief Voyages
of the Dutch, gave the French Translator thereof, A de VVicquefort, occasion to
augment the said Book with whatever he found excellent in all those, who have
given the best account of the East Indies. So that it is to him we are obliged
for the exact description of the Province of Guzuratta, the Kingdoms of Pegu,
and Siam, etc. the state of the affairs of Zeilon, Sumatra, Iava, the Molucca's
and Iapan, as also for the Religions of these people. So that there is, in this
Edition of ours, especially as to the Travels of Mandelslo, a third part more
than there is in the largest of the German Editions.

The Reader will find therein many things, which will happily seem incredible to
him, as, among others, he may happily be astonished at the wealth of a Governor
of Amadabah, and at that of a King of Indosthan, as also at the vast revenues
of the Provinces and Lords of China and Iapan; but, besides that there is
nothing of Romance in all this, and that there is no comparison to be made
between the wealth of Europe and that of Asia, there are many persons, in
France and England, that will justify our Relation, though it said much more
than it does.

I might here trouble the Reader with what I find in the Learned Isaac
Vossius's Observations upon Pomponius Mela (Lib. 3. c. 5. v. 16. concerning the
length and breadth of the Caspian Sea, wherein he differs from our Author, and
prefers the measure of it by our Countryman Ienkinson, before that of Olearius.
But I choose rather to referr the more critical to the place it self, and leave
them to satisfy their own curiosity, by conferring what is there said by
Vossius, with the account given by Olearius, of the said Sea, page 190, 191,
192. of this English Edition of the Travels.

I have only this to add that the French Translator, de Wicquefort, promises
the world (if it be not abroad already) a Piece of his own; which coming out
under the authentic name of History, will contain some thing beyond what may
be expected from a Relation.

A JOURNAL OF THE TRAVELS of the Ambassadors from the Duke of Holstein into
MUSCOVY, TARTARY, and PERSIA; Which may serve for a Table to this Relation.
THE FIRST VOYAGE. INTO MUSCOVY.
M.DC.XXXIII.
OCTOBER.
THe 22. the Ambassadors from the Duke of Holstein leave Gottorp; the occasion
of the Embassy; the names and qualities of the Ambassadors; their retinue. Page:
1.
NOVEMBER.
The 6. they leave Hamborough; where they took order for their Voyage; come the
next day to Lubeck, the 8. to Travemunde, where they embarked the 9. ibid The
10. they pass away near the Island of Bornholm, and anchor the 12. at Cap de
Domines, in Courland, the 18. come to Dunemunde. p. 2. The same day, come to
Riga; the Magistrates Present; Riga described, its foundation; is made an
Archbishopric; subject to Poland; taken by the Swedes; its Fortifications, and
Commerce. p. 3 The Ambassadors continue there near a month.
DECEMBER.
The 14. they leave Riga, and come the 18. to Wolmar, 3. days 18. l. the 20.
to the Castle of Ermes; the 21. to that of Halmet; the 22. to that of Ringen,
and the 23. to the City Torpat, or Derpt. p. 3 A description of Torpat, where
they pass over the Christmas holy days. ibid.
M.DC.XXXIV.
IANVARY.
The 3. (having left Torpat, the 29. of December), the Ambassadors came to
Narva. ibid. There they continue 5. months* JANUARY, FEBRUARY, MARCH, APRIL,
and MAY, during which, they send part of their Train, to Novogorod, and go
themselves to Revel, where the Swedish Ambassadors met them, in order to their
going together into Muscovy. p. 4
MAY.
The 15. leave Revel and return to Narva the 18. ibid. The 28. they leave
Narva; come to Gam-Fort, Kapurga; the civilities of the Muscovian Ladies; come
to Iohannestal, or St. John's Valley. p. 5
JUNE.
The 1. they come to the Neuschans, to the Lake Ladoga; to Noteborough. ibid.
Spiring, a Swedish Ambassador; the Swedish Ambassadors depart; a Suedish
resolution; the Muscovites sleep after dinner; the reception of the Swedish
Ambassadors. p. 6 A Muscovian Collation; the situation of Notebourg, its
description. ibid. Here they continue six weeks.
IVLY.
The Ambassadors come to Laba; their reception. ibid. Another Muscovian
Collation. The Ambassadors are defrayd all the time of their abode in Muscovy,
according to the custom, and they take their allowance in money p. 7 The Music
and dancing of Muscovy. ib. They embark upon the Wolgda (a distinct River from
the Wolga.) The devotion of the Muscovites. ibid. Wolgda described; a dangerous
fall of water; troublesome flies and other insects; the Presents of a Muscovian
Monk; the Muscovites do not condemn those of a contrary belief. p. 7. 8 The
come to Corodiza; to Soliza; to Grunza; to Wisoke; to Krifzeuiza: to Novogorod:
to Brunitz. p. 8
AUGVST.
The 1. a Muscovian Procession. ibid They come that day, to Crasmistansky; the
2 to Gam-Chresta; to Iazelbitza; to Simnagora; to Wolsolk; to Columna; and the
7. to Badeua. p. 9 The 8. come to Torsock, traveling in those eight days, 71.
leagues. ibid. The 9. come to Tuere, (upon a River of the same name, which
falls into the Wolga). The 13. to Nicholas-Nachinski; the 14. to MOSCOU. ibid.
There they stay above four months. Their reception, and entrance into Moscou.
p. 10 The 19. they have their first Audience; Their Cavalcade. p. 11 The
Presents made to the Great Duke. ib. The Ceremonies of the Audience. 13. The
Great Duke treats the Ambassadors. ibid. They are permitted to go abroad,
contrary to the ordinary custom of the Muscovites. p. 14
SEPTEMBER.
The 1. was celebrated the Muscovian Newyears-day. ibid. Their Epoche is the
Creation of the World. ibid. The Ambassadors of Holstein negotiate jointly with
those of Sweden, about the Silk-trade in Persia. ibid. The entrance of the
Tartarian Embassy. 15 The entrance of a Turkish Ambassador. 16 The Turkish
Ambassador's Presents. ibid. Those of certain Greeck Ecclesiastics. 17
OCTOBER.
A Muscovian Festival, celebrated Oct. ibid The Cavalcade of the Great Duke and
Duchess. ibid.
NOVEMBER.
The 19. the Ambassadors have their last private Audience; the Great Duke
grants them passage through the Country; Another Muscovian Procession. 18 A
Cavalcade of Crim-Tartars, 72. in number, all Ambassadors; Our last public
Audience. ibid. The Great Duke's Present to the Ambassadors. 19
THEIR RETURN toward HOLSTEIN.
The Ambassadors leave Moscou. ibid. Come December the 26. to Twere, the 20 to
Tarsock, and the 31. to Novogorod 120. leagues, in seven days. 20
M.DC.XXXV.
IANVARY.
1. Leave Novogorod, come the next day to Mokriza; the 2. to Tuerin, the 3. to
Orlin, the 4. to Zariza, and the 5. to Narva, 38. leag. and a half in 9. days.
ibid. 7. Leave Narva, and come to Revel the 10. ib. Here they staid near 3.
weeks.
FEBRVARY.
Leave Revel, Ian. 30. and come Feb. 2. to Parnau, taking their way by land,
along the Baltick-Sea, and so through Livonia, Curland, Prussia, Pomerania, and
Meklenbourg. The City of Parnau described. ibid. The Ambassadors come to Riga,
Febr. 6. and leave it the 12. and come to Mittau the 14. 21 Description of the
Duchy of Courland and the Prince now reigning there. ibid. The Ambassadors
come to Bador in Poland, 22 leagues in three days. ibid. Come the 19. to
Memel, in the Duchy of Prussia, 16. l. in 3. days. Memel described. ib. Leave
Memel, Febr. 20. and come the 21. to Koningsberg, the Metropolis of Prussia,
16. l 2. days. 22 Koningsberg described, where they see, among other things,
the Elector of Branderburg's Library. ibid. Leave Koningsberg, the 24. and
exchange the Sledges for Wagons, come to Elbing, and thence to Dantzick, 20.
leag. 3. days. ibid. There they continue 17. days. Dantzick described, its
situation, Magistrate, Privileges, Commerce, etc. ibid
MARCH.
The 16. they leave Dantzick, and come the 25. to Stetin, which described. 23
Come the 29. to Rostock, in the Duchy of Mecklenbourg. ibid. A description of
the City of Rostock and its University. ibid. Leave Rostock, the 30. and come
the same day, to Wismar, which described. ibid Mar. the last, come to the
Castle of Schonberg. ibid
APRIL.
The 1. Leave Schonberg, and come to Lubeck, which described. ibid Leave Lubeck
the 3. come the next day to Arnsbock, the 5. to Pretz, the 6. to Kiel, and the
same day to Gottorp. 24
THE SECOND VOYAGE into Muscovy and Persia.
M.DC.XXXV.
OCTOBER.
The Ambassadors having made their report, and augmented their Train, leave
Hamborough, Oct. 22. and come the 24. to Lubeck, 10. leagues. 25 Embark at
Travemunde, the 27. come the 29. near the Castle of Bornholm, touch against a
Rock the night following, land in the Island of Oeland, come to Calmer. 26 A
description of the Island of Gotland. 27 A description of the Island of Hogland,
against the Rocks whereof the Ship is split, but the men, goods and horses are
saved, the provisions are spoiled and lost, and the Embassy reduced to great
extremities in a desert Island. 28
NOVEMBER.
The 17. the Amb. leave Hogland, in two Fisher-boats, with much danger, and
land in Livonia, the 18. 29
DECEMBER.
The 2. they come to Ruel, the Metropolis of Esthonie, where they continue
three months. ibid A description of Livonia, its Frontiers, Lords, Fertility,
Inhabitants, Order of Knights, the manner of life of the Livonians, the
Ceremonies of their marriages, the Religion, Barbarism, and Superstition of the
Peasantry of those parts, their Nobility, the Government of Livonia. p. 30.
etc.
M.DC.XXXVI.
MARCH.
The 2. the Ambassadors leave Revel, and come the fifth to Narva, 17. l. 4.
days. 34 A description of Narva, its Commerce, Political Government, the
Castle of Juanogorod, A remarkable story of a mad Wolf and a Bear. 35 The 7.
they leave Narva, come the same day to Lilienhagen, the 8. to Sarits, the 9.
Orlin, and, the same day, thence to Tzuerin, 3. days 24. leagues, thence to
Dosan, thence to Mokriza, 8. l. ibid. A Pristaf meets them at Orlin, and
receives them in the Great Duke's name. 36 The 11. they came to Novogorod,
where they stay five days. ibid. A description of the said City, its situation
on the River Wolgda, its bigness, the cruelties exercised there by the Great
Dukes of Muscovy, the fabulous voyage of St. Anthony. 37 The 16. they leave
Novogorod, pass through Brunits, Miedna, Kressa, Iaselbitza, Simnagora,
Columna, Wisnawolloka, and Windra-Pussk, and came the 21. to Torsock, 59.
leagues 6. days. 38 The 22. they leave Torsock, pass through Troitzka Micdna,
and came the next day to Twere, 12. l. two days, There they embark upon the
Wolgda the 23. but the next day prosecute their journey by land, pass through
Garodna, Sawidowa, Saulka-spas, Klin, Beschick, and Zerkizowo, and come the 28.
to Nichola Darebna, 29. l. 6. days. ibid. The 29. they leave Nichola Darebna,
and the same day make their entrance into Moscou, where they stay three months
ibid
APRIL
Their Cavalcade and reception; their lodgings in the City of Moscou. 39 Their
allowance of provisions; their first public Audience; the Great Duke's
treatment of them; their first private Audience. ibid Their second private
Audience; the Muscovian Palm Sunday Procession; the Muscovian celebration of
Easter; Easter-eggs, and other Ceremonies. 40 The Amb* Brugman's private
Audience. ibid
MAY.
Several Audiences and Conferences of the Ambassadors. ibid.
JUNE.
The 1. was celebrated the birth day of the Prince of Moscovy; the Great
Dutchess's Cavalcade. 41 The Ambassadors last Audience; the Audience of the
Secretary of the Embassy. ib. They augment their Train; the entrance of
Ambassadors from Poland; the fierceness of a Polish Ambassador; the Great
Duk'es pass. ibid The Amb. leave Moscou; its description; situation; buildings;
quarters; the Great Duke's Palace, its markets, Monasteries; the great Bell;
its Churches and Chapels. p. 42 Muscovy described; the Provinces of Wolodimer,
and Smolensko. 45 Rhesan, Permie, Jugarie, Wiathka, Bielsk, Rschovie, Tuere,
Plescou, Siberie, Jaroslaf, Rosthou, Susdal, Dwina. 46 Archangel, Ustingha,
Vologda, Bielejezoro, Petzora, Obdory; the source of the Wolga. 47 The River
Boristhenes; that of Dwina; the air of Muscovy extremely cold in Winter and hot
in Summer. ibid. Its fertility, fruits, especially Melons; more fertile than
Livonia; the seed-time and harvest. 48 Boranez, what; flowers, asparagus,
venison and fowl; no Dear; furrs. 49 No Carps in Muscovy; mines, and iron
forges. ibid. The Samojedes, a different people from the Samogithes; their
habitations, manner of life, stature, clothing. 50 The error of certain
Geographers. 51 A description of Groenland. ibid The stature of the
Groenlanders. ibid. Their language, 53 Their clothing, and ordinary exercises.
54 They are Salvages; have no gold or silver; are Pagans. ibid. Whence it comes
that the Inhabitants of Septentrional-Countries are swarthy. 55 The stature of
the Muscovites. 56 They are great admirers of long beards* and great bellies.
ibid. The women paint; their dress. 56 The Muscovites constant to their own
fashion. ibid Their manner of life; they have an aversion for the Sciences,
whereof they know nothing, especially the Mathematics and Anatomy. 57 They are
naturally ingenious; liars, distrustful, and calumniators. 58 A pleasant story
of a woman who fasly accused her husband. 59 They are indiscreet, uncivil,
quarelsom, land insolent in their expressions. 60 Not addicted to any study;
shameless. 61 Drunkards. ibid. The women much given to drink. 62 Tobacco
forbidden among them: they are all Slaves to the Great Duke, as well strangers,
as such as live in Muscovy. ibid The Knez and Bojares keep many slaves, who
commit great disorders, both in City and Country. 63 They are good Soldiers. 64
The siege of Smolensko, in the year 1635. ib. Their hous-keeping; ordinary
food; Cavayer. 65 Hydromel, a kind of mead; how made. 66 The expenses of
persons of quality; the highest act of Muscovian civility. ibid. The Muscovites
sleep after dinner; their stoves and bathing-places. 67 Are long-lived; subject
to fornication, and brutality ibid. The ceremonies of their Marriages. ibid.
The nuptial bed; the ceremonies in the Church. 68 How the women live; their
divertisement; why the Muscovites bang their wives. 69 Divorce. 70 The
Government of Muscovy; the true signification of the word Czaar, or Zaar; his
Arms; the veneration the Muscovites have for their Prince; know not what
liberty is. 71 The Great Duke's absolute power; changes the Governors of
Provinces every three years. 72 The money of Muscovy; Muscovian Ambassadors; a
remarkable Present. 73 An abridgement of the History of Muscovy, from the
beginning of the last Century. 74 The tyranny of Juan Basilouits, commonly
called Johannes Basilius. ibid. The usurpation of Boris Gudenou. ibid. Foedor
Borissouits, his son, ejected. 75 A counterfeit Demetrius; the history of him,
and his end. ibid. John Basilouits Zuski, made Great Duke; a second counterfeit
Demetrius; a third Impostor. 76 The Muscovites choose Uladislaus, Prince of
Poland, Great Duke of Muscovy; are discontented with the Polanders; an
insurrection at Moscou. ibid. Michael Federouits chosen Great Duke; the story
of a counterfeit Zuski, his impostures, and death. 77 The ceremonies of the
Czaar's Coronation. 81 The story of the Great Duke's Favorits. 82 An
insurrection at Moscou, which costs the lives of some of the Favorites
creatures. 84 The Officers and Ministres of State of Moscovy. 87 Their expense;
they esteem Nobility. 88 The Great Duke's revenue; expense. ibid. His Table,
Physicians, Interpreters, Privy Council. 90 Their administration of Justice. 91
Their ordinary punishments. 92 The Religion of the Muscovites. 93 The
Characters of the Muscovian language. 95 Their Baptism. ibid Their Chaldeens.
96 Their Proselites. 97 The admirable constancy of an English Gentlewoman. 98
Their Festivals. ibid Their Divine service. 99 Their corruptions of the stories
of the Bible, particularly that of Mary Magdalen. ibid Their Images. 100 Their
Churches, bells. 102 Their Hierarchy. 103 Their Patriarch, and Archbishops.
ibid. Their Prelates marry not; their Monks; the habits of Ecclesiastics. 104
Their Priests are obliged to marry; their Monasteries. ibid. Their Fasts,
Confession, and Communion. 105 Their Interrments. 106 They tolerate all
Religions, but Roman Catholics. 107
THE TRAVELS of the AMBASSADORS from MUSCOVY into Tartary and Persia.
M.DC.XXXVI.
JUNE.
The 30. the Ambassadors leave Moscou, in order to their departure for Persia;
embark upon the River Mosca, so to go by that of the Wolga, to Astrachan. 109
IVLY.
The 2. they come to Columna, 24. l. ibid Within three quarters of a league of
Columna, the Mosca falls into the Occa, ibid The 4. they come to the City of
Pereslas, 22. l. 110 Leave Pereslas the 4. and pass in sight of Rhesan. ibid.
The 7. they come to the little City of Cassinogorod, in Tartary, where they
sent to complement a Tartar-Prince, subject to the Duke of Muscovy, 25. l. 3.
days. ibid. The 8. they come to Moruma, the greatest City of the Tartars of
Mordwa, 22. leagues, 2. days. 111 The 10. they leave Moruma, and come the next
day to the great City of Nise or Nisenovogorod, at the meeting of the Occa, and
the Wolga. ibid. They continue 3. weeks before the City, till the ship was
finished, for their sailing along the Wolga. and the Caspian Sea. ibid A
description of the City of Nise; the Weywode's magnific^nce. ibid From Moscou
to Nise, there are 100. leagues by land, and 150. by water. ibid The River
WOLGA; its breadth; is one of the greatest Rivers in the World, there being
from its source to its mouth, above fifteen hundred French leagues; it is very
full of Sandbanks. 112
AUGUST.
The 4. the Ambassadors settle their Guard, to prevent what danger they might
fear from the Cosaques. ibid. The 5. they come before the City of Basiligorod,
which described. 113 The Tartars called the Ceremisses; their habitations,
their Religion; their belief concerning the immortality of the Soul; their
superstitions, sacrifices; Polygamy lawful among them; the clothing of the men
and Women. ibid. The 6. they come to Kusmademianski, 8. l. 2. days. 114 The 8.
to Sabackzar, 8. l. 1. day. 115 The 9. to Kocks-chaga, 5. leagues 1. day. ibid
The 13. to Suiatzki; and the same day opposite to Casan, where they find a
Caravan, conducting a Tartar-Prince, and a Factor of the King of Persia's. ibid
The description of Casan, its situation, buildings, Castle; how the Province
(of the same name) conquered by the Muscovites, which occasions a pleasant
diversion; the exemplary fidelity of a Weywode; the Great Duke forced out of
Muscovy; takes the City of Casan by storm. ibid. Melons of extraordinary
bigness. 116 The 15. they leave Casan, come the 17. to the mouth of the River
Kama, which falls into the Wolga on the left hand, 12. leagues from Casan. 117
The Island of Sokol. ibid The 18. they come to the River Serdick, and afterward
to that of Vtka, and see as they pass by the City of Tetus 25. leag. from
Casan. 118 The 19. they pass before the Island Staritzo, which is three leagues
in length. ibid The fishing of the Muscovites and Tartars. ibid Botenska Island;
the Cape of Polibno; the River Beitma; and several Cities ruined by Tamerlane.
ibid The mountain Arbeuchin. ibid The River Adrobe; the Salt-mountain; the
River Vssa; the mountain Divisagora. ibid Iabla-neu-quas, or the Cider-valley.
ibid The mountain Sariol-Kurgan, and that of Savobie. 119 S. Nicholas's red
Snakes. ibid The 28. betimes in the morning, they come to the City of Samara,
60. l. from Casan, upon the River of the same name, within two wersles of the
Wolga. ibid The same day, they come to the, mountain of the Cosaques, and
opposite to the fall of the River Ascola. 120 The River Pantzina; the Island of
Zagcrinsko. ibid The 30. to the River Zagra; the Island of Sosnon, and the
mountain Tichi. ibid The 31. to the Island Osino, and that of Schismamago, to
that of Koltof; the mountain of Smiowa, and the 40. Islands. ibid The fabulous
metamorphosis of a Dragon killed by a Hero. ibid.
SEPTEMBER.
The 1. they come to the City of Soratof, which lies upon a branch of the
Wolga, 70. leagues from Samara. 121 The 2. pass by the Islands Kri^sna, and
Sapunofka, and come to the mountain Achmats-Kigori, 10. l. from Soratof. ibid
4. leagues lower, to the Island Solotoi, and the mountain Solottogori, or the
Golden mountain; that of Craye; the mountain of Pillars; the River Ruslana; the
mountain Vrakofskarul, 30. l. from Soratof; the mountain Kamuschinka, and River
of the same name. ibid. At this place, the Don or Tanais, is within 7. leag. of
the Wolga. Visits from the chief Persons of the Caravan. 122 The River
Bolloclea, 18. l. from Kamuschinka: The first branch of the Wolga. 123 The 6.
they come to Zariza, 70. l. from Soratof, on the right side of the River. ibid
Thence to Astrachan there are only barren lands and heaths. The Island
Zerpinske, behind which there falls a River into the Wolga, whereby there might
be a communication with the Don. ibid The 7. they come to the Island and
mountain Nassonofsko. 124 Tziberika, a Fish of a rare figure. ibid The 8. to
the Cape Popowizka jurka, 14. l. from Zariza, and the mountain Kamnagar, 8 l*
lower; the Island and River Wesowoi, and that of Wolodinarski-Vtzga,
Achtobenisna. Vtsga* a second branch of the Wolga; the Island Ossino; an
extraordinary kind of Liquorice. ibid. The 9. to the little City Tzornogar, 40.
l. from Zariza; its original, ibid Carps weiging 30. pound, Sandates, etc. 168
The 10. leave Tzornogar, come to the mountain Polowon, and the Island Kissar.
125 The 3. and 4. branches of the Wolga; the Islands of Coppono and Katarniski.
ibid The Island Peruski; the 5. branch of the Wolga; the excellent fruits of
Nagaia; Cormorants; the 6. and 7. branches of the Wolga. ibid The 15. the
Ambassadors (having passed by the Islands, Itziburki, and Basan, and the River
Biltzick,) come to Astrachan. ibid The 7. branch of the Wolga makes the Island
Dolgoi, in which Astrachan lies. From Moscou to Astrachan there are above six
hundred German leagues. A description of Astrachan where they stay near a
month. 126 A description of Nagaia; the Island of Dolgoi; the Salt Pits. 127
Astrachan, 12. l. from the Caspian Sea; the fruits of Nagaia. ibid Its
Inhabitants; Nagaia, when conquered by the Muscovites; the greatness of the
City, its Structures, Ammunition, Garrisons, Governors; the Tartars not
permitted to come into it; their manner of life, and clothing, wars with the
Kalmukes, and Tartars of Buchar. 128 Their Princes, Religion, food. 129 The
Ambassadors visited by the Persians who came along with the Caravan. ibid The
Cuptzi's Present; a visit of the Tartar-Prince, and his reception. ibid The
Cuptzi's visit; the Weywode's Present to the Ambassadors; the Ambass. visit to
the Tartar-Prince. 130 The Cuptzi's Feast. 131 The Tartars much addicted to
Hawking; the treatment of another Persian Merchant; Brugman's imprudence; the
visit of another Tartar-Prince. 132 The Weywode's Present. ibid
OCTOBER.
The 1. the Secretary sent to the Weywode; Provision made for the continuation
of the Voyage. ibid The 10. the Amb. leave Astrachan, and embark upon the
Wolga; Simples of extraordinary bigness near Astrachan. 133 The 12. come to
Tomanoigor, or the Snaky mountain. ibid Many Islands at the mouth of the River;
the Sepulcher of a Tartar-Saint; the Sacrifices of the Tarters; dog-fishes;
several sorts of Birds. ibid The 15. come to the mouth of the Wolga, and to the
entrance of the Caspian Sea, where it is very troublesome sailing. 134 A
Muscovian Slurr^; the civility of a Persian Pilot; an ominous day. 135
NOVEMBER.
The 1. they come before the City of Terki in Circassia, having sailed but 60.
l. in 16. days; the situation of Terki, upon the River Timenski; its
fortifications, Garrison. ibid The Cuptzi's Present to the Ambassadors; a
mutiny in the ship; an Eunuch, belonging to the King of Persia, visits the
Ambassadors; their Present to the Weywode. 136 Their message to the
Tartar-Prince, his house; his reception of those sent to him; a collation; the
curiosity of the Tartar-Ladies. 137 The Princess's Present to the Ambass. The
Tartars inclined to theft. ibid The Weywode's Present. ibid Nov. 10. the
Ambassadors leave Terki; An Island in the Caspian Sea. 138 A description of the
Island Tzetlan, by the Persians called Tzenzeni. ibid Come in the sight of the
mountain Salatto, which is the Caucasus of the Autients, in Mengrelia, or
Colchis; mount Ararat. 139 Are forced by a tempest upon the Coasts of Persia.
ibid The Ambass. dis-embark, with part of their retinue. 140 The Ship run a
ground. 141 A description of the Caspian Sea; its names; It is a particular
Sea, having no communication with any other. 142 Above a hundred Rivers fall
into it, yet is it not known what becomes of them. ibid The length and breadth
of it, contrary to the common opinion of Geographers; its water is salt; Q.
Curtius's error; the Caspian Sea not known to the Ancients. 143 It neither ebbs
nor flows; has few Havens; its fish and fishing. ibid A description of the
Province of Shriwan, which is the ancient Media. 145 A description of Persia;
its etymology, greatness, frontiers, Provinces; the Province of Erak. ibid
Fars, Schirwan, Iran, Aderbeitzan. 146 Kilan, Mesanderan, Labetzan, Rescht,
Kesker, 147 Chorasan, Sablustan, Sitzistan, Kirman, 148 Chasistan, Tzifire, or
Diarbeck. 149 A particular description of the Province of Shirwan. ibid The
houses of Persia; the Governor of Derbent'ss Present to the Ambassadors; which
is refused through Brugman's uncivility. 150 A Mehemandar, sent to the
Ambassadors, to conduct them through the Country. ibid The Cuptzi comes to
Niasabath. ibid The Tartar-Prince of Dagestan visits the Ambassadors; Brugman's
indiscretion. 151
DECEMBER.
The 22. the Ambassadors leave Niasabath, by land, and lodge at the Village of
Mordou; its Inhabitants, a people called Padars. 152 Caravansera, what it
signifies; the mountain Barmach, described; ruins of the Fortresses anciently
called Portae Caspiae; the opinions of the Persians, concerning the said
Fortresses. ibid The 26. leave Barmach, and come the next day to Pyrmaraas a
place famous for the Sepulcher of a Persian Saint; A description of it, as also
that of another. 153 An error of I. Caemerarius, Varro and Ammianus
Marcellinus. ibid Shells in mountains far from Sea; false Miracles wrought by
the Persian Saint; the superstition of the Persians; 154 The 30. come to
Scamachie. ibid The ceremonies of their reception there; the kindred of Aly
distinguished by their habit, the Chan's retinue. 155 The Music of the
Persians; the Chan treats the Ambassadors; the services of the Feast; the
Napkins. ibid The cleanliness of the Persians; the Chan an excellent Marks-man;
One of the company, a Persian, kills himself with drinking Aquavitae; the
Chan's present to the Ambassadors. 156 We continued at Scamachie three months.
M.DC.XXXIII.
IANVARY.
Ths enterment of the foresaid Persian Gentleman; the Ceremonies of the
Armenians consecrating of the Water, on Twelf-day. 157 The Calenter's Feast;
the Ambassadors Present to the Chan; the Governor permits the Armenians to
build a Church. 158 The Schach's orders for the Ambassadors. 159 The 28. the
Muscovian Envoy leaves Scamachie. ibid
FEBRVARY.
A College for the instruction of Children. 160 What taught in the said
College; Another School; the Persians have Euclid; and make use of the
Astrolabe ibid The Prior of a Monastery of Augustine Friars, at Tiflis, visits
the Ambass. 161 A Feast in memory of Aly; a Persian Priest pleasantly dressed;
a Procession after Sermon. ibid The 14. ended the Persian Lent, which began
Jan. 16. the Amb. treated by the Chan; hunting with a tame Leopard. 162
MARCH.
The 1. the Persians celebrate a Feast; their New-years-day; their Epoche;
their year consists of 12. Lunar months. 163 The Chan makes his last visit to
the Ambass. their Persian Intepreter turns Renegado. 164 The 24. the Chan sent
his New-years-gift to the King; the Ambassadors reimburs'd their expense. ibid
A description of Scamachie. 165 Its name and situation; is the Metropolis of
Media Atropatia* its Founder, Streets, Houses, Inhabitants, Commerce,
Marketplace, Caravanseras. ibid Its Hamams, or public stoves; the Chan's
charge; a character of the Chan and Calenter. 166 A ruined Fortress, named
Kolekulesthan; two sepulchers of Saints; the tomb of a Princess of Persia. ibid
The perpetual fire of the Persians, kept in the mountain of Elbours. 167 The
18. the Ambassadors leave Scamachie; the Sepulcher of a Persian Saint. ibid The
30. come to Kasilu; the 31. to Tzavat; the conjunction of Cyrus and Arares. 168
APRIL
The 2. the Ambass. cross the River Cyrus, by a bridge of Boats; change their
Mehemandar; a kind of Deer not known in Europe. ibid The torrent of Balharu;
Tortoises, how they hatch their eggs; the Inhabitants thereabouts; Tartarian
hutts. 169 Ill weather; a venomous herb; the Schach sends another Mehemandar to
meet the Ambassadors. ibid The mountain Tzizetlu. ibid The 10. of April the
Ambassadors make their entrance into Ardchil, having traveled 45 leagues in
12. days. 170 They continue there two months. The ceremonies of their
entrance; the Chan and Calenter of the City; their names and qualities; the
Chan's Collation. ibid The Chan's house described; the veneration the Persians
have for their Prince; Thaberick, what; Is served without wine; the allowance
of the Ambass. during their stay at Ardebil. 171 The Governor's visit; that of
an Armenian Bishop; Christian Churches in Persia; the Kurban, or sacrifice of
the Persians. ibid The Pilgrimage of the Turks and Persians to Meca. 172 The
fabulous story of the sacrifice of Abraham. 173 Prayers for the Dead; the Chan
treats the Ambassadors, and acquaints them with the violent death of the Grand
Seignior. 174
MAY.
The 4. the Chancellor of Persia's son visits the Ambass. ibid The 14. a
particular Feast kept only by the Persians. ibid A strange kind of devotion; a
false Miracle; the last Ceremonies of the Festival. 175 Persian Poets;
Fireworks. ibid The enterrment of Hossein represented; a bloody devotion. 176
A description of Ardebil; its situation, air, and soil. ibid Its streets;
marketplace; the sepulcher of Schich-Sefi; its Metzids of Mosqueis, 177 The
Ambassadors visit Schich-Sefi's sepulcher; lay down their Arms at the entrance
of it. 178 Laics not permitted to approach the sepulcher; its miraculous
Vault; the Library belonging to it. 179 The Kitchen; the charity of the place;
the sepulchers of the Kings of Persia. Commissaries for the reception of the
profits belonging to the sepulcher. 181 The Insolence of a Favorite punished.
ibid Another Saint's sepulcher. 182 The tomh described; the Governor of Arbil
administors an Oath to the Religious Men belonging to the sepulcher; Medicinal
waters. ibid Sulphurous sources; Springs of hot water; the wholesomness
whereof discovered by the Serpents; the pool of Scherkol. ibid The Ambassadors
Presents to the Chan. ibid
JUNE.
The 1. there came another Mehemandar from the King, 183 The 12. the
Ambassadors leave Ardcbil; the Chan takes leave of them; the Province of
Chalcal; the corruption of the Persian Officer; strange Grass-hoppers. ibid
Kisilosein; the Mehemandar's complaint; the Ambassadors come to Kcintze; to
Kamahl. 184 The Persians set upon the Ambassadors Guard; they come to the City
of Senkan; a Gentleman on horseback who had neither hands nor feet; Senkan,
destroyed by Tamcrlane; 30. leagues, in seven days. 185 A branch of the mount
Taurus. ibid The 21* they come to Sulthania; 6. l. one day; its description;
built by Chodabende. 186 There they stay three days. A paraphrase of the
Alchoran; the superstition of the Persians; Artillery; a Mosquey founded by
Schach Ismael. ibid Tamerlan's respect for the Mosquies; the Persian Ladies
travel in great Chests. 187 The 27. the Ambassadors come to Caswin. 188 The
Situation, Inhabitants, Language; is the ancient Residence of the Kings of
Persia. ib. Its Palace, Marketplaces; Turqueses and Rubies very cheap there;
Turqueses and Rubies very cheap there; the Sepulcher of Hossein's son; Its
Caravanseras. ibid The fabulous story of Locman; Risa, a false Prophet; the
History of the Indian-Prince. 189 Schach-Tamas's evasion; the Ambassadors send
to visit the Indian-Prince. 190
IVLY.
The 2. the Chan gives the Ambassadors a divertisement, the error of the
Ancients concerning the Elephant; the mountain of Elwend. 191 A pleasant story.
ibid
IVLY.
The 13. the Ambassadors leave Caswin, and come the 17. to Saba, 20. l. four
days; the situation of Saba. 192 Leave Saba the same day, and come the 19. to
Kom, 11. leagues in two days. 163 Their entrance into Kom, its situation; it
is the Guriana of Prolomey; Its fruits, traffic, and Inhabitants. ibid The 21.
they leave Kom; and come the 24. before day to the City of Kaschan, 18. l. in
three days. 194 Their entrance into Kaschan; the Daruga's advancement. ibid
Its situation; the house with a thousand doors; Its public structures; its
soil and fruits. ibid Venomous Creatures; the remedy against the stinging of
Scorpions; the Author stung by one; another venomous insect, its venom and the
operation of it; the remedy. 195 The Fable of Schutza Adin; Hassan Kalchi an
Arabian Author; Elmacini, another. 196 The 26. they leave Kaschan, and come the
28. to the little City of Natens, 12. leag. 2. days. ibid They Travel on the
29. and having got ten leagues in six days, come to Ispahan the 3. of 197
AUGUST.
The Ambassadors continue at Ispahan above four months and a half. ibid Their
entrance into Ispahan; they are ledg'd in that quarter of the Suburbs, where
the Armenians live, and visited by the Dutch Factor, of the East-Indy Company.
ibid A quarrel with the Indian Ambassadors domestics, which occasioned an
engagement wherein many were killed on both sides. ibid The King interposes his
Authority. 199 The Indian Ambassador dismissed; his abode at Ispahan; his
Presents; the occasion of his Embassy, ibid The Ambassadors change their
quarters; which they fortify against the Indians, have their charges defraid by
the King; their allowance. 200 They go into Mulcovian Habits: their first
Audience; the Presents made in the Prince his name: the Presents from the
Ambassadors themselves: the Persians observe no order in their ceremonies. 201
The Reception of the Ambassadors, the Hall for Audience, silver pails to water
Horses; the King's person, age, aspect, stature, dress, retinue. ibid The
particulars of their Audience; they dine with the King. 202 The gold-plate,
Schiras-wine: the Carver; the manner of sitting at meat, silence at meals,
Music. 203 Their first private Audience, at which the King is in person. 204
The 28. of Aug. the Ambassadors are treated by the Augustine Friars, at their
Monastery ibid.
SEPTEMBER.
The Ambassadors highly treated by the Armenians. 205 Porcelane-Musick, de
magnificence of an Armenian Lord. ibid The 19. the Ambass. have their second
private Audience, they are treated by the English Merchants, Indian
Dancing-Women, their dress. 206 The Ambass. are treated by the French
Merchants. ibid
OCTOBER.
The 1. the Ambassadors make a Feast, running at the Ring; the scuandalous life
of one of the Ambassadors. 207 Ceremonies of Marriage among the Armenians;
their Communion. ibid The Baptism of the Armenians; the Tragical history of a
Clock-maker. 208 His execution, his barial; the King takes the Ambassadors
along with him a-hunting. 209 An Astrologer; Crane-hunting; Duck-and wild Goose
hunting. 210 Leo pards; a Persian Lord turns executioner. ib. Wild-Ass-flesh
esteemed in Persia; Present from one of the Ambassadors to the King. 211
Pidgeon hunting; the King carries the Ladies of the Court a-hunting; his
liberality in his debauches. 212
NOVEMBER.
The 19. the Chancellor treats the Ambassadors; a Hall set all about with
Looking-glasses; the Persian treatments have all diversions. ibid A character
of the Chancellor; his Fortunes and Advancement; the same of an Armenian Lord;
a second conference with the Chancellor; the visit of two Armenian Lords. 213
DECEMBER.
The King's Presents to the Ambassadors; their last treatment at Court; the
Chancellor's Present to the King; the Ambass. take leave; the Muscovian
Possanick dimiss'd. 214 The Presents from some Persian Lords to the
Ambassadors; Brugman's imprudence; one of the Gentlemen of the retinue takes
Sanctuary. 215 Brugman's insolence, the King's patience. ibid A description of
Ispahan, the Metropolis of Persia. 217 Its greatness; the River Senderut. 218
Ispahan destroyed by Tamerlane; its gardens; its fountains. ibid The houses,
stoves, streets; the Maidan or Marketplace. 219 The King's Palace; his Guard,
and the several appartments. 220 The Sanctuary; the Citadel; another
Sanctuary; the chief Mosquey of Ispahan. 221 The exercises of the Grandees;
Taverns and other drinking-houses. ibid The The, or Tea-houses; those for
Tobacco and Coffee; Barbers and Surgeont; the Basar. 222 Ispahan, a place of
great Trade; the Persian money. 223 Caravanseras, or public Inns or
Storehonses; the Monasteries. 224 The King's Stables; his Garden; fruit trees;
the Suburbs. ibid The Religion of the Kebbers. 225 Villages near Ispahan; the
fields about it; the air of Persia. 226 The diseases of the Country; its soil.
ibid Cotton, domestic Creatures. 227 The reason why the Persians ab hor Swine.
228 Camels, several particulars of them. 229 Horses, etc. Fruits. 230 Why the
Mahumetans drink no wine. 231 Their ordinary drink which is Duschab etc. 232
Fruit Trees. ibid Nefte, salt, iron; the stature of the Persians. 233 They
paint their hands, and nails; their clothing. 234 Kisilbachs, what. 235 The
habit of the women; the Persians are very neat; ingenious and complemental. 236
Addicted to lying; constant in their friendships. 237 Luxurious; the King of
Persia has several Wives and Concubines; Sodomy not punished in Persia;
Polygamy allowed. ibid Their housekeeping, and house-hold-stuff. 238 Their
ordinary food, and drink; they take Opium. 239 And Tobacco; they drink (...) or
Coffee, two pleasant stories concerning the effect of it. 240 The use of The or
Tea. 241 Where the best stuffs of Persia are made. ibid What silk it produces
yearly. ibid Trading not obstructed by War; the inconveniences of Polygamy. 242
Incest tolerated. 243 Their ceremonies of Marriage. ibid The watch in the night.
244 Marriage for a certain time; the superstition of the Persians. 245 Their
Iealousy; Adultery punished; Divorce lawful; stories to that purpose. ibid The
education of their Children; their Authors for reading; their writing, Ink,
Pens; the Persian language. 247 The Persians learn the Turkish language; their
characters; their Universities; their best Authors. 248 A fabulous history of
Alexander the Great: etc. 249 The Persians addicted to Poesy; their best
Poets. 251 Their Law, Medicine, Astronomy. ibid The Lunar and Solar year. 252
They are much addicted to Judiciary Astrology. 253 The political Government of
Persia. 254 The quality of Sophy, the Kingdom of Persia hereditary: the Arms of
Persia, the Coronation of their Kings. 255 A short history of the late Kings of
Persia, Ismael 1. Jacup. ibid Schach Tamas. 256 Ismael II. Mahomet Chodabende.
258 Emir Hemse, Ismael III. Schach Abas. ibid He engages in a war against the
Tartars. 259 Another against the Turks. ibid His severity; puts to death his
eldest son. 261 His voluntary penance for the said murder. 262 Several other
particulars of Schach Abas; of his cruelty, etc. 263 Schach Sefi succeeds his
Grandfather Schach-Abas. 265 Several examples of his cruelty; kills an Uncle
and his three sons. 266 Kills Seinel-Chan with his own hands. ibid Puts to
death his Chancellor and others. 267 Causes 40. Ladies to be buried alive,
among whom, his own Mother. 269 Expressed more temerity than courage in his
actions; is subject to wine. ib. His Wives, Concubines, death. 270 Schach Abas
succeeds his Father; dignities not hereditary in Persia; the Persian Armies
consist most of horse. ibid Their Military Officers; they hate Cowards. 271 The
Schach's revenue: the Officers of the Court, their names, and places. 272 The
administration of Justice; Usury forbidden; their punishments. 275 The Religion
of the Persians; the signification of the word Mussulman; Circumcision; the
difference between the Religion of the Persians and that of the Turks. ibid The
initials of the Religion of the Persians; their Saints. 276 Their Festivals;
Commentators upon the Alcoran. 277 Their Miracles. 278 Their purifications, and
prayers. 279 The Persians very devout; their opinion concerning Heaven and
Hell. 280 They dedicate their Children to Saints; their Lent; the kindred of
Mahomet. ibid Another sort of lewd Religious men called Abdallas. 281 The
enterrments of the Persians. 282
THE RETURN of the AMBASSADORS From Persia, through Tartary and Muscovy, to
Holstein.
M. DC. XXXVIII. DECEMBER.
Some of the retinue takes Sanctuary. 284 The 21. the Ambassadors leave
Ispahan; and take their way back by the little City of Nalens, whence they come
to Kaschan. 285
IANVARY.
The 3. come to Kom; the 6. to Saba; the 11. to Caswin; 60. leagues in 14.
days. 286 The mountain Kilissim, and other salt-mountains. ibid They meet with
a Polish Ambassador. ibid The superstition of the Persians. 287 The Ambass.
leave Caswin. ib. Fauces Hyrcaniae; a Caravansera upon a Bridge; a dreadful
road; Summer and Winter the same day. 288 The Province of Kilan described; its
fruits. ib. Its Inhabitants. ib. The history of Karib-Schach; a strange
punishment. 289 The Kilek disarmed; their habit; and language; the Thalischs;
the different employments of men and women in those parts. 290 The Ambassadors
come to Rescht, the Metropolis of Kilan; a feast in honor of Aly; Sefi Myrza's
Sanctuary; they leave Rescht. 291 They come to Kurab, Metropolis of the
Province of Kesker. ibid
FEBRVARY.
The 1. they leave Kurab, and come the 11. to Kisilagats, in the Government of
Astara, 50. l. in 8 days. They cross several little Rivers, among others that
of Dinatzar, which divides the Provinces of Kesker and Astara. 292 Come to the
Province of Lenkerkunan; leave Lerkeran; the City of Kisilagats. 293 The
Inhabitants of a Village extirpated for their incest; a false Miracle of Aly; A
barbarous action of the Ambassador Brugman. 94 Causes a Kisilbach to be killed
in cold blood. ibid A Robber General of an Army, and Governor of a Province.
295 The River Aras; some errors in Geography corrected by the Author. 296 The
mountain of Scamachie; the Chan treats the Ambassadors. 297
MARCH.
Several treatments given the Ambassadors by the Chan and others; how the King
of Persia assures the Chans of his favor. ibid The ceremonies of that
assurance. ibid Ceremonies of the Armenians; their Easter; the Ambassador from
the King of Persia for Holstein comes to Scamachie. 298 The Ambassadors leave
Scamachie March 20. and come the 7. of April to the City of Derbent; 42.
leagues in 9. days. 299
APRIL.
Padars; a people, otherwise called Kurs; who are high-way-men. ibid Above 30.
sources of Nefte, black and white. Derbent described. ibid Built by Alexander
the Great. ibid The Fable of Tzumtzum and his Sepulcher; Many other Sepulchers
upon occasion of the defeat of Kassan, King of Media; the Inhabitants of
Derbent. 300 The Chan of Tarku proffers to convoy the Ambassadors; they take
order for their departure; the Governor hinders it; Other Saints Sepulchers.
301 The 14. the Ambassadors leave Derbent; enter into Dagesthan; pass through
the Country of Osmin, and the Seigniory of Boinack; and come the 16. to Tarku
the Metropolis of Dagesthan; 18. l. in 3. days. 302 There they continue, in
much danger, and with great inconvenience, near a month. ibid The Tartars ot
Dagesthan, their Habit; (...); the Prince of the Tartars. ibid The Country of
Osmin: the Lordship of Boinack; Brugman's impertinence; a Polish Ambassador
killed. 303 The Author in danger to be taken by the Tartars. ibid The
Ambassadors in great danger; are treated by the Prince of Tarku; their drink.
304 The Present sent to Surkou-Chan; who invites the Ambassadors to Dinner;
particulars of the entertainment; Another Tartarian feast. 305 The Governor of
Terki refuses a Convoy. 306
MAY.
The Ambassadors leave Tarku; enter the 18. into the Circassian Tartary, and
come, the 20. to the City of Terki, the Metropolis thereof; 26. leag in 9.
days. The Schemkal grants the Ambassadors passage. ibid The River Koisu, the
Albanus of Ptolomy, they come to Andre. 307 The Schemkal's Present to the
Ambassadors, their to him, Brugman's policy; they leave Andre, and cross the
Rivers Ascai and Bustro, which last divedes the Dagesthane from the
Circassians. 308 They enter Circassia; abundance of Serpents, a kind of
Field-Mice. ibid The Government of Circassia; the language; habit, the dress of
Widows; their women very familiar, yet chaste. 309 Their Religion, sacrifices,
enterrments, their mourning. 310
JUNE.
The 4. the Ambassadors leave Tarku, and travel over a great sandy Plain, and
come the 15. to Astrachan, 60. leagues in twelve days. The desert of
Astrachan, in which, being 11. days journey, they saw neither City, nor
Village, nor House, nor Tree, nor any River, but that of Kisilar, nor meet with
so much as fresh water. 311 They cross the Wolga to get to Astrachan; the
Weywodcs Present to the Ambass. theirs to him. 312 There the Ambassadors
continue from the 14. of June, to the 7. of September. ibid A pernicious design
of one of the Ambassadors; the Muscovian Ambassador leaves Astrachan; poisons
himself. ibid
AUGUST.
The 1. was celebrated the Reduction of Astrachan, the Persian Ambassador's
entrance into it. 313
SEPTEMBER.
The Ambassadors divide their Baggage; Brugman buies two young Girls; the
Persian Ambass. buys him a wife. ibid The 7. the Ambass. leave Astrachan, and
embark upon the Wolga, come to Tzornogar; to Sariza. ibid
OCTOBER.
The 6. came to Soratof; the 24. to Slamara. ibid
NOVEMBER.
The 6. they come to the River Casan, the Wolga, being frozen up, and go to the
City of Casan. 314 There they continue five weeks.
DECEMBER.
The 13. they leave Casan, by Sledges, are drawn along the Wolga, and come the
21. following to Nisa. The 16. the Muscovites celebrated the feast of their
Patron St. Nicholas. 314
M.DC.XXXIX.
IANVARY.
The 2. the Ambassadors make their entrance into Moscou. It was according to
the accustomed manner; they have several conferences with the Officers of the
Court. The 8. the Czaar's second Son dies. ibid The Ambassadors continue at
Moscou six weeks.
FEFRVARY.
The 3. the Persian Ambassador made his entrance into Moscou. ibid
MARCH.
The 15. the Ambassadors leave Moscou; come the 18. to Tuere; the 19. to
Torsock; the 23. to Novogorod; the 27. enter Ingermania, and the last, make
their entrance into Narva. ibid
APRIL.
The 4. they leave Narva, and come the 15. to Revel, where the Author leaves
them, and embarks for Lubeck. 316 They continue at Revel three months.
IVLY.
The 11. the Ambassadors leave Revel, come the 23. to Travemunde, the 30. to
Kiel.
AUGUST.
The 1. they put a period to their Travels into MUSCOVY, TARTARY and PERSIA,
and came to Gottorp. ibid
The end of the JOURNAL of the AMBASSADORS Travels.
A Catalogue of all the Pieces of Sculpture contained in these TRAVELS.
1. The Frontispiece, containing, in one Plate, five Heads, viz. Frederick,
Duke of Holstein; the two Ambassadors, Crusius, and Brugman; Olearius, Author
of the Travels into Muscovy, Tartary, and Persia; and John. Albert de
Mandelsto, Author of the Travels into the East Indies. 2. A Map of LIVONIA,
Part 1. lib. 2. page 30. 3. A Map of MVSCOVY, P. 1. lib. 3. page 45. 4. The
Pourtraiture of MICHAEL FEDEROVITS, Great Duke of Muscovy, P. 1. lib. 3. p. 77.
5. The Characters of the Muscovian Language, P. 1. lib. 3. p. 95. 6. A Map of
the Great River WOLGA, P. 1. lib. 4. p. 112. 7. A Map of PERSIA, P. 1. lib. 5.
p. 145. 8. The Pourtraiture of SCACH SEFI, King of Persia, P. 1. lib. 6. p.
265. 9. A Map of the Province of KILAN, as it lies on the Caspian Sea, P. 1.
lib. 7. p. 288. 10. A Map of the EAST INDIES, P. 2. lib. 1. p. 13.
By the First-Part are meant the Travels of the Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia; By the Second, those of John Albert de Mandelslo, into the
East Indies.

THE TRAVELS OF THE AMBASSADORS FROM THE DUKE of HOLSTEIN INTO MUSCOVY, and
PERSIA.
The First Book.
THE Most High and Mighty Prince, 16^3.
Frederick, by the Grace of God, Hereditary Prince of Norway, The occasion of
these Travels.
Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, of Stormarie and Ditmars, Count of Oldenburg,
etc. having built the City of Frederickstad, in the Duchy of Holstein, would
settle there the Trade of Silks, the most important, no doubt, An Embassy sent
the King of Persia and Great Duke of Muscovy.
of any in Europe. Persia is the Kingdom, which of any in the World, yields
most of it, upon which account, the said Prince resolved to court the
friendship of the Sophy. But in regard there were several reasons, why the
Silks could not be brought home by Sea, and that, to transport them by Land, he
stood in need of the permission of the Czarr, or great Duke of Muscovy, he
thought fit in the year 1633. to send a solemn Embassy to those two great
Monarks.

He employed in this Embassy, The Ambassadors.
Philip Crusius, a Lawyer and his privy Councellor, and Otton Brugman, a
Merchant of Hamborough, whom he honored with the quality (...) Councellor. On
the 22. OCTOBER.
of October in the year aforesaid, they departed from Gottorp, the place where
Duke Frederick made his residence, and went to Hamborough, where they took
order for their Voyage.

There they entertained their retinue, Their retinue.
which consisted of 34 persons, and departed thence the 6. NOVEM.
of November. The next day they came to Lubeck; the 8. to Tauemund, where the
Ambassadors took into their service an experienced Sea-Captain named Michael
Cords, who was to be their Pilot, especially upon the Caspian Sea.

The 9. we took leave of our Friends, They embark.
who had come along with us from Hamborough, and embarked in a Ship called the
Fortune, whereof John Muller was Commander. We took abord along with us
Wendelin Sibelist, a Physician, who was going to Muscovy, to be principal
Physician to the Great Duke.

We got out of the Haven about 2. in the afternoon, and anchored in the Road at
8. fathom water. Orders for civil behavior.
About 9. at night, the wind South-West, we set sail, and made that night 20.
leagues. The next day, the Ambassadors thought fit to make some particular
Orders to be observed during our Voyage, so to prevent the disorders which are
but too frequent among those, who ordinarily leave not their own Country, but
out of a hope to live with greater freedom elsewhere; and to see the execution
of them the better performed, they named several Officers, giving the Secretary
of the Embassy the quality of Fiscal, and to Wendelin Sibelist, and Hartman
Gramem, our Physician, that of Assessors. They discharged their places well,
and Justice was ^o duly administered, that at the end of our Voyage, which was
but of five days, the penalties came to above 22. Crowns, which were put into
the hands of the Captain, with order they should be equally distributed between
the Poor of Riga and Lubeck.

The same day, Bornholm.
toward evening, we passed by the Island of Bornholm, leaving it a good league
on the right hand. That Island is conceived to be distant from Lubeck 40.
German Leagues. The length and breadth of it is near the same, viz. 3. leagues;
it has a Royal Palace, named Hammershausen, belonging to the King of Denmark.
Toward the North-side of the Island are the Rocks called Erdholm, well known
by reason of the frequent wracks, which make them so much the more formidable
to Mariners in the Autumn, in regard the darkness of the nights keeps them from
being discovered, and that all about them those that sound meet with no bottom.

The 11. at noon, we were at 56. degrees of latitude, the weather continuing
fair; but, toward night, the wind, still at South-West, raised such a tempest,
that we were forced to take in all our sails, and go before the wind till the
next morning. Those among us who were not used to the Sea, Sea sickness.
were so sick, that some vomited blood: but in regard we had the wind a-stern,
it is violence hindered us not from keeping on our course, and making fifteen
Leagues that night.

Some are of opinion, Its cause.
that the stinch of the salt water, corrupting in the sink, is that which
provokes such vomiting. Others, on the contrary, affirm, that it is caused by
the violent agitation of the Ship, which makes the head turn, and the stomach
to cast up what is in it. But certain it is, that both contribute thereto, in
as much as if the agitation trouble the brain, the stinch also offends it, and
makes those heart-sick whose smelling is subtle, provoking vomiting, even
without any violent motion, wherever they are, not only at Sea, but also any
where else. Those who conceive, that people are not subject hereto upon Rivers
are deceived; for, besides that experience has evinced the contrary, we have
there the same motion, and fresh water being corrupted, stinks no less than the
salt.

The 12. we had so great a calm, A Calm.
that the Ship being as it were fastnen'd to the same place, we had the
convenience to bring our Musical Instruments upon the deck, to sing a Te Deum,
and to give God thanks for our deliverance, out of the imminent danger we had
been in the night before.

About noon the wind came to South, Cap de Demesnes.
which carried us to the Cap de Demesnes, in Courland, where we cast Anchor,
and staid all night. The next day 13. the wind West, we weighed Anchor, doubled
the Cape, entered into the Bay, Dunemunde.
and came, the 14. before the Fort of Dunemunde, so called, because situated at
the mouth of the River Dune, where that River enters the Baltic Sea, within
two leagues of Riga, And forasmuch as the thick mist hindered those of the Fort
from seeing us, we caused the Trumpets to sound, to oblige them to send us a
Pilot, without whose assistance we should hardly have got into the Haven. Those
who had the oversight of the Customs, came immediately to search our Ship, but
finding no Merchants goods in it, for which they might challenge ought, they
returned back, and sent us a Pilot, who conducted us that night as far as
before the City of Riga. The Ambassadors come to Riga.
The Ambassadors being got ashore, at the entrance of the City found a coach,
which the Governor had sent to meet them: but in regard they were not far from
their Inn, they would make no use of it, and so kept on their way afoot.

The 21th. the Magistrate sent his Presents to the Ambassadors, The Magistrat's
present.
viz. an Ox, some Sheep, some Poultry, Hares, Patridges, and other Fowl,
Wheaten and Ry-Bread, and half a Tun of Rhenish Wine. The 24th. The Ambassadors
entertained, at Dinner, Andrew Erichzon, the Governor of the City, as also the
Magistrate, the principal Minister, who amongst the Lutherans is looked upon as
a Bishop, and some Officers of the Garrison.

During our abode in this City, which was almost five weeks, in expectation the
Fens of those parts should be frozen up, and the snow cover the Way, which we
were to Travel in Sledges, we augmented our retinue with some necessary persons
for that great journey, and we had the leisure to learn the condition of the
City, whereof we shall here give a short description.

Clytraeus, Riga described.
in his History of Saxony, p. 19. says, That the City of Riga was built by
Albert the third, Bp. of Livonia, in the Year 1196. but Alnoul, Abbot of
Lubeck, an Author of the same time (as living under Otho IV.) says, in the
continuation of the Chronicle of Helmold, Its foundation.
1. 7. c. 9. that it was built in the year 1189. by Bertold, Abbot of Locken,
in the County of Shauenbourg, in the Diocese of Minden, of the Order of
White-Friers, successor to Menard in the Bishopric of Livonia, Made an
Archbishopric.
the seat whereof he settled at Riga. In the Year 1215. it was raised to an
Archbishopric, and made Metropolitan of all Livonia, Prussia, and Curland.
The Knights of the Espadon, and, afterward, the Master of the Teutonick Order
in Prussia, have, many times, divided the administration of Justice and the
Sovereignty in that place, with the Archbishop, till that, in consequence of
the Reformation of Religion, both lost the Authority they had in this City. It
was forced afterward to have recourse to the Crown of Poland, Subject to
Poland.
whose it became by a voluntary rendition, made in the year 1561. occasioned by
the War with the Muscovite. Since that, Charles, Duke of Sudermania, having
usurped the Crown of Sueden, from Sigismond, his Nephew, who had been called to
that of Poland, thought it not enough to fortify himself in the possession of
what he had usurped, but conceiving he might turn into an Offensive War, that
which even in the Defensive was criminal, he entered Livonia in the Year 1605.
where he besieged the City of Riga. He was forced to raise the siege; as also
to do the like in the year 1609. but Gustavus Adolphus was so fortunate as to
take it, in the year 1621. Taken by the Suedes.
Ever since that time, the Suedes. have been in possession of it, though
without any Title thereto; the Treaty agreed on between the two Crowns in the
year 1635. allowing them the possession of it no longer than till the Peace,
which was to be made between the two Kings, should restore it to it is lawful
Prince, or bestow it on him who was possessed of it. The Suedes discover how
unwilling they would be to restore it, by the care they took when we were upon
our Travels, to carry on the Fortifications thereof. They consist, Its
fortifications.
on the land side, of six regular Bastions, with their Half-moons, and their
Counterscarps Palisadoed. It Is situation is very pleasant, in a spacions
Valley, upon the River of Dune, which in that place, is a large quarter of a
League broad. It is very populous, and very considerable because of its
Commerce, as well with the English and Hollanders, and the Hansiatick Towns,
Its commerce.
in Summer time, while the Baltic Sea is Navigable, as with the Muscovites
when the frost and snow can bear Sledges. The Traffic of it is so great, that
it has almost as many Shops as Houses. All Provisions are very cheap, because
there is such an abundance of all, that an Ox may be bought for three Crowns, a
Hog for one, and Fowl and Venison proportionably, all the Country Peasants
thereabouts having the liberty to Hunt, though they have not any other. Since
the last reduction of it, they have no other Religion there than the
Protestant, the Magistrate and Inhabitants being all Lutherans, and so zealous
in their way, that they no less hate those of the Reformation, than they do the
Catholics, and Muscovites. There is no Inhabitant almost but understands the
Highdutch, the Sclavonian, and Curland Language; but the Magistrate in his
public Acts makes use only of the Highdutch. The same is used by the Ministers
in their Sermons, unless it be that for the meaner sort of people, who
understand not the Highdutch well, there are Sermons made in the Sclavonian and
Curland Language, in two several Churches.

December. 14. DECEMBER.
we dispatched away 35 Sledges, The Ambassadors leave Riga.
with part of our Train and Baggage, and the next day, the Ambassadors
followed, by the way of Derpt. The 18th we came to Wolmar, a small Town,
distant from Riga 18 leagues, and so ruined by the Muscovites and Polanders,
that the Inhabitants, to avoid the injuries of the weather, have been forced to
make little buildings of wood upon the ruins of better foundations. The
Governor came to meet us, and entertained us kindly. Ermes Castle.
The 20th we got six leagues farther, to the Castle of Ermes, belonging to
Colonel De la Bar, who treated us most magnificently.

The 21th we got four leagues to the Castle of Halmet, Halmet Castle. Ringen.
Come to Derpt.
where we saw a young Elk, which was higher than a Horse, brought to us while
we sat at Table. The 22th we got four leagues further, to the Castle of
Ringen; and the 23th we reached Derpt or Torpat. This City is within 6 leagues
of the Castle of Ringuen, upon the River Eimbec, between the Lakes of Worzero
and Peipis, in the heart of Livonia. Its buildings are very ancient, but
extremely ruined by the War. The Muscovites, who call it Iuriogored, were
possessed of it, till the year 1230. in which the Master of the Teutonick Order
took it, An Episcopal City.
and raised it to a Bishopric. John Basilovits, Great Duke of Muscovy, retook
it the 19th of July 1558. without any resistance, through a pannick fear of the
Bishop, the Nobility and the Inhabitants, who rendered it upon the first
Summons. In the year 1571. Reinold Rose, a Gentleman of the Country, attempted
to put the City into the hands of Magnus, Duke of Holstein, but this design
being discovered, he was cut to pieces by the Muscovites, who thereupon
exercised all manner of cruelties upon the Inhabitants of that City, without
any distinction of age or sex. It returned to the Crown of Poland, Reunited to
the Crown-f Poland. Taken by the Suedes.
with all the rest of Livonia, by the Peace made between the Great Duke, John
Basilovits, and Stephen Battory, King of Poland, in the year 1582. Jacob de la
Guard, General of the Suedish Army, took it from the Polanders, in the year
1625. since which time the Suedes have kept it, but by a Clause in the Treaty
of 1635. viz. Until it should be otherwise disposed of, according to the event
of the present War. The late King of Sueden, Gustavus Adolphus, An University
founded there by the King of Sueden.
founded an University there, in the year 1632. at the instance of John Skytte,
whom the said King made Baron of Duderof, and, afterward, Senator of the Crown
of Sueden, as a gratification for the pains he had taken, in laying the first
foundations of Learning in him. But the University is not much known, either
for the reputation of its Professors, or number of its Scholars; there having
not been above ten Suedes, and happily as many Finlanders, who ever could be
persuaded, there was any thing to be learnt in those quarters.

Having kept Christmas at Derpt, JANUARY 1634.
we left it Dec. 29. and got, the 3d. of January 1634. to Narva, where we were
forced to stay almost six months, in expectation of the Suedish Ambassadors,
who were to go along with us to Muscovy. But though we had here, as well as at
Riga, all divertisements imaginable, keeping open house, and having Music at
Meals, the Ambassadors entertaining all persons of Quality, The Ambassadors
come to Narva.
and endeavored to abate the wearisomness of our stay there, by banquests,
hunting matches, and walking, for which there were daily appointments made; yet
did that course of life, with the impatience we were in to go on in out
Travels, become in time insupportable to us. Upon which consideration, as also
that it was conceived in a manner impossible the Suedish Ambassadors should
come before the Spring; that then the way between Narva and Novogorod would be
very ill for traveling, and that in the interim our people had daily quarrels
with the Soldiers of the Garrison; it was resolved, that on the 28th. of
February, FEBRUARY.
Mr. Paul Fleming should be sent away with part of the Train and Baggage, and
that he should go by Sledges to Novogorod. Dr. Wendelin made use of that
convenience, and so took his way for the City of Mosco. We had had yet another
inconvenience, in that, Provisions failing us, our Pourveyors, who were
Muscovites, were forced to go 8 and 10 Leagues from the City to get Fowl and
Mutton. And in regard we could not so soon expect the Suedish Ambassadors, ours
went with a retinue of twelve persons to Revel, To Revel.
where they were received with the shooting off the great Guns, complemented,
and entertained with Presents, by the Magistrate, the Governor and principal
Citizens, who did us much honor during the stay we made there, which was six
weeks. Of Revel, Narva, and the rest of Livonia, we shall speak in the ensuing
Book.

May 10. Philip Scheiding, MAY.
Governor of Revel, named to be Chief of the Embassy which the Crown of Sueden
sent to Muscovy, had information that his Colleagues were come to Narva; so that
being ready for his journey, we left Revel the 15th following, the Governor
causing the Artillery to be discharged at our departure. We came to Narva the
18th and within a League of the City, Return to Narva, and meet the Suedish
Ambassadors.
met with Colonel Henry Fleming, Eric Gyllenstiern, and Andrew Bureus, designed
for the Embassy of Muscovy, with a very gallant retinue. The Governor caused
all the great Guns to be discharged at our entrance, as he had done the first
time. The Ambassadors resolved the next day, that to go to Novogorod, they
would take the way of Carlelia, by Sea, or the Lake of Ladoga; whereof they
sent notice to the Governor of Novogorod by an Express, that he might take
order for our reception, and that we might not be stayed upon the Frontiers.
For it is the custom of Muscovy and Persia to make stranger Ambassadors stay on
the Frontiers, till the Governor of the Province has sent intelligence to the
Court of their arrival, and received orders from his Sovereign, for their
reception and entertainment. The reason whereof is, The Muscovites and Persians
defray Ambassadors charges.
that the great Duke of Muscovy, as also the King of Persia, defrays the
charges of the Ambassadors, both as to Provisions and Carriage, from their
coming into their Countries, and to that end allows them a Conductor, whom the
Muscovites call Pristaf, and the Persians, Mehemander, who provide for their
entertainment and conveyance of their baggage, and have a party of Soldiers
for their Convoy.

The Suedish Ambassadors, having dispatched a Messenger to Novogorod, left
Narva the 22th. of May, by the way of Kapurga, where they made account to pa^s
over Whitsuntide, so to be nearer the Frontiers of Muscovy. In the mean time,
we stayed at Narva; where I had the curiosity to go, May 24. being Whitsun Eve,
to Russian Narva, and there to observe the Ceremonies of their Anniversary, and
their Devotions toward their deceased Kindred and Friends. The Churchyard was
full of Muscovite women, who had spread the Graves with Handkerchers,
Anniversary Ceremonies observed by the Muscovites for the dead.
whereof the Corners were fringed with silk of several colors, upon which they
had laid dishes full of fish broyl'd and fried, Custards, Cakes, and painted
Eggs. Some stood; others kneeled, making diverse questions to their Kindred,
weeping over their Graves, and expressing their affliction by dreadful
howlings; but with so little attention, that they slipped no occasion of
speaking, nor indeed of laughing with those of their acquaintance who passed
by. The Priest, attended by his Clerks, walked up and down the Churchyard,
having in his hand a Censer, into which he ever and anon cast little pieces of
Wax, to cense the Sepulchers. The women named to him, those of their Kindred and
Friends whom they would recommend to his prayers, pulling him by the surplice
to be served one before the other. The Priest did this devotion very slightly,
and with so little attention, that he was but too well paid with the piece of
Copper they gave, so far was he from deserving the Provisions they brought him,
which his Clerks had a care to secure for the advantage of their Master.

The 26th We did our Devotions, The Ambassadors leave Narva. Gam Fort.
and having sent away our baggage, and part of our train, by water, as far as
Neuschans, we left Narva the 28. Colonel Port, Governor of the place, did us
all possible honor at our departure, and accompanied us to Gam, which is a
fortified place, or rather a Fort, in the Province of Inguermannia, not 12. (as
the Baron of Herberstein says in his travels of Muscovy) but three leagues from
Narva, upon a small River called the torrent of Gam. It Is a small place, but
encompassed with a good Wall, and fortified with five Bastions built of stone,
having near it a Village inhabited by Muscovites, but subjects to the Crown of
Sueden. Kapurga.
There we took up fresh Horses, which brought us to Kapurga, six leagues from
Gam, whether we got the 29th. Burgislas Rose, Governor of the Fort; received
us kindly, and treated us sumptuously, both that night at Supper, and the next
day at Dinner. We departed the 30th. at three, afternoon, being to Lodge that
night at the house of a Bojar, or Muscovite Lord; but in regard we had still
seven Leagues to go, we were forced to travel all night, and could not reach it
till three next morning. The Bojar entertained us nobly, and gave us the
divertisement of two Trumpets while we were at Dinner. And to honor us the
more, as we riss from Table, he caused his Wife and Daughter to come in; they
were very rich in Clothes, attended by a Gentlewoman or waiting-maid, who was
extremely deformed, the more to set off the beauty of the Ladies, The civility
of the Muscovian Ladies.
who indeed needed not that foil. They drank each of them a Cup of Aquavitae,
and presented each of them as much to the Ambassadors. This is the greatest
honor the Muscovites think they can do strangers; unless it be, that, to make
it a transcendent civility, they also suffer them to be kissed. This civility
Count Alexander Slakou did me, when the Duke my Master sent me since into
Muscovy, in the year 1643. in acknowledgement of the honor he had received in
our Court, during his Exile. This Bojar's name was N. Basilovits. He was a very
handsome person, and of an excellent good humor. He told us he had been in the
Wars of Germany; that in the year 1631. he was at the battle of Leipsig, and
showed us the scars of the wounds he had received there.

The last of May, at one afternoon, we took leave of him, and got four Leagues
that day, to Iohannestal, Johannestal.
or St. John's Valley, so called from the name of Baron John Skytte, who was
then going to build a little City there. There it was we met with the first
persecution of Files, Gnats, and Wasps, which the Fens thereabouts produce in
such quantity, that a man has much ado to make his party good against them.
There we received intelligence, that the Suedish Ambassadors expected us at
Neuschans, JUNE.
which caused us to be on our way June 1. by three in the morning. Neuschans
Ladoga, a Lake.
Neuschans, by others called Nie, is a Fort, two Leagues and a half from
Iohannesthal, upon a Navigable River rising out of the Lake Ladoga, discharging
it self into the Gulf of Finland, and serving for a common Frontier between
Carlelia and Inguermannia. The Suedish Ambassadors departed thence after a
conference of two hours had with ours. The Ambassadors come to Notebourg.
We followed them the next day, June 2. and came the same day to Noteburg,
where we stayed above six weeks, in expectation of the Great Duke's orders for
our reception. The Governor of the place, John Kunemund, crossed the River in
a Boat, made, and covered like a Gondole, to come and meet us. The Suedish
Ambassadors kept open house during their stay at Noteburg, and every meal sent
their Mareshall, a place like that of High Steward in the Courts of Germany,
and the Gentlemen of their retinue, to invite and conduct to them the
Ambassadors of Holstein.

June 17. came to Noteburg Mr. Spring, Spiring, a fifth Ambassador from Sueden,
a Hollander born, and sometime an Arrasweaver. The Suedish Ambassadors depart
Farmer General of the Outland customs of Sueden and Livonia, one of the
Ambassadors designed from Sueden, for Muscovy. June 25. the Suedish Ambassadors
had intelligence that the Weywode or Governor of Novogorod had sent a Pristaf,
to receive them upon the Frontiers, which obliged them to depart the next day
to go to Laba. Ours accompanied them four Leagues from Noteburg, and permitted
me to follow the Suedes even to the Frontier, to see the Ceremonies of their
reception. The 27. at four in the morning, we came to the River which is about
40 paces broad, and, in that place, serves for a Frontier between Sueden and
Muscovy. The Ambassadors having understood, that there were on the other side
of the River seventeen Boats, for their waftage over, sent immediately their
Interpreter to the Pristaf, to desire him to send some of them to bring over
the baggage, so to facilitate their reception. The Pristaf, who was an aged
man, made answer, that he durst not do it, and that they were not to imagine,
the expenses of one day, which they should not think much to lose, would be any
inconvenience to the Czaar his Master (so the Muscovites call their Prince) and
that he must begin with the reception of the Ambassadors. About noon he sent to
them his Interpreter, with four Musketeers, whom they call Strelits, whereof he
had about thirty to wait on him at this Ceremony, to tell them, that he was
ready to give them reception. A Suedish resolution.
One of the Ambassadors made him answer somewhat roundly, yet civilly enough,
that they had been five weeks upon the Frontiers, and that the Pristaf could
not take it ill, if they made him stay one day; That his Colleagues being then
taking their rest, he could not make him an absolute answer, and that he should
have notice, when they could pass the River with their convenience. The
Ambassadors were indeed asleep, which happened as well in regard they had
traveled all night, The Muscovites sleep after Dinner.
as that, being come to the Frontiers of Muscovy, they complied with the custom
of the Country, where sleep is as necessary after Dinner as in the Night. One
of the Suedish Ambassadors asked the Interpreter, when those of Holstein would
be received; he told him he could not tell, but, as he thought, it would be
three weeks first, that is, after the arrival of the Suedish Ambassadors at
Moscou, because the same horses and carriages were to bring them thither. About
4. afternoon, the Ambassadors gave notice they were ready to cross the River,
and that the Pristaf had no more to do but to receive them; whereupon they,
with their Interpreter, went into one Boat, and I with some of their Gentlemen
into another. The Pristaf got into another, accompanied by fifteen Muscovites
in very good order; but to express the greatness of his Prince, the Boat-men,
who were instructed how to behave themselves, put off so slowly that they could
hardly quit the shore, forbearing ever and anon to row, purposely to let the
Ambassadors get before, which method was also observed by the Boat-man that
carried over the Ambassadors. But Philip Scheiding, perceiving the intention of
the Muscovites, calls to the Pristaf, telling him, that pride was not
seasonable at that time, that he should come forward, and consider, that that
kind of proceeding would conduce as little to the advantage of the Great Duke,
as to the disadvantage of their Prince. At last the Boats being all come to the
middle of the River, the Pristaf advanced, and read out of a paper, That the
Great Duke and Czaar, Michael Federouits, etc. had ordered the reception of the
Ambassadors coming from the Crown of Sueden, The reception of the Suedish
Ambassadors.
and that he had given command, they should be provided for, they and their
retinue, with Provisions and all things necessary, till they came to the City
of Mosco. After the Ambassadors had answered the Complement, the Pristaf
brought them ashore, and conducted them to a Gentleman's house who was of the
quality they call Simbojar, not far from the River, where they were received
into a little Stove, black as Hell, by reason of the smoakiness, yet had they
then made a fire, never considering the sultriness of the weather, A Muscovian
Collation.
which indeed was extreme. They treated the Ambassadors with spic'd bread, some
gobelets of a very strong kind of Aquavitae, and with two sorts of very bad
Hydromel. The Ambassadors only put it to their lips, and having passed the Cup
from hand to hand, the last presented it to me, with this commendation, addatur
parum sulphuris and fiet potio infernalis. After this banquet, which lasted
about an hour, during which time, the Muscovite Muketiers gave several volleys
such as they were, the Ambassadors and the Pristaf departed; the Suedes in
twelve Boats, and the Muscovites, with Colors and Drum, in three. I returned
to Notebourg, where our Ambassadors continued three weeks, as the Pristaf had
foretold.

The Country, which the Muscovites call Osinca, about Notebourg, is very
pleasant, so that we wanted no divertisement, especially that of hunting.
Within a quarter of a League of Notebourg are two Isles, distant one from the
other, as far as a Musket will carry, both well stored with wood, and so
furnished with Fowl that our pieces could hardly be at rest for them, and the
Sea-dogs, whereof there is an incredible number in the Lake, found us excellent
sport, when they exposed themselves to the Sun along the Rocks. We had also the
learned and divertive conversation of Mr. Peter Crusbiorn, who came, during
that time, to Notebourg, with a design to go into Mvscovy, in the quality of
Resident from the Crown of Sueden. This place is situated at 63. degrees, The
situation of Notebourg.
30. minutes, at the entrance of the Lake Ladoga, upon an Isle, which the said
Lake makes there in form like a Nut, which gives it the name. The Muscovites
had built it, and encompassed it with a wall, two fathom and a half thick,
against the attempts of the Suedes, who took it, under the command of James de
la Guard, after the extremities of the siege, and a contagious disease had
consumed the whole Garrison to two men, who yet made a very advantageous
Capitulation. The place is pleasant and delightful, but not healthy, because
of the fresh water Lakes and Fenns that ly about it. We were extremely troubled
there with a kind of Fly much like those which in Latin are called Pyraustae,
whereof there was such abundance, that many times they deprived us of the sight
of Heaven, and would not suffer us to open our eyes. These insects are also
very numerous in Carelia, but not near so much as at Notebourg.

July 16. JULY.
Notice was brought us, that a Pristaf, named Simon Andrew Kareckshin, was come
to the Frontiers, The Ambassadors came to Laba.
to receive us; so that we put all things in order for our journey, and
departed the 20. for Laba. We were no sooner got thither, but the Pristaf's
Interpreter, accompanied by a Musketier, came to know, whether the Ambassadors
desired to be received? In answer whereto, we asking, whether he would receive
us on this side, or in the middle of the River, as he had received the Suedish
Ambassadors; he told us, we had no more to do but to pass, and that those
Ceremonies were observed only with the Suedes, because of the contest there is
between them about the Frontiers.

Having passed the River, Their reception.
we found the Pristaf standing within 8 or 10 paces of the shore, clad in a
long Coat of red Damask. As soon as the Ambassadors had set foot on land, he
came toward us, being still covered, till such time as he began to speak. Then
he took off his Cap, as he pronounced the Great Duke's name, reading out of a
paper these words, His Majesty, the Czaar, Michael Federouits, Conservator of
all the Russians, etc. has sent me hither, to receive thee, Philip Crusius,
and thee, Otton Brugman, Ambassadors from the Duke of Holstein, and commanded
me to accommodate you and retinue, with Provisions, Carriages Horses, and what
else shall be necessary, till you come to the City of Moscou.

His Interpreter, whose name was Anthony, spoke High Dutch so ill, that we had
much ado to understand him. The Ambassadors made answer by their own
Interpreter, John Arpenbeck, who was very well versed in the Muscovian
Language. This done, The Pristaf gave the Ambassadors the upper hand, and
conducted them to the Inn, through a party of twelve Musketeers, all Cosaques.
The volley they gave us was not so well discharged, but that the Secretary
belonging to the Resident of Sueden, Another Muscovian Collation.
who came along with us to see the Ceremonies of our reception, was shot in his
Buff-coat. After a collation of Ginger-Bread, Cherries newly preserved, and
Aquavitae, we took water again, and embarked for the continuation of our
Voyage. After we had dined with the Governor of Notebourg, who came along with
us thither, and who treated us that day with several sorts of pleasant drinks,
we were disposed into seven Boats. The Ambassadors prosecute their Voyage


The 22. we passed the Lake Ladoga, which in that place is 12 leagues over. We
landed near a Monastery called Nauolkus Konsky, where he met with a Monk, who
presented us with bread and dried Salmon. The Pristaf who was to bear our
charges, asked whether he should provide for us, or that we had rather take the
money allowed by his Majesty for our entertainment, and have our meat dressed
by our own Cooks. We made choice of the later, according to the custom of
those Ambassadors who go into those parts. So that we bought our provisions our
selves, which we found cheap enough, in comparison to what the Pristaf provided
for us. Two Copecks, which make two sols French, would buy a tame Fowl, and for
a penny we had nine Eggs. We were allowed every day two Roubles and five
Copecks, amounting to four Crowns five pence, which found us very good fare.
After dinner, we embarked on a River which brought us to Ladoga, Come to Ladoga.
which is distant from Laba 17 leagues, whither we came the same night. We met
by the way a Pristaf, going to meet the Suedish Resident, with three Boats. In
all our Travels had we not seen so many Children under 7 years of age, as we
found at Ladoga. Some of ours being gone to take the Air, they run after us,
having Goosberies to sell, whereof we bought a hatful for a Copeck. 'Twas
pleasant to see those Children, to the number of fifty together, leaping about
us, as we lay on the grass to eat our Goosberries, so dressed as that we could
not distinguish the Boys from the Girls, for both had their hair cut all off,
excepting only two mustaches, which were suffered to grow at their Temples, and
were clad in shirts reaching to their ancles. Our Physician would needs make a
discovery of sexes among them, and having caught one of the Children by the
shirt, it happened to be a Boy, who told him laughing, Deske niet, that he was
no Girl, and thereupon pointed to some that were.

The 23. at dinner, The Music of Muscovy.
was the first time we heard any of the Country Music, which consisted of a
Lute and Violin, with some voices, singing aires to the honor of their Czaar,
Michael Federouits, and perceiving they were permitted, they fell a-dancing
after a strange manner. The men and women danced much after the same manner,
every one alone, making strange faces, with as strange gesticulations; the
motions of the hands, shoulders, and hips, being more violent than those of the
feet, which they do but gently stir, not moving as it were from the same place.
The women have commonly handkerchers in their hands, fringed with silk of
diverse colors, which they cast about their heads.

After dinner we embarked upon the River Wolgda. Wolgda.
Our Musketeers, or Strelits, begged the benediction of a Monk that happened to
be by the River side; it being their custom to beg it of all Monks, The
devotion of the Muscovites.
and in all the Churches they come to by the way, which if they have not the
time to go into, they think it enough to do reverences to the Crosses they see
upon the Churches and Chapels, pronouncing these words, Hospodi Buchmilo, that
is to say, Lord be merciful to me.

The wind being with us, it was thought fit we should make use of our sails,
but, the Muscovites being not the most expert Mariners, one of the Ropes broke,
and the sail falling on one of the Musketeers, struck him down so as that we
gave him over for dead, but coming to himself again within an hour after, and
having taken a considerable dram of the Aquavitae bottle, he was as well as
ever.

The Wolgda is as broad as Elbe, Wolgda described.
but runs much more slowly. It rises near great Novogorod, out of the Lake
called the Lake of Ilmen, and falls into that of Ladoga. Seven werstes (whereof
five make a German League) from Ladoga, A dangerous fall of water.
there is a strange fall of Water in that River, and about a league and a half
thence, another, where the water falls with such violence, that it runs like a
shaft, amidst the many Rocks scattered up and down near those places: in so
much that to draw the laden Boats up the River, there needs above a hundred
men. We got ashore at the former, and saw our Boats pass safely, all save the
last, in which we had left Simon Frisius, a Merchant's Son of Hamborough, who
being extremely sick was forced to stay in it. This Boat being drawn up to the
highest pitch of the water, the rope broke, so that the water forced it back
with such violence, that it would have split against the Rocks, if, by an
unexpected good hap, one end of the rope, which was fastened to the mast, had
not twined it self about one of the Rocks, by which means the Boat was stayed*
till we had the convenience to dis-engage it. There we were told, that a
certain Bishop, coming that way in a Boat laden with Fish, had been cast away
some few days before. The other fall we passed without any danger, and came
that night to a Convent, called Nicolai Nepostiza, where we took up our
quarters, and stayed the next day, expecting the Boats that were coming after
us.

From Revel to Moscou, Troublesome Flies and other insects.
are nothing but Woods, Fenns, Lakes and Rivers, which produce such abundance
of Flies, Gnats, and Wasps, that people have much ado to keep them off, in so
much, that, in the night time, they are forced to wrap themselves up in certain
linen clothes, such as Travelers make use of in Livonia and Muscovy: those
among us who had not been careful to cover themselves, having their faces so
sported, as if they were newly recovered from the small pox. The Wagoners and
Conntry people, who have not convenience enough of those clothes, are forced to
make use of fire against the importunity of those Insects; insomuch that
Muscovy being every where well furnished with wood, they make good fires, and
lie down by them; The Presents of a Muscovian Monk.
all which hinders not but that they are extremely troubled with them.

There were but four Monks in the Convent; the most aged among them made us a
Present of Turnips, pickled Cowcumbers, some green Pease, and two wax candles.
We gratified him with a Crown piece, which he took so kindly, that he let us
into his Church, contrary to the Custom of the Country, and put on his
Sacerdotal Vestments, that we might see them. He showed us, in the Portal, the
Miracles of S. Nicholas, painted according to the mode of the Country, very
roughly, and without proportion. Upon the door was represented the last
Judgment, wherein the Monk pointed to a Man habited after the German fashion,
and told us, The Muscovites do not condemn those of a contrary belief.
That the Germans and other Nations were not incapable of Salvation, provided
they had a Muscovite Soul, and that they lived justly in the sight of God. He
showed us also a Bible in his own Language (for no Muscovite knows any other
than his own and the Sclavonian) and read to us the first Chapter of S. John's
Gospel, which we found absolutely conformable to our Text. To which he added,
that being once at Revel, he had there had a conference with some of our
Pastors, concerning the Holy Scripture; but that he could give them no great
satisfaction, because he did not well understand the German Interpreter. He
would have shown us all the Church, but our Musketeers coming in grumbled at
it, and reproached him for having communicated too much to us. We gave him the
the other Crown, for which he gave us many thanks, bowing his head to the very
ground, and smiting it with his forehead. We intended to have made our repast
upon the grass, but were hardly set, ere the wind turning for us, the Monk
brings us another prefent of Turnips and Cowcumbers, telling us, that the
kindness we had done him had obtained of S. Nicholas the good wind which was to
carry us on in our Voyage.

About 2. afternoon, we set off, made four leagues that day^punc; and came at
night to a Village called Cerodiza: Corodiza.
but finding it more pleasant to be by the water side, than in a Village, we
caused our meat to dressed there, and supped, while the Mariners, who made
account to go thence that night, took some hours rest.

We slept not, but made sport with a young Bear, the Pristaf had brought us,
which could show a thousand tricks. After midnight we set forward, and got four
leagues to the Village Soliza; Soliza.
where the Pristaf, who had stayed at Corodiza, overtook us, bringing along
with him his Host, who was a Knez, or Muscovite Prince, named Roman Iovanouits.
He had treated him so well, that both were got drunk: however, seeing they were
still desirous to drink, we supplied them so well with Aquavitae and Sack,
whereof we had good store, that we laid them asleep.

We got that day six leagues to a Village called Grunza, which the Country
people had also absolutely forsaken, Grunza.
which obliged us to take up our Lodging in the Fields, in a Meadow near a
great Pool, where we made three great fires: and in regard we had slept almost
all day in the Boat, we spent some part of the night i^ telling of stories, and
diverting our selves with the Bear. The Musketeers, who had been somewhat busy
with the Aquavitae, entertained us with some feats of their activity. Here we
saw abundance of Cranes, and counted, upon the Pool, above 300 of them.

The next day, Iul. 26. about three in the morning we prosecuted our Voyage,
and before noon got four leagues, Wisoko.
to the Village of Wisoko. The Pristaf, whom we had invited to dinner, hearing
the name of Jesus pronounced, made the sign of the Cross several times upon his
breast, and desired to have our Prayer in writing, and liked it so well, that
he said, he could not have believed, that the Germans were so good Christians,
and so just men.

The 27. all day, and the night following, we prosecuted our Voyage, so that
the 28. with the day, we were come to the Village of Krifseuiza. There we staid
that day, to give the Pristaf time to acquaint the Governor of Novogorod with
our arrival, Krifseuiza.
and to know his pleasure concerning our reception.

This Village is within 2 leagues of Novogorod, and about 600 paces from it is
a very fair Monastery, which some call Nachatim,, but it is commonly called
Krifseuiza Chutina Spasof Monastir. It is well built, and better situated,
having an Abbot, 60 Monks, and 400 Country people to husband the grounds
belonging to it: but it is obliged out of its Revenue to maintain a hundred men
of the Garrison of Novogorod, for the service of the Great Duke.

The 29. we continued our Voyage, The Ambassadors came to Novogorod.
and came to Novogorod, within a league of which we met with some of our
retinue, whom we had sent away from Riga, and who had expected us for several
months with much impatience. They met us in a Boat, and expressed much joy at
our arrival. The Weywode sent to our Inn, one Tun of Beer, another of Hydromel,
and a Barrel of Aquavitae; and we sent him a silver Cup, Vermilion gilt. We
left Novogorod the the 13. of July, Brunits.
and went 4 leagues farther by water, to Brunits, whence we finished our
Journey by Land.

As we were dis-embarking our Baggage at Brunits, August 1. AUGUS.
came to the River side a Muscovian Procession, A Muscovian Procession.
to bless the water thereof. In the first place marched two men, one carrying a
Cross, having at the four corners the four Evangelists; the other, an old
Image, painted, and covered with a clean linen cloth. After them came a
Priest pontifically vested, holding in his hands a wooden Cross, a good half
foot wide, and singing in consort with a little Boy who carried a Book after
him. Then came the Country people with their Wives and Children, those who were
of age carrying a wax Candle. After all came one who seemed to be the Clark of
the Parish, having ten Tapers fastened together, all lighted. The Priest being
come to the River side, spent half an hour or better in singing and reading:
Then he took the wax Candles from the Clark, and extinguished them in the
Water, in imitation of whom, the people did the like with theirs. Then the
Priest dipped his Cross three several times in the Water, when he took it out
letting it drop into a Basin destined for the preservation of that Water, which
they esteemed most sacred. This Ceremony over, the Women put their Children,
great and small, into the Water, some with their shirts on, others naked. Those
who needed not the assistance of others leaped in themselves. Nay some brought
their Horses to drink, that they might also participate of the virtue of that
Holy Water. This done, the whole Procession returned to the Church, where the
Priest, having given the people his benediction, dismissed them.

About 4. afternoon, we got on Horseback, after we had disposed our Baggage
into 50. Wagon, Crasmistansky.
and traveled that day five leagues, to a Village named Crasmistansky. The
next, August 2. Gam Chresta.
we traveled eight leagues, and came at night to Gam Chresta. Gam, among the
Muscovites, are those places where Travelers take fresh Horses.

The 3. we came to Iazelbitza, Jaselbitza.
a little Village which the Country people had forsaken. There we met with this
misfortune, that our Cook being gone two leagues further to provide our Supper,
we could not come up to him, by reason of the badness of the way, so that we
had a sleepless night of it. We met that day with several Officers, who, upon
the Peace concluded between the Polanders and Muscovites at Smolensko, had
desired leave to go to their own Habitations.

The 4. we met at Simnogora, Simnogora Wolsolk.
where are fresh Horses to be taken up, with Colonel Fuchs; and the 6. at
Wolsolk, with Colonel Charles. They both honored our Ambassadors with their
visits, which occasioning entertainments, begat also those* excesses and
disorders which ordinarily attend them in Germany; in one whereof our
Trumpetter mortally wounded one of our Musketeers, without any injury done him
by the other. We left the wounded person behind, and gave money to those who
were to look to him. The Trumpetter was killed afterward, after he had been
entertained into the Great Dukes service, at our return from Persia.

The 5. we passed through a Village, which the Inhabitants had forsaken, to
avoid quartering the German Soldiers, who had been disbanded near Moscou. We
lodged at night in the Village Columna. Columna*
In those parts, we found many great blue stones, which the Tyrant John
Basilouits, had caused to be taken out of the Sepulchers, when he took the City
of Revel, having designed them to be brought to Mosco; but news being come that
he was dead* they were unloaden in the highway, where they have remained ever
since.

The 7. Budeua.
we came Budeua, a Village also; but at our entrance into it, our Horses began
to wince, stand upon their hinder feet, and beat the ground, as if they had
been bewitched, whereof we could not imagine what should be the cause, till
that having alighted, we found them covered all over with Bees, which were
beginning to fall-upon us, and prosecuted their animosity so far, as to force
us to keep them off with our Cloaks, and other Garments, and to go and take up
our quarters in the Fields. We understood since, that it was a Stratageme of
the Inhabitants, who had incensed the Bees, purposely to prevent our lodging in
the Village.

The 8. we came to a Stage where were fresh Horses, Torsock.
and so to Torsock, a little Town situate upon the descent of a Hill, not far
from the Highway, fortified with Ramparts, and Bastions of wood. Bread, Beer,
and Hydromel were there excellent good. The Ambassadors caused Huts to be made
of boughs of Trees without the Town, where we Supped and Lodged that night.

The 9. we passed over two Torrents, one near Torsock, the other half a League
from Miedna. Tuere.
We came at night to the City of Tuere, which is also on a Hill-side, as
Torsock, but somewhat bigger. These two places have each of them their Weywode,
or Governor. The latter has its name from the River Tuere, The River Wolga.
which passes by it, as well as the Wolga, which continuing its course from
this City, through Muscovy and Tartary, disembogues its self above 600 German
Leagues thence (which make above 1500 French) in the Caspian Sea. It is already
so broad in those quarters, that we were forced to make use of a Ferry-boat to
cross it. We were lodged the other side of the City, in the Suburbs. This was
our last stage for fresh Horses, till we came to Moscou.

August 13. Nichola Nachinski.
we came to a Village called Nichola Nachinski, two Leagues from Moscou, whence
our Pristaf dispatched an Express to give notice of our arrival.

The 14. the Pristaf, attended by his Interpreter and Secretary, came to
Complement the Ambassadors, giving them thanks for the kind treatment he had
received from them, and making an Apology for the ill they might have received
from him. We presented him with a Vermilion Gilt-Cup, and gave some ten or
twelve Crowns among the rest. The same day, the Messenger sent by the Pristaf
returned from Moscou, and obliged us to prepare for our Entrance, which we made
the same day in the order following.

1. The Strelits, or Muscovian Musketeers, who had convoyed us, matched in
first. 2. After them, Jacob Scheve, our Harbinger, Michael Cords, Captain of
the ship, and John Algueyer, Clark of the Kitchen, all three abreast. 3. Three
led Horses, to be presented to the Great Duke; one, black, and two,
dappledgrey. 4. A Trumpetter. 5. Marshall, or Steward. 6. Three of our
Gentlemen abreast. 7. Three more of our Gentlemen. 8. The Secretary,
Physician, and Controller. 9. The Ambassadors, attended each, by a Guard of
four, with their Carabines, having on their right hand, but a little distance,
the Pristaf who had conducted them. 10. The six Pages, in two ranks. 11. A
Coach with four gray Horses. 12. The Master of the Wagons, with eight others,
three in a rank. 13. The Presidents designed for the Great Duke, carried in
five Litters, covered with Turkey Tapistry. 14. An open Wagon, wherein Simon
Frisins lay sick. 15. Forty six Wagons loaded with baggage. 16. Three
Servants.
Having marched in this order, very slowly, till we came within half a League
of the City, we met ten Coureiers (or Messengers) who came one after another
with full speed toward us, to acquaint the Pristaf with the place, where they
were whose Office it was to receive us; with order, one while, to march on very
slowly, another, to make more haste, to the end we should be much about the
same time with them at the place appointed for our reception. We saw also
several Muscovites; very well mounted and richly clad, who only rid at some
distance from us, and returned having taken a view of us. Within a quarter of a
League of the City, we passed through a Body of above 4000 Muscovites, all
excellently well mounted and sumptuously clad. Most of the Suedish Ambassadors
retinue came also to meet us, but were not permitted to come near us, so that
we could only salute them at a distance.

Within a Pistol shot thence we saw coming toward us, two Pristafs clad in
coats of Purfled Satin mounted on two gallant white Horses. Instead of Bridles,
they had Chains of silver, whereof the links were two inches broad, but no
thicker than the back of a knife, and of such a compass as that a man might
thrust in his first into them, which made a strange noise as the Horses went
along. The Great Duke's Master of the Horse followed them, with twenty led
Horses all white, and was accompanied by a great number of persons both a foot
and a hors-back. When the Ambassadors and Pristafs were alighted, The reception
of the Ambassadors.
the antienter of the two uncovered himself, and said; The Grand Seigneur,
Czaar, and Great Duke, Michael Federouits, conservator of all the Russians,
Prince of Vladimer, Mosco, Novogorod, Czaar of Cassan, Czarr of Astrachan,
Czaar of Siberia, Lord of Plescou, Great Duke of Tuersky, Iugersky, Premsky,
Wadsky, Bolgarsky, etc. Lord and Great Duke of Novogorod in the Low Countries,
Commander of Rosansky, Rostofsky, Gerastafky, Besolerski, Vdorski, Obdorski,
Condinski, and of all the North, Lord of the Countries of Iveria, Czaar of
Kartalmski and Ingusinski, Prince of the Countries of Kabardinski, Cyrcaski,
and Iorkski, Lord and Sovereign of many other Seignenries, receives you, as
great Ambassadors from the Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormarie and Ditmars,
Count of Oldenbourg and Delmenhorst. He grants you and the Gentlemen of your
retinue the favor to make your entrance upon his own Horses, and has
appointed us Pristafs to have a care of you, and so to furnish you with all
things necessary, during your abode at Mosco. To which Complement when the
Ambassador Crusius had made answer, there were brought two very stately white
Horses, with Saddles after the German fashion, Embroidered with Gold and
Silver, with Footh-cloaths, and Harness suitable.

As soon as the Ambassadors were mounted, the Pristaf and Musketeers, who had
conducted us from the Frontiers, were drawn off. There were brought also ten
other white Horses for the chiefest of our retinue, with Saddles after the
Muscovian fashion, of Cloth of Gold and Purfled Satin. The Pristafs take the
upper hand of the Amdors.
The Pristafs took the Ambassadors between them, though in Muscovy, he is
thought to have the more honorable place, who has the right hand free. After
them marched the Muscovian Grooms of the stable, who had the coverings of their
Saddles of Leopard-skins, Cloth of Gold, and Scarlet. The Cavalry we had seen
in the fields, and the other Muscovites, came pouring into the City with the
Ambassadors, and accompanied them to their Lodgings, Their Lodgings.
within the white wall, in that quarter which is called Czarskigorod, that is
to say, the City of the Czaar. We had assigned us two Citizens houses built of
wood, the Pristaf making this excuse, in the name of the Great Duke, that a
fire having not only consumed the ordinary house for the entertainment of
Ambassadors, but also another great house appointed for our Lodgings, we could
not possibly be better accommodated for the present; And indeed, at our
entrance into the City, we had observed whole streets burnt down, the fire
having been so violent, that it had reduced to ashes above five thousand
houses: insomuch that most of the Inhabitants were forced to lodge in Tents and
Huts.

Ere we had taken a view of our Lodging, The Great Dukes refreshing present to
the Ambassadors.
the presents from the Great Duke's Kitchen and Cellar were brought us; viz.
eight Sheep, thirty Capons and Pullets, great store of white and brown bread,
and 22 sorts of drinks, Wine, Beer, Hydromel and Aquavitae, all brought in by
32 Muscovites, who marching all in a file made the show so much the greater.
This done* the doors of our Lodging were locked upon us, They are under a Guard.
and a Guard of twelve Musketeers set, to prevent all communication between us
and the Inhabitants, till after the first Audience. The Pristafs in the mean
time failed not to visit us every day, to assure us of their readiness to serve
us. They had also left with us an Interpreter, to facilitate the service which
the Musketeers were obliged to do us in the buying of our Provisions and other
things. This Interpreter was a Muscovite born, and had been taken prisoner by
the Polanders; by which means he fell into the hands of Prince Ianus Radzivil,
who brought him to Leipsig, where he learnt the German Tongue.

Aug. 15. The Muscovites celebrated the Feast of our B. Lady's ascension, and
the same day ended a Fast they had begun the first of that month. The 17. was
designed for our first Audience; but the Great Duke being gone out of the City
to do his Devotions, we spent the day in giving God our humble thanks for his
happy conduct of us to the place for which our Embassy was designed. We caused
Te Deum to be sung, with Music, and our Minister to make a Sermon, at which,
as also at the Dinner which followed it, was present, by permission on of the
Great Duke, M. Balthazar Moucheron, who managed the Affairs of the Duke of
Holstein at Mosco, in the quality of Commissary. He told us, that the
Muscovites thought our entrance very handsome, and wondered much that Germany
should have Princes able to send so considerable an Embassy. They give all
strange Princes the quality of Knez, though their Knez are properly no more
than what Gentlemen are with us, and, those excepted who have public
employments relating to the State, the rest have no great Estates, it may be,
about 800. or 1000 per annum.

The 18. The two Pristafs came to acquaint us that the Great Duke would give us
public Audience the next day. They desired also, in the Chancellors name, a
Catalogue of the presents we were to make his Majesty. After Dinner, the
younger Pristaf came to confirm the notice they had given us in the morning,
viz. that on the morrow we should have the honor to kiss the Great Dukes hand.
We asked him what the discharging of the great Guns the day before meant, and
the shooting we had seen out of our Windows in a great Meadow. He told us, it
was only to make trial of some pieces which the Great Duke had lately ordered
to be cast. Others said, that they had been discharged, only to make it appear
that the Muscovites had not lost all their Artillery before Smolensco, as some
would have had it believed.

Aug. 19. The Pristafs came to see whether we were ready for Audience; and
having perceived that our men had put on their best Clothes, and that all was
in readiness, they went immediately to give notice thereof at the Castle,
whence were brought us the white Horses which we had at our Entrance. About 9
of the Clock the Pristafs returned to us, having their striptsatin Coats
carried after them, as also their Caps of Martins skins, which they left in the
Ambassadors Antichamber. The Ambassadors Cavalcade
We mounted with our Cloaks on, but no Swords, none being permitted to wear any
in the Great Dukes presence, and rode toward the Castle, the Cavalcade being
as follows.

In the front, marched 36 Musketeers.

After them our Steward.

Three Gentlemen of the Ambassadors retinue.

Three other Gentlemen.

The Commissary, Secretary, and Physician.

After them went the Presents, The Presents.
led and carried by Muscovites, viz. One Horse coal-black, with a rich covering.

One, dapple gray.

Another, dapple-grey.

Harness for one Horse, set out with Silver, and enriched with Turkish Stones,
Rubies, and other precious Stones, carried by two Muscovites.

One Cross of Chrysolite enchac'd in Gold, about half a foot long, carried in a
Basin.

An Ebony Cabinet, garnished with Gold, like a little Apothecaries Shop, with
its Boxes and Vials of Gold, enriched with precious Stones, full of several
excellent Chemical extractions, carried by two Muscovites.

A small Vessel of Rock-Christal, garnished with Gold, and beset with Rubies.

A great Looking-Glass, being an ell and a quarter high, and half an ell broad,
in an Ebony frame, with Boughs and Fruits carved thereon in Silver, carried by
two Muscovites.

A Clock, on which was represented, in painting, the Parable of the Prodigal
Child.

A Walking-Staff, Vermilion Gilt, in which was a piece of Perspective.

A great Ebony Clock, in an Ebony Case, garnished with Silver.

Next went two Gentlemen of the Chamber, carrying up on high in the Air, the
Credential Letters from his Highness, one to the Great Duke, the other to the
Patriarch his Majesty's Father. His name was Philaretes Nikidits; He died after
our departure from Holstein, but we were told it would not be amiss to make it
known we had Letters of credence for him.

Then followed the Ambassadors between the two Pristafs, having before them the
Interpreters, on each side four Lacqueys, and behind them, the Pages.

It was, from our Lodging to the Castle a good quarter of a German league,
there being above 2000 Strelits or Musketeers disposed on both sides of the
street, to make us free passage to the place of Audience. The streets, windows
and houses tops were full of people, who were come from all quarters of the
City to see our Cavalcade. We marched in very good order, halting and advancing
according to the orders, which the Courriers, who rid with full speed from the
Castle, brought our Pristafs; to the end we might come to the Hall of Audience,
just as the Great Duke were sat in his Throne.

Being come into the Castle-Court, we passed before the Posolsky Precase, or
the Chancery for strangers affairs, where we alighted. After the Officers, and
Gentlemen, had taken their places, to wit, the Steward, in the head of the
Presents, and the Gentlemen, with the other Officers, immediately before the
Ambassadors, we were brought to Audience. The Hall for Audience is on the right
hand of the Cour: when there come any Ambassadors from Persia, Turkey, or
Tartary, they are carried up a stone pair of stairs on the right hand; but in
regard we were Christians, we took the left hand, and were led through a
vaulted Gallery, purposely that we might pass by a very fair Church, where they
were then at service. Before we came into the Hall, we saw, in a spacious
vaulted appartment, abundance of people, and among others many ancient Men,
venerable for their long snowy beards, whereof some sat, others stood along
the walls, all clad in long Coats of stripped Satin, and Caps of Martins skins:
they told us they were his Majesty's Goses, that is, his principal Merchants or
Factors, who had those habits out of the Great Dukes Wardrobe, that they might
honor him in those kinds of Ceremonies, conditionally they returned them
as soon as they were over.

The Ambassadors being come to the door of the Antichamber, they met with two
Bojares, or Lords, clad in Coats of Purfled Satin, covered with an embroidery
of great Pearls, who were to receive them at their Entrance. They told them
that his Czaarick Majesty did them, and the Gentlemen of their retinue, the
favor of admitting them into his Presence. The Presents were stayed in the
Antichamber, and they conducted into the Hall the Ambassadors with the
Officers, Gentlemen, and Pages, there going before them John Hermes, the Great
Dukes principal Interpreter. As soon as he had set his foot within the Hall; he
saluted his Majesty with a loud voice, wishing him all prosperity and long
life, and acquainted him with the arrival of the Ambassadors. The Hall was
square, and vaulted, hanged and floor'd with Tapestry. The roof was gilt, and
had several Sacred Stories painted therein. The Great Duke's Chair was opposite
to the door, against the wall, raised from the floor three steps, having at the
four corners Pillars which were Vermilion Gilt, about three inches about, with
each of them, at the height of an ell and a half, an Imperial Eagle of Silver,
near which the Canopy or upper part of the Chair rested upon the same Pillars:
besides which the said Chair had at the four Corners as many little Turrets of
the same stuff, having also, at the ends, Eagles, after the same manner. We
were told there was another Chair of State a-making, about which were bestowed
1600 Marks of Silver, and 120 ounces of Ducat-gold for the gilding, and that it
would amount to above 25000 Crowns. The designer of it was a German, born at
Nuremberg, his name, Esaias Zinkgraf

The Great Duke sat in his Chair, clad in a long Coat, embroidered with
Pearls, and beset with all sorts of precious Stones. He had above his Cap,
which was of Martins-skins, a Crown of Gold, beset with great Diamonds, and in
his right hand a Scepter of the same Metal, and no less rich, and so weighty,
that he was forced to relieve one hand with the other. On both sides of his
Majesty's Chair stood young Lords, very handsome, both as to Face and Body,
clad in long Coats, of white Damask, with Caps of a Linx's skin, and white
Buskins, with Chains of Gold, which crossing upon the breast, reached down to
their hips. They had laid over their shoulders each a Silver Ax, whereto they
put their hands, as if they had been going to give their stroke. On the right
side of the Chair, upon a Pyramid of Silver carved thorough, stood the Imperial
Apple, of massy Gold, representing the World, as big as a Canon-bullet of 48
pound weight; and at a like distance, on the same side, a Basin and Ewer and a
Napkin, to wash and wipe the Great Dukes hands, after the Ambassadors and those
of their retinue had kissed them. The principal Bojares or Lords of the Court,
to the number of fifty, were all set upon Benches by the wall-side, on one
side, and opposite to the Great Duke, very richly clad, with great Caps, of a
black Fox furr, a good quarter of an ell high. The Chancellor stood on the
right hand, some five paces from the chair.

They having made a low reverence at their Entrance, The Ceremonies of the
audience.
were placed in the midst of the Hall opposite to the Great Duke, and about ten
paces from him, having behind them the Officers and Gentlemen of their retinue,
on the right, the two Gentlemen who carried the Credential Letters, which they
held before them, and on the left, the Interpreter John Helmes. This done, the
Great Duke made a sign to the Chancellor, that he should tell the Ambassadors,
that his Majesty granted them the favor to do him reverence. The* Ambassadors
went one after another, and kissed his right hand, which he very gracefully
reach^d to them, and with a smiling countenance, taking the Scepter in the mean
time in his left hand. Now it is to be observed, that in these ceremonies, he
who kisses the Great Dukes hand is not to touch it with his own, and that only
the Ambassadors of Christian Princes have the honor to kiss it, which the
Turks and Persians, much less the Tartarians, have not.

This Ceremony ended, he caused the Chancellor to tell them, that if they had
ought to propose from their Prince, they might do it. Whereupon the Ambassador
Crusius made him a complement from the Duke our Master, and his condoleances
for the death of the Patriarch his Father, adding, that his Highness hoping we
should have found him living, had given them Letters of Credence for him, and
that they had brought them along with those his Highness writ to his Majesty.
Whereupon he took the Letters from those that held them, and was advancing to
deliver them; but the Great Duke made a sign to the Chancellor to take them,
and having commanded him to come to him, he whispered in his ear the answer he
would make the Ambassadors. The Chancellor being returned to his place, said,
The Grand Seigneur Czaar, and Great Duke, etc. tells thee, Philip Crusius, and
thee, Otton Brugman, Ambassadors from the Duke of Holstein, that he has
received the Letters of his Highness, that he will order them to be translated,
and he will acquaint you with his intention by his Bojares, and that he will
make answer thereto. The Chancellor, who had not uncovered himself, no more
than the other Lords, took off his Cap when he pronounced the name of his
Majesty, or that of his Highness of Holstein.

This done, The Ambassadors were seated on a Bench covered with a Turkey
Carpet, which was set behing them, and the Chancellor told them, that the Great
Duke was pleased that their Officers and Gentlemen should have the honor of
kissing his hand. Which done, the Great Duke raised himself up a little in his
Chair, and said to the Ambassadors, Knez Frederic jescha sdorof? Is Duke
Frederick in good health? Whereto it was answered, that at our departure we had
left him very well, God grant a good life and a long, and all happiness to his
Majesty and Highness.

Then was brought in a List of the Presents, which were sent in with it* and
stood some time before the Great Duke, till the Chancellor ordered them to be
taken away. The said Chancellor presently after told the Ambassadors, that the
Czaar and Great Duke of all the Russians, Lord and Sovereign of many
Seignories, etc. was further pleased they should speak of their A^^airs; but
they desired, that, to avoid doing any thing prejudicial to the Treatise made
between the Crown of Sueden and his Highness, concerning the Commerce of
Persia, they might have a private Audience together; which was accordingly
granted. After this, the Great Duke caused them to be asked, whether they were
in health, and whether they wanted any thing, giving them notice, that that day
he would do them the favor to treat them with meat from his own Table. This
was the first public Audience the Ambassadors had. They were brought back to
the Antichamber by the same Bojares who had received them at their en^rance. We
mounted at the same place where we alighted, and returned to our Lodgings,
accompanied by our Pristafs, The Grand Duke treats the Ambassadors.
in the same order as we had gone thence. We were hardly alighted ere there
came in one of the Gentlemen of the Great Duke's Chamber. He was of the quality
of the Knez, to which his countenance and behavior was suitable, being of
great stature, magnificently clad, excellently well mounted and attended, and
had been sent by the Great Duke, to treat the Ambassadors at Dinner. As Soon as
he was come in, he caused the cloth to be laid, on which were in the first
place set, a Salt-seller, and two Vinegar-dishes of Silver, and certain
drinking-cups, whereof three were of Gold, and two others of Silver, and so
big, that they were above a foot diameter, a great Knife and some Forks. This
Lord, seating himself at the end of the Table, ordered the Ambassadors to sit
down by him, the Gentlemen standing before them. He caused to be set on the
Table before the Ambassadors three great vessels full of Sack, Rhenish-Wine,
and Hydromel, and caused the meat to be served out, on 38. great Silver Dishes,
which consisted in boiled, roasted and pastry. All being served, the Knez rise,
caused the Ambassadors to come before the Table, and told them, there was the
Provision which the Czaar had commanded him to entertain them withal, praying
them to be pleased with the treatment. Then he took the great Cup, which he
caused to be filled with excellent good Hydromel, made with Raspices and having
drunk his Majesty's health, he caused as much to be given the Ambassadors, and
all their retinue, obliging us to drink the Great Duke's health all at the same
time. Some of us would have reached their arms over the Table, to take the
Gobelet, but the Muscovite would not suffer it, saying, that Table then
represented the Great Duke's, who permits none to go behind his Table, and so
obliged them to come round about and take the Cup. This health was followed by
that of our Prince, which he began to the Ambassadors, saying, God grant health
and prosperity to his Highness, and make him long to continue in a good
correspondence and amity with his Majesty. The third health was that of the
Prince, the Great Duke's son. This done, they sat to the Table, and some
Gobelets of a Wine made of Cherries and Mulberries were drunk about. The
Ambassadors presented him with a Vermilion-gilt cup, of the weight of three
Marks and a half, which he caused to be carried before him, as he returned to
the Castle.

Aug. 20. The Pristafs came to tell us, that the Great Duke was pleased we
should go (...) and gave us the liberty to walk about the City, and to that end
Horses should be brought us from his own stables, when ere we should desire it.
We were also permitted to visit the Suedish Ambassadors, and to receive their
Visits. All which were thought so great favors, that the Muscovites themselves
were astonished at it; for till then it had not been suffered, that the
Domestics of strange Ambassadors should walk about the City, but, when their
occasions obliged them to go abroad, they were accompanied by one or more of
the Musketeers. Two days after, the Pristaf accompanied by a Groom of the
Great Duke's stables, brought us six horses, and conducted us to the Lodgings
of the Suedish Ambassadors, whom we saw several times after, and held a very
fair correspondence with them.

Aug. 23. The Ambassadors would have invited to Dinner Dr. Wendelin, the
Physician, the Apothecary, and some other servants of the Great Duke; but the
Chancellor would not suffer them to come, and forbad them seeing us for three
days; of which rigorous treatment we could have no account, till afterward,
that we were told, it was, because, the Presents had not yet been valued, among
which was the Cabinet made like an Apothecaries shop, we spoke of before, which
could not be valued but by them.

The 24. Came before Moscou Arnald Spirin, Farmer General of the Customs in
Livonia, through which he had passed, and was sent by the Crown of Sueden to be
present at the Negotiation, which the Ambassadors thence were to manage for
Commerce, wherein he was very well versed. The Muscovites, who knew him, made
some difficulty to entertain him in that quality; but perceiving the Suedes
took it ill, they were at last content to do it, and sent a Pristaf to meet and
receive him.

September 1. SEPTEM.
The Muscovites celebrated the first day of their New year; The Muscovian
New Years day.
for having no other Epoche than that of the Creation of the World, which they
believe to have been in Autumn, they begin the year with the Month of
September, and they accounted then 7142 years, according to the opinion of the
Greeks, and the Eastern Church, which count 5508. from the Creation of the
World to the birth of Christ; whereto add 1634. you will find the number 7142.
whereas we account from the Creation of the World to the same year 1634. but
5603 years. Their Procession was hand some enough, consisting of above 20000
persons, of all ages, who were admitted into the outer Court of the Castle. The
Patriarch, attended by almost 400 Priests, all Pontifically habited, and
carrying a many Banners, Images, and old Books open, came out of the Church,
which is on the right hand of the second Court, while the Great Duke came out
on the left hand of the same Court, accompanied by his Councillors of State,
Knez, and Bojares. The Great Duke and the Patriarch advanced one toward the
other, and kissed, the Duke having his Cap in his hand; and the Patriarch, who
had a Mitre on his head, held in his ^^id a Golden Cross, about a foot long,
beset with Diamonds and other precious stones, which he presented to the Great
Duke to kiss. That done, the Patriarch gave his Majesty his Benediction, as
also to all the people, wishing them all prosperity in the New year. There were
many Muscovitis who held their Petitions in the air, and, their way of
presenting them to the Great Duke, was, to cast them with no small noise at his
feet, whence certain Officers gathered them up, to be carried to his Majesty's
chamber, that they might be answered. This done, the Processions parted, and
returned to the place from whence they came.

Sept. 3. Gillenstiern, Bureus, and Spiring, who were to Negotiate jointly with
us concerning the Passage into Persia, were conducted to their public
audience, with the same Ceremonies as we had been, while the two other Suedish
Ambassadors, Mr. Philip Scheiding, and Col. Henry Fleming were to treat in
private, of the difference which were between the Crown of Sueden and the Great
Duke. The Three former desired in their audience to be received jointly with
us, to treat with those whom it should please his Majesty to appoint for that
purpose: which was granted.

Hereupon, all the Ambassadors, as well the Suedish as ours, went the 5th to
the Castle. They were at first conducted into a spacious appartment, on the
left hand, where they found the same Goses, or Merchants, and in the same
habits, as we had seen at our first Audience. Thence they went into a Hall,
where the four Commissioners appointed to treat with us, were sat at a Table
expecting us. They were, two Bojares, and two Chancellors, or Secretaries of
State, very richly clad, having Coats of stripped Satin, embroidered with very
great Perls and other precious stones, and great Golden Chains which made a
Cross upon their breasts. The Bojares had Caps, after the fashion of calotts,
beset with Perls, having in the midst a clustre of Diamonds and precious
Stones. The other two had their Caps of black-fox fur, according to the
ordinary fashion. They received the Ambassadors very civilly, and entreated
them to sit down by them; but with all their civility they took up the best
places themselves, at one corner of the Hall, where the benches joined. The
Ambassadors took up theirs near them against the Wall; and there was brought a
seat without any back, for the Chancellors or Secretaries of State, opposite to
the others. John Helmes, the Great Duke's chief Interpreter, stood among our
Pristafs, and all the Gentlemen, with all the rest of our retinue, stayed in
the Antichamber, except only the two Secretaries of the Suedish Ambassy and
ours, as many Interpreters, and a Muscovite Clark, who was taken in to take
notes of what was treated of. All having taken their places, one of the Bojares
asked the Ambassadors, whether they were supplied with necessary provisions, or
wanted any thing? The Ambassadors made answer, that they had occasion rather to
commend those who had the management thereof, and that they gave his Majesty
their most humble thanks for his care of them. After this complement, all rise
up, and being uncovered, the more considerable of the two Bojares, said, The
Grand Seigneur Czaar and Great Duke (reciting all his Titles, and being all sat
down again, he went on) gives you to understand, you Lords Ambassadors from the
Crown of Sueden, and Duke of Holstein, that he has caused your Letters to be
translated into the Muscovian Language, and that he has also hearkened to the
Propositions you made to him, at the public audience he gave you. Upon that
they all rose again, and the other Bojare, uncovering himself, said, The Grand
Seigneur, Czaar and Great Duke, etc. (not omitting any of the former titles,
and so sitting down, continued) wishes the Queen of Sueden and the Duke of
Holstein all prosperity, and victory over their Enemies, and tells you, that he
has read their Letters, and that he well understands their intention. The
third Commissioner proceeded with the same Ceremonies, saying The Grand
Seigneur, etc. has seen the Letters you have brought him, is satisfied, that
all credence is to be given you in what you shall say and propose, which shall
accordingly be done. To which the fourth added, That his Majesty, the Czaar,
had appointed them Commissioners, to receive from them, what they had to
propose and desire; and thereupon read the names of the Commissioners, who were:

Knez Boris Michaelouits, Likow Obolenscoi, Weywode of Tuere Knez Vasili
Iuanouits Stresnow, Weywode of Tarschock The two Secretaries of State, whom
they call Dumnoi Diaken, were, Iuan Tarascouits Granmatin, Lord Keeper of the
Seals or Chancellor, etc. Iuan Offonassiowsin Gauaarenow, Vicechancellor.
This done, they all rise, and one of the Suedish Ambassadors, Eric
Gillenstierna, having given his Majesty thanks on the behalf of his Mistress,
for their admission to a private audience, read to the Commissioners their
proposition, contained in one sheet of paper, written in the the German tongue.
We would have done the like with ours; but being larger than the other, to
forbear importuning the Commissioners, we thought it enough to put it in with
that of the Suedish Ambassadors. The Commissioners, having received them, went
up to the Great Duke's Chamber, to communicate them to him, leaving us alone,
save that the Pristafs and Gentlemen of our retinue were permitted to come into
the room to entertain us. Having expected a good half-hour, the Vice Chancellor
came down to tell us, that we should have no other answer at that time, than
that his Majesty would cause the propositions to be translated, and would let
us know his resolution with the soonest.

Sept. 10. The Suedish Ambassadors had their last private audience, as to what
concerned the affairs of that Crown.

The 12. A Tartarian Cavalcade.
We saw a Cavalcade of three Tartarian Ambassadors. sent by the Prince of
Cassan, a Vassal of the Great Duke's. They had no other retinue or company than
that of sixteen servants, who followed them, with their Bows and Arrows in
their hands. Their Cassocks, were of a very coarse red cloth; but at their
return from audience, they were in Damask coats, some red, some yellow, which
the Great Duke had bestowed on them by way of present. There hardly passes a
year, but these Gentlemen, as well as the other Tartars their Neighbors, send
such an Ambassy to Moscou; not so much for any business they have, as to get
some Furs, Martins skins, and silk Vestments.

The 15. Our Pristafs came to tell us, that the Great Duchess was, the day
before, delivered of a Daughter, who was already Christened, and named Sophia,
according to the custom of the Muscovites, who baptize their Children
immediately after their birth, and without any Ceremonies or entertainments, as
they do in other Countries. The Patriarch was her Godfather, as he had been to
all the rest of the Great Duke's Children, who would nevertheless have us to
participate of that joy, upon which account, our ordinary allowance was doubled.

The 17. Came in a Turkish Ambassador, The entrance of a ^urkish Ambassador.
who was received with great Ceremonies; and though they sent 16000 Horse to
meet him, yet in all that Army there were seen but six Colors. The first,
which was that of the Duke's Guard, was of white Satin, and had in the midst,
within a circle of Laurel, an Imperial Eagle with a triple Crown, with this
Motto, Virtute Supero. One of Crimson Damask branched, having in the midst a
Ianus with two faces. One of a plain red Damask; and the other three, blew and
white, whereof one had a Gryffon, another, a Snail; the third, a naked Arm
coming out of the Clouds, and holding a sword. It Is thought these were the
devises of the German officers, during the War at Smolensco. Every Colors was
attended by Timbrels and Hautbois, but the white had six Trumpets, which made a
wretched inharmonious noise. The Knez and Lords that were sent to meet this
Ambassadors, were excellently well mounted, upon Horses that came out of
Persia, Poland, and Germany, very richly set out, having with them out of the
Great Dukes Stable, twenty led Horses, with great silver Chains instead of
Bridles, such as we have mentioned before.

We, with the Gentlemen and Officers of the Suedish Officers retinue, made up a
Troop of fifty Horse, under the command of Wolfwolf Spar, Gentleman of the
Horse to the Suedish Embassy, who, as our Captain, marched in the head of the
Troop. We went a good league to meet the Ambassador, who no sooner perceived
us, but he looked very earnestly upon us, and we upon him. We kept along with
him a good while, to take the better notice of his retinue, and Cavalcade,
which marched in the order following.

First, marched 46 Strelits, having, instead of Muskets, Bows and Arrows, and
Cimitars by their sides. After them came a Pristaf clad in a Coat of Brocado,
and followed by eleven Men, clad in Red Branched Velvet, whereof some were
Grecian and Turkish Merchants, some Greek Ecclesiastics. After them marched
the Ambassador's Steward, alone, and behind him a Gua^d of four, with Bows and
Arrows. After them two Cavalliers very richly clad, immediately preceding the
Ambassador, who marched alone. He was a middle-statur'd Man, much tanned in the
face, his Beard very black: His under-coat was of a White-Flowr'd Satin, and
his upper Garment of Satin purfled with Gold, lined with Martins-skins. His
Turbant was white, as were also those of his retinue. He was in a sorry Wagon,
of a white kind of Wood, but all covered with rich Tapestry. The rest of his
Train consisted in above forty Wagons of Baggage, which were every one kept by
one or two Boys. Being come within a quarter of a league of the City, near, as
he imagined, the place where the Muscovites would receive him, he mounted an
excellent Arabian Horse. Nor indeed had he rode a Pistol-shot, ere he met the
two Pristafs appointed for his reception, with the Great Duke's Horses,
according to the custom. The Pristafs continued on Horsback, till the
Ambassador had alighted; but he, on the other side, stirred not his Turbant,
though the Muscovites took off their Caps, when they pronounced the Great Duks
name.

After this first Complement, the Pristafs immediately mounted; the Ambassador
did what he could to be in the Saddle as soon as they, or sooner; but they had
brought him a very high Horse (with a Saddle yet much higher, according to the
Muscovian fashion) and so skittish withal, that he not only found some
difficulty to get up, but very narrowly escaped being hurt by him. Being got up,
the Pristafs took him between them, and conducted him to the ordinary place for
the entertainment of Ambassadors, which had been built up since our coming
thither. As soon as he was got in, the doors were shut, and several Guards of
Musketeers placed about it.

Our Ambassadors intended to have gone that day to those of Sueden, who had
invited them to dinner, to show them the Turks, who were lodged near them, the
Suedes having a prospect into their Court: but the Chancellor sent to desire us
not to stir abroad that day, for reasons he could not discover.

The 19. We had the second private Audience with the suedish Ambassadors.

The 23. The Turkish Ambassador had his first public Audience, The Turkish
Ambassadors first audience.
to which he went in this order.

In the Front marched 20 Cosaques, mounted on white Horses, out of the Great
Duke's stables: after them, the Turkish and Greek Merchants; and then the
Presents, viz.

Twenty pieces of Satin stripped with Gold, carried by so many Muscovites, who
marched all in a file.

A Golden Cross, about a fingers length, beset with several large Diamonds,
carried by a Muscovite in a Basin.

A Vessel of Rock-Chrystal, adorned with Gold, and enriched with precious
Stones.

A Belt or Girdle for a Cimitar, enrich^d with Gold, and beset with precious
Stones.

A Pearl of great bigness, laid on a piece of watered Taffata, in a Basin.

Harness for two Horses, embroidered with Gold, and set with Pearls.

A very fair Diamond-ring, in a Basin.

A Ruby, as big as a Crown piece of Silver, enchac'd in Gold, in a Basin.

A very fair Battel-Ax, which they call Bulaf, formed like a Scepter.

After the Presents marched eight Turks, two abreast, and after them, two very
handsome young men, carrying upon great pieces of silk, the Credential Letters,
which though folded, were yet at least half an ell wide. The Greek
Ecclesiastics were not in the Cavalcade, but had their Audience by themselves
the 28. following. Two Muscovy Priests went to them at their Lodgings, and
conducted them to the Castle, where they met a great number of Priests, who
accompanied them to their audience. Their presents were;

Six Basins with Relics, or a parcel of Bones, whereof some were gilt.

Linings for a Priest's Cope, embroidered with Gold and Perls.

A Head-stall for a Horse, beset with precious Stones.

Two pieces of Satin purfled with Gold.

One Priest's Cope.

One piece of silvered Taby, with flowers of Gold.

The Greeks marched after the Presents, clad in Violet Chamlet, and had a Cross
carried before them.

Our Ambassadors had also Letters from the Elector of Saxony to the Great Duke,
and thought fit to deliver them at a Public Audience, for which was appointed
St. Michael's day, Sept. 29. We went in the same order as the time before, and
the Letters were carried M. Vchterits upon black and yellow Taffata, which are
the Elector's Colors. The Great Duke received them with much kindness,
inquired after the health of his Electoral Highness, and commanded we should
once more be furnished with meat from his own Table; which indeed was brought
us, not ready dressed as the former, but we were left to order it as we would
our selves.

October 1. the Muscovites keep as one of their most solemn Festivals, OCTOBER. A
Muscovian Festival.
or Prasnick: the Ceremonies, these. The Great Duke attended by the whole
Court, and the Patriarch, accompanied by all the Clergy, went in Procession to
the Church which is in the outer Court of the Castle, called by the Muscovites,
that of the Blessed Trinity, by the Germans, Jerusalem. But before they went
into it, they turned aside to a place balcony'd about much after the form of a
Theater, on the right hand as you go to the Church, near which place are two
great pieces of Canon, whereof the bore is at least half an ell diameter. The
Great Duke and the Patriarch, being got into it, not admitting any other, the
Patriarch presented to his Majesty an Image painted upon a piece of past-board,
which folded as it had been a book, enriched with silver in the middle, and at
the four corners, to which Image the Czaar made a most low reverence, and
touched it with his forehead, the Priests in the mean time muttering over
their Prayers. Which done, the Patriarch approaching the Great Duke again,
presented him, to kiss it, a Golden Cross, of about a foot length, beset with
Diamonds. He also touched his forehead and temples with it: whereupon they all
went into the Church, where they concluded the service.

The Greeks that came along with the Turkish Ambassador, went in also, by a
privilege particular to them, of all Christians, whom the Muscovites suffer
not to enter their Churches; but they permit the Greeks, as such as profess the
same Religion with them.

October. 8. we had our third private Audience, with the Suedish Ambassadors, and
were above two hours in conference with the Great Duke's Ministers.

The 12. the Great Duke went on Pilgrimage, The Great Duke goes a Pilgrimage.
to a Church half a league from the City. He rode alone on horseback, with a
whip in his hand, and was followed by above 1000. horse. The Knez and Bojares
who attended him, marched ten abreast, which made a noble show, and expressed
the greatness of the Prince. The Great Duchess, with the young Prince and
Princess, followed them in a large Chariot, all of Joyners work, covered with
Scarlet, the curtains of yellow Taffata, drawn by sixteen white horses. After
the Dutchess's, the Court-Ladies were carried in 22. other Chariots, of wood,
painted green, covered with Scarlet, the curtains drawn close, so that those
within could not be seen. I had the happiness, the wind having blown those of
the Great Duchess, a little on one side, to have a glimps of her, and I
thought her very handsome, and very richly clad. On both sides marched above a
hundred Strelits, having white tlaves in their hands, to keep off the people,
who were thronging to bless their Princess, for whom the Muscovites have a
particular respect and devotion.

The 23. we had, with the Suedish Ambassadors, our fourth private Audience,
wherein we concluded our Negotiation, The 28. the Suedish had their last
public Audience in order to their departure, returning from which, they caused
the Answer to their Letters, to be carried by two Gentlemen. The 7. and 10. of
November they departed from Mosco, in three troops, some taking the way of
Livonia, others that of Sueden.

Nov. 19. we had our fifth and last private Audience, NOVEM.
at which it was told us, that his Czaarick Majesty, having taken our
propositions into serious consideration, had at last resolved to gratify his
Highness the Duke of Holstein, as his Friend, Uncle, and Ally, as to what he
had desired of him, and to grant him, what he had denied many other Princes and
Potentates of Europe, to wit, a passage through Muscovy to go into Persia, and
that his Ambassadors might go thither, The Great Duke grants the Ambassadors a
passage through his Country.
but with this proviso, that they should first return back to Holstein, and
bring him the ratification of the present Treaty.

Having so happily, though with much difficulty, perfected our negotiation, we
thought it not amiss, to divert our selves, for some days, among our friends;
as we did at the Christening of a Child of the Residents of Sueden, at a feast
which Dr. Wendelin made, at the marriage of a Kinsman of his, and at the
magnificent entertainment which David Ruts, one of the chiefest Dutch Merchants
there, gave us at his own house.

The 22. The Muscovites made a solemn Procession to a Church, near the ordinary
place where the Ambassadors are entertained, at which the Great Duke and the
Patriarch were present. There was a passage made with Deal-boards, from the
Castle to the Church, along which came first several pedling Merchants, who
sold wax Candles; after them, some that swept the passage and kept it clean.
The Procession was thus.

First, went a man carrying an Ewer, and a Napkin.

Three men carrying Banners, like Cornet's Colors, half Red, half White.

Sixty one Priests, in their Copes.

Four Cherubins carried upon long poles.

A man carrying a Lantern at the top of a long pole.

Forty Priests.

Eight Priests, carrying a great Cross, fastened in a great piece of timber,
double-cross'd.

A hundred Priests and Monks, carrying every one a painted Image.

A great Image covered, carried by two men.

Forty Priests.

A great Image, adorned with abundance of precious Stones, carried by three men.

Another lesser Image.

Four Priests singing.

Another Image.

A Cross of Diamonds, in a Basin.

Two men, carrying each a lighted Taper.

The Patriarch, in Pontificalibus, very richly clad, under a blew Canopy, and
led by the Arms by two Men, having behind, and on one side of him, about fifty
Priests and Monks.

The Great Duke under a red Canopy, supported by two Lords of his Counsel, and
attended by his Knez and Bojares.

The Great Duke's Chair of State, of red Velvet, carried by two men.

The Great Duke's Horse.

His S'edge, drawn by two white Horses.

This Procession was occasioned upon the finding of an Image of our Lady's in a
certain place, where, since, there is a Church built.

December 12. We saw a Cavalcade of seventy two Crim-Tartars, A Cavalcade of
Crim-Tartars.
who all took the quality of Ambassadors, and were going to have Audience,
which the Great Duke gave them, and whereat he had the patience to endure them
for the space of three hours. Being come into the Hall of Audience, some sat
on the ground, others lay along, and there was given every one a Gobelet of
Hydromel; to the two Chief of the Embassy, Garments of Brocado, to others of
Scarlet, and to the most inconsiderable among them, Clothes of some more common
Stuff, with some Furrs, and Caps of Martins-skins, which they had upon their
other clothes, as they returned from Audience. It Is a Nation absolutely
barbarous and dreadful to look on. Though they are at a great distance from
Muscon, toward the South, yet they do the Great Duke abundance of mischief by
their incursions, and the robberies they incessantly commit upon his Subjects.
The Czaar, Faedor Iuanouits, the present Great Duke's Father, endeavored to
prevent their incursions, by causing the Woods to be cut down, and by means of
a Causway and a Moat, which he had caused to be drawn a hundred leagues
together, to hinder their entrance into his Country: but they never rested till
they had pulled down one, and filled the other; so that, to keep them at home,
the Great Duke is obliged from time to time, to suffer these Embassies, the
design whereof is only to get Presents, whereof the expense would not trouble
the Great Duke, if they would keep the Barbarians quiet, but they continue in
peace but till they perceive they can make any advantage by the breach of it.

The 16. we had Audience, The Ambassadors have their last Audience.
in order to our departure, to which we were conducted with the same Pomp and
Ceremonies as to the first, save that by reason of the Ice and Snow, which
hinder great Lords to make use of horses, they sent us two sumptuous Sledges,
whereof one was lined with a Crimson watered Satin, the other, with Damask of
the same color. There were within them some white Bears-skins, and over head
rich Turkey Tapistry, to serve for a covering. The Buckles of the Harness were
covered of all sides with Fox-tailes, which is the richest Ornament, that the
Great Lords, nay indeed the Great Duke himself, can make use of. The Pristafs
had each his Sledge, and went on the right hand of the Ambassadors. At our
alighting, we were received by two Bojares, after the accustomed manner. As
soon as the Ambassadors were come into the Great Duke's presence, and that the
Chancellor had given him an account of their health, a seat was brought, and
they were entreated to sit down. Whereupon the Chancellor said, The Grand
Seigneur, Czaar, and Great Duke, Michael Federouits, Conservator of all the
Russes, etc. tells you the Lords Ambassadors, that his Highness, Duke Frederick
of Holstein* having sent you to his Czaarick Majesty with the Letters which he
has received, he has, npon your entreaty, caused your propositions to be
communicated unto and examined by his Bojares and Counselors, Knez Boris
Michaelouits Lukou, Vasili Iuanouits Strenou; and the Dumnoi, Diakan, Iuan
Tarassouits, and Iuan Gauarenow, upon which all sides are agreed to a Treaty
which you have signed. His Majesty has also received the Letters you brought
him from Iohn-George, Elector of Saxony, the contents whereof he has also
considered. You shall immediately receive his Majesty's answer, both to Duke
Frederick, of Holstein, and to the Elector Iohn-George. Whererpon he delivered
them the Letters before the Great Duke's Chair, and the Ambassadors having
received them with much respect, the Great Duke said, When the Ambassadors
shall have arrived at the Court of the most Serene John-George, Elector of
Saxony, and his Highness, Duke Frederick of Holstein, they will salute them
from me. Which done, they were told by the Chancellor, that his Majesty was
pleased to grant the Ambassadors, and Gentlemen, and Officers of their retinue,
the favor of kissing his hand once more.

That done, they told us, we should have meat sent from the Great Duke's own
Table. The Ambassadors gave the Czaar thanks for all the favors they had
received from him, wishing his Majesty long life and a happy Government, and,
to the whole house of the Czaar all prosperity. Having taken their leaves, they
returned to their quarters. About an hour after, the meat from the Great Duke's
Table was brought, in forty six dishes, most fish, boiled, broyl'd, and fried
in Oil, some Sallets and Pastry; but no flesh, by reason of the Fast which the
Muscovites very rigorously observe before Christmas. Knez Iuan Wolf, came along
with them, to treat us, with the same ceremonies as we were treated with at our
first public audience. After Dinner, we were visited by the Groom of the
Stables, the Butler, and the Pourveyer, who came to demand their Presents. The
Knez, the Groom, and the Butler, had each of them a drinking Cup of
Vermilion-gilt. The rest, who were about sixteen, had bestowed among them 32.
Roubles, which amount to about 64. French Crowns.

The next day, the two Pristafs, accompanied by their Interpreters, John
Helmes, and Andrew Angler, of whom the former had served us in our Negotiation,
with the Great Duke and the Bojares, the other, in our private affairs, came to
ask us how many Horses we should stand in need of for our return. We demanded
80. and presented each of them with a large drinking Cup, of Vermilion-gilt. We
did the like to the chief Secretary of the Chancery, and some of the great
Lords.

The 21. Our Pristafs presented to us another Pristaf, named Bogidan Tzergeuits
Gomodof, who had orders to conduct us to the Frontiers of Sueden.

The next day were brought us the Horses appointed for our journey, and at the
same time came, with one of our Pristafs, the Lord Treasurers Secretary,
accompanied by 12. Muscovites, laden with Martins-skins, The Czaar's present.
to be presented, from the Great Duke, to the Ambassadors, and those of their
retinue. The Ambassadors had for their shares eleven Zimmers (every Zimmer
makes twenty pair) of the best kind of Sables; The Officers, Gentlemen, Pages,
Harbinger, the Clerk of the Kitchen, and the Master of the Wagons, had each a
Zimmer of Martins-skins. The rest had some two, some but one pair. We gave the
Secretary a drinking Cup, of Vermilion-gilt, and to the rest 30 Crowns. The
Great Duke sent also to tell us, that if we would make a little longer stay at
Moscou, by reason of the approaching Festivals of Christmas, and the cold
weather, which indeed was to extremity, he should take it kindly, and, though
we had our dispatches, yet should we be furnished with the ordinary provisions;
but the desire we had to return into Germany, would not permit us to accept of
his favor, so that we put all things in readiness for our journey. To that
end, we bought Sledges, that we might travel with more convenience; they
standing us in but three or four Crowns apiece. But in regard we were to travel
into Persia, having obtained the Great Dukes permission to do it, it was
thought fit, that Michael Cords, with six other persons of our retinue, should
be sent to Nisa, which is a hundred Leagues from Moscou, there to order the
building of such ships as we should stand in need of, as well upon the River
Wolga, as the Caspian Sea.

December. 24. Was the day of our departure from Moscou, in order to our return.
The two Pristafs came about noon, accompanied by a certain number of
Musketeers, who had brought with them those two Sledges, which we had made use
of at our last audience, and conducted us in very good order a quarter of a
League from the City; where we took leave of them, as also of those friends who
had brought us so far on our way.

That day, and the night following, we made 90 Werstes, or eighteen German
Leagues, to a Village named Klin, where the next day we had a Sermon, it being
Christmas day. In the afternoon, Kl^n. Tuere.
we parted thence, and kept on our way all night, so that the next day in the
morning, December 26. we arrived at Tuere, where we took fresh Horses, with which
departing that night, Tarsock. Novogorod.
we came the next day to Tarsock. Four days after, viz. December. 31. which was
the 7th after our departure from Moscou, we came to the City of Novogorod,
which is distant from the other 120 German Leagues. Which is not to be much
wondered at, for that Muscovy is a plain Country, and during the cold weather,
many times the Horses travel upon the Snow ten or twelve German Leagues
together without ever drawing bit.

January 1. 1635. After Prayers and Sermon, we left Novogorod, and got forwards
36 Werstes, 1635.
or seven Leagues, to Mokriza. The 2. We came to Tuerin, six leagues and a
half. The 3. to Orlin, JANUARY.
six Leagues; the 4. to Sariza, 8 Leagues; and the night following we made
four Leagues, to Lilienhagen, belonging to Dame Mary Stop, the Relict of John
Muller, who, Mokriza. Tauerin.
living, had been Agent from Sueden, in Muscovy. We were very well treated
there; and the next day we got seven Leagues, and came to Narva.

The 6. We sent away our baggage. Orlin. Sariza. Lilienhagen. Narva. Revel.
The Ambassadors followed the next day, and three days after, viz. the 10. we
came to Revel, whence we stirred not for the space of three weeks. But
considering at last, that the Baltic Sea was not Navigable that time of the
year, and being withal unwilling to stay there the rest of the Winter, Narva.
we conceived it would be our best course to be gone thence with the soonest,
Revel.
and to prosecute our journey by Land, through Prussia, Pomerania, and
Mecklenbourg.

The Ambassadors left Revel Ian. 30. having tabled most of their retinue with
Mr. Henry Kosen, and with a retinue of ten persons, took their way to Riga The
two first nights we passed over at Kegel, a house belonging to John Muller,
Counselor of the City of Revel, my Father-in-law; where we were very well
entertained.

Feb. 2. we came to Parnau, at which place God was pleased to favor me with
a great deliverance, which was thus; discharging their Canon at our entrance,
the Tampion, which they had forgotten to take out of one of the pieces, passed
very near me, and struck against the wall of the City Gate, where it broke,
the splinters of it flying about my head with such violence, that, being
stunned thereby, it was half an hour ere I recovered my self.

The City of Parnau is but a small one, FEBRUARY.
but has a good Castle, built of wood, and after the Muscovian fortification;
to which the Houses, the Gates, and the Churches are suitable. It is seated
upon the little River of Parnau The Description of Parnau.
of Parnou, which gives it the name, and which rising out of the great Forest
near the little River Beca and the Castle of Weissenstein, and receiving in its
passage the waters of the Rivers Fela and Pernkeia, disembougues it self into
the Baltic Sea, near this City, which is divided into two parts, the Old and
the New. It Is numbered among the Hanseatick Towns, though it has not in a
manner any other Commerce than that of Wheat. Eric, K. of Sueden, took it from
the Poles, in the year 1562. but they recovered it again by stratagem, in the
year 1565. The Muscovites became Masters of it July 9. 1575. but it was
reunited to the Crown of Poland, with the rest of Livonia, by the Treaty of
Peace made between that Crown and the Great Duke. In the year 1617. the Suedes
took it, and have kept it ever since.

We met there with the Countess Dowager La Tour, named Magdalene, of the house
of Hardek, in Austria. The Ambassadors sent me, with two more of our retinue
to complement her, and to make proffers of service to her in their names. She
took it so kindly, that not content to make us drink his Highnesse's health
three times over, she forced us to take the bovvls out of her own hands, and
in the mean time entertained us with much excellent discourse, in commendation
of his Highness and that Embassy; as also concerning the manners and Religion
of the Muscovites, with a svveetness and gravity which cannot well be
expressed. She would needs have the young Counts, Christian, and Henry, her
sons, go to the Inn where the Ambassadors were Lodged, to complement them*
which the young Lords performed handsomely; and to heighten their civility,
they also stayed Supper with them.

The next day, the Countess sent us all manner of Provisions, and Letters for
Count Matthew Henry de la Tour, her father-in-lavv. She sent also to desire the
Ambassadors to recommend her sons to his Highness, and to assure him of their
services, when they should be of an age, and in a capacity to do him any. As we
were getting on hors-back, our Host showed himself an honest man, and refused
to take our money, telling us, the Countess had sent in most of the Provisions
for the Ambassadors Supper, and that the rest was not worth the reckoning: so
that to require his sincerity we gave him twenty Crowns. But we were not got a
League off the City, ere we were overtaken by a man he had sent, to return us
our money, and to tell us the Present was too small, in requital of the trouble
we had given him. We sent back our Harbinger, with the Messenger, who gave the
Host twelve Crowns more, wherewith he seemed to be satisfied.

The 6. We entered Riga. 1635.
The next day, the Governor visited the Ambassadors, and the 10. he made a
great Feast for them, The Ambassadors come to Riga.
to which he invited the chiefest of the City. Some days following were also
spent in Feasting, among some or other of our friends.

Febr. 13. The Ambassadors left Riga, having in their Company a certain
Ambassador of France, who was called Charles de Tallerand, and assumed the
quality of Marquess of Exidueil, Prince of Chalais, Count of Grignol, Baron of
Marueil and Boswille. Lewis xiii. King of France and Navarre, had sent him with
James Roussel upon an Embassy into Turkey and Muscovy. But Roussel, his
Colleague, had done him such ill Offices with the Patriarch, that the Great Duke
sent him to Siberia, where he continued three years a prisoner; till such time,
as the malice and artifices of Roussel, who endeavored nothing so much as to
inflame the differences between the Princes, being discovered, he was set at
liberty, after the Partiarch's death. During his restraint, his diversion had
been to learn by heart the four first books of Vergil's Aeneids, which he had,
as they say, ad unguen. He was a person of an excellent good humor, aged about
36. years.

We took our way through Courland, Mittau.
and came the 4. about noon to Mittau. This little City is situated in that
part of Courland, which is called Semgalles, six Leagues from Riga, and it is
the place where the Duke ordinarily resides. Courland made a Duchy.
The Duchy of Courland was some time part of Livonia, from which it is divided
by the River Dune: but all this Province having been miserably ruined by the
Suedes and Muscovites, and the Archbishop of Riga and the Master of the
Teutonick Order having submitted to the Crown of Poland, with all they were
still possessed of there, Sigismond Augustus, King of Poland, raised Courland
to a Duchy, and gave it to Godard Ketler, of Nesselrot, last Master of the
Teutonick Order in Livonia, to be held immediately from the Crown of Poland.
Godard dies, May 17. 1587. leaving, by Anne, the Daughter of Albert Duke of
Meklenbourg, two sons, Frederick, who died without issue, and William, who
succeeded his brother in the Duchy of Courland. This William having been
dispossessed by Sigismond III. and the States of Poland, was forced to live in
Exile, till that, upon the mediation of several Foreign Princes, he was
reestablished in the year 1619. During the first War between Poland and
Sueden, the City of Mittau was taken by the Suedes, who fortified it, and
restored it not to the Duke of Courland, till obliged thereto by a Cessation
agreed on between those two Crowns, in the year 1629. James (William's son) who
now has the Duchy, and assumes the quality of the Duke of Courland, L^vonia,
and Semgalles, is married to Louise-Charlotte, Daughter to George-William,
Elector of Brandenbourg, and Elizabeth-Charlotte, of Baviere. It is not long
since, that this Duke of Courland, having dispatched a Gentleman for Moscou, to
manage some affairs there, the Weywode of Tleslau would not give him passage,
and sent him word, that Courland being dependent on the Crown of Poland, could
not have particular Agents and Ministers, but was to negotiate Affairs by means
of the Ambassador, which the King his Master had at Muscovy. But this Prince
has been so fortunate, as, since this last War, to obtain the neutrality of
all the neighboring Princes, so that it is very likely, the Treaty to be
agreed on between them will be such, as that he shall have no dependence on any
of them.

At night we came to a Village, Doblen.
called Doblen, three Leagues from Mittau. The Innkeeper, who took us for
Soldiers or Gypsies that were in distress for Lodging, made some difficulty to
let us into his house: but at last he was persuaded, and lodged us. All we had
to supper, was, hard Cheese, very brown Bread, and sour Beer.

The 15. we traveled 7. Leagues, Bador*
and came to Bador, in Poland, where an ancient Gentleman, who had sometime
been a Captain of horse, named John Amdod, lodged us, and treated us extremely
well, especially with all sorts of drinks, as Lithuanian Hydromel, excellent
Sack, and good Beer, which made us spend some part of the night in carowsing:
the Wine having the virtue of contracting a great friendship between the
Ambassadors and him. The next day he gave us a very sumptuous entertainment,
and the divertisement of Timbrells; and that all might be complete, in the
treatment, he would needs bring in his two Daughters, whom we had not seen the
night before. He also presented the Ambassadors, one with a Fire-lock, the
other with a Sword: and the Ambassadors gave him each of them a fair Watch.
This breakfast, which lasted till the afternoon, hindered us so, that we could
get but four Leagues that day, to Hashoff, Hashof.
where we went to bed supperless. The 18. we traveled six Leagues, to a
Village called Walzau. Walzau.


The ^9. we came to Memel, Memel.
six Leagues from It Is a pleasant little Town, at the entrance of the Gulf
called the Courishaf, or Lake of Courland. The Courlanders, in their Jargon,
call this Town Cleupeda, and Crometus, in his History of Poland, calls it
Troipes. The Castle belonging to it is pleasant, and well fortified, and its
Haven very commodious. The River Tange compasses it round, and not far thence
falls into the Gulf. It was built in the year 1250. and was at that time part
of the revinue of Livonia. The Friars of the Order of Livonia, in the year
1328. sold this City to the Master of the Order of Prussia, and it is, with
that Duchy, come to the Elector of Brandenburg, who has been possessed of it,
ever since the Suedes restored it, by virtue of a cessation of 26. years, which
France got concluded, in the year 1635. between the Crowns of Poland and
Sueden. The 20. we got upon the Haf, or Gulf of Curland, and dind* that day at
Snenzel, Swenzel.
three leagues from Memel, and lodged at Bulcapen Bulcapen.
five leagues from the said Memel.

The 21. we traveled 8 leagues, and came to Koningsberg* Koningsberg.
where, the snow beginning to fail us, we were forced to quit our Sledges. This
city, called by the Polanders Krolefsky, is seated by the River Pregel, the
chiefest of that part of Prussia, which is called the Ducal, because it has
its Duke, or particular Prince, under the Sovereignty of the Crown of Poland.
It Is a Production of the thirteenth age, in which the Knights of the Teutonick
Order built it, and named it Coningsberg, or Royal-mount, in honor of
Primislas Ottocarus, King of Bohemia, and in acknowledgement of the assistance
he had brought them against the Heathens in those parts. It is now much bigger
than it was then, inasmuch as, besides the suburbs, which are very great, there
was added in the year 1300. that part of the city which is called Lebenicht,
and in the year 1380. that of Kniphof, both which have their several
Magistrates, both as to policy and administration of Justice. The Palace ows
its perfection to George Frederick, of Brandenburgh, Duke of Prussia, who built
it, about the later end of the last age. Among other remarkable things, there
is a Hall, that has no pillars, and yet is 274 Geometrical feet in length, and
59 in breadth; and a fair Library well furnished with abundance of excellent
Books; among which, in drawers full of Books adorned with silver, is to be
seen, that which Albert of Brandenbourg, first Duke of Prussia, made and writ
with his own hand, for the instruction of his Son, and government of the
country, after his death. The University was founded by the same Prince, who
made it his business to render this city one of the most considerable of all
the North, The River Pregel, or Chronus, which rises in Lithuania, and falls
into the Gulf, called the Frishaf, a league below the City, contributes very
much to the improvement of its commerce; and the City is so populous, that many
times there are seven or eight families in a house. They generally speak the
German language, though there are few Iahabitants but have also the Polish,
with those of Lithuania and Courland. There are brought thithes, from ^oland
and Lithuania, Oak for Joyners work, Soap-ashes, Wax, Honey, Hydromel, Leather,
Furrs, Wheat, Rye, Flax, and Hemp; and the Suedish, Dutch, and English Ships,
bring Iron, Lead, Tinn Cloth, Wine, Salt, Butter, Cheese, etc. We say nothing
here of Prussia, out of a fear of making too great a digression, and meddling
with ought relating to the History of Germany, which has nothing common with
our Travells; but only, that the Crown of Poland has quitted all pretension of
Sovereignty over the Duchy of Prussia, by the last treaty it made with his
Electoral Highness of Brandenbourg.

We left Coningsberg, Feb. 24. and came the next day to Elbing, Elbing.
a City seated upon a River of the same name, between the Lake of Drauser, and
the Frishaf, in the Royal, or Polish Prussia. It is not very big, but its
streets are straight and spacious; and its fortifications, made by the late
King of Sueden, during the last War of Poland, before his entrance into
Germany, are very regular. If he who is Master of it, were also Commander of
the Fort of Pilau, which the Elector of Brandenburg is possessed of, at the
entrance of the Frishaf, it might be made a very considerable place for
Commerce.

The 27. we came to Dantsig, Dantsig.
where we staid 16 or 17 days, during which time, the Magistrates treated us
with the ordinary Presents of refreshments, and the principal Inhabitants gave
us several noble entertainments. The Polanders call this place Gdansko, whence
comes the modern Latin word Gedanum. It is not very ancient, and yet it cannot
be certainly affirmed whether it was built by the Dukes of Pomerania, or by the
Danes, since it seems to have its name from the later. It was a long time
possessed by the Dukes of Pomerania, and afterward by the Kings of Poland, and
by the Masters of the Teutonick Order in Prussia. In the year 1454 it redeemed
it self out of subjection to the Order, and made a voluntary rendition of it
self to Casimir, King of Poland. It is situated in Cassuba, upon the Vistula,
and Rodauna, which they say is the Eridanus of the Ancients (because in that
place there is found much yellow amber) and near the Moslava, which falls into
the Vistula, a quarter of a league below the City. But the River is so shallow
there, that great Ships cannot come up to the City: Toward the West, it has
several mounts of sand, which they were forced to bring within the
fortifications, because they commanded the city: though Canon cannot be
discharged to any great purpose, when they shoot point blank downwards, and
that there would not have been space enough between the mount and the ditch, to
put forces in order, and to give an assault. Toward the South and North, it
has a pleasant Plain, and on the East, the River. It is well built, but the
streets not over-clean. The public Structures are magnificent, and those of
private persons very commodious, and handsome. On the other side of the
Moslava, lies part of the Suburbs, called Schotland, or Scotland, as large as a
pretty little City, but it depends not on the City of Dantsig, but on the
Bishop of Cujavia. It has its seat and suffrage in the Diets of Poland, even
in those which are called for the election of the King. It Is one of the four
Cities, which have the superintendency of all the Teutonick Association, or
Hanseatick Towns, and has so many other Privileges, that, though it
contributes to Poland, and gives the King half the duties raised there, yet
does it in a manner enjoy an absolute freedom. There is so great a Commerce of
Wheat in this City, that it is thought, there are sold every year above seven
hundred and thirty thousand Tuns, whereof two make a Last. The Magistracy
consists of fourteen Senators, and four Burgomasters; whereto are to be added
the Governor, appointed by the King of Poland, some Escheuins, or Sheriffs,
for civil and criminal causes, and a hundred Counselors for affairs of
importance. Criminal causes are finally judged, without admitting any appeal,
as also Civil, not exceeding a thousand Livers. It makes Statutes, and imposes
taxes upon the Inhabitants, according to the exigencies of public Affairs,
without staying for any superior Permission, and regulates the exercise of
those Religions that are permitted by the Laws of the Empire.

March 16. We left Dantsig, and came the 25 to Stetin, It Stetin*
the chief City of Pomerania. is at 53 degrees. 27. min. latitude, and 38 d. 45. m.
longitude, seated in a very pleasant place, upon the descent of a Hill. The
River Oder divides it self there into four branches, whereof that which runs by
the City keeps its name (the others taking those of Parnits, and the greater
and lesser Kegelitz) and straggles so, as that to come to the City from
Dam-side, a man must pass over six bridges, which, put together, are in length,
996 German else, and 24 foot broad, and are all joined by a noble Causey, well
paved, and having in the middle a Royal Fort. The structures of it are
beautiful, and it is excellently well fortified, especially since the Suedes
became Masters of it. John Frederick Duke of Pomerania, in the year 1575. laid
the first foundations of the sumptuous Palace which is there built after the
Italian Architecture, with very noble appartements, where, before these last
Wars, there were worth the seeing, a noble Library, a Magazine of Arms, many
rarities, and the rich Wardrop and Plate of the Dukes of Pomerania. It Is one of
the Hanseatick Towns, and enjoyes many great Privileges, among others, that of
obliging strangers to disburthen in the City all the Merchandises which pass
through it, what nature soever they are of: as also that the Gentlemen
thereabouts cannot build any Castle or strong place any way within three
Leagues from it; nay, that the Dukes of Pomerania themselves cannot build any
Fort upon the Oder, or the Suine, or upon the Frishaf, between that and the
Sea. But this advantage is lost by it is coming into the hands of the Suedes.

Mar. 29. being Easter Day, we came to Rostock, Rostock.
a City seated on the River Warn, in the Duchy of Mekl^nbourg, where
heretofore lived the people called the Varini. Pribis^i II. the son of Niclot,
last Prince of the Obotrites, encompassed it with a wall, in the year 1160. and
made it a City out of the ruins of that of Kessin, which Henry le Lion, Duke of
Saxony, had destroyed. Its Port is not commodious, in regard Vessels of burden
are forced to unload at Warnemunde, two Leagues below the City, at the mouth of
the River. The City is handsome enough, having three great Marketplaces, 27
streets, 14 little gates, and four great gates. Its University is one of the
most ancient in all Germany, and was founded, by John and Albert,
Cousin-Germans, Dukes of Mecklenbourg, who, together with the Magistrate,
opened it in the year 1419. Among its Professors are many very great Persons,
of whom one was Albert Crantz Rector of it in the year 1482. This City, having
been taken by the Imperialists, in the year 1629. with all the rest of the
Duchy of Mecklenbourg, the late King of Sueden, Gustavus Adolphus, besieged it
in the year 1631. and took it the 16. of October. the same year.

The 30. of March, we left Rostock, and came the same day to Wismar, Wismar.
seven Leagues. Those who say this City was built by Wismar, King of the
Vandals about the year 340. tell a fabulous story, whereof the vanity is so
much the more visible, in that it is certain, that it was no City, till Henry
of Jerusalem, Duke of Mecklenbourg, made it such, by the privileges he bestowed
on it, in the year 1266. It is near as big as Rostock, and its Port, which no
doubt is one of the best upon the Baltic Sea, brings it very great Traffic.
Its situation, being amidst Fenns, and upon the Sea, is very advantageous, and
its Citadel fortified with five regular Bastions, makes it one of the most
considerable places in all Germany. Adolphus Frederick, Duke of Mecklenbourg,
and General Todt, took it, Ian. 10. 1632. from Colonel Gramma, who had the
command of it, for the D. of Fridland; ever since which time the Suedes have
kept it, as one of the most precious Jewels of their Crown.

The last of March, we came to the Castle of Schonberg, Schonberg
belonging to the Duke of Mecklenbourg, where some friends of our Comrade, John
Albert de Mandelslo, received us, and treated us very nobly. For my part, I am
particularly obliged to acknowledge their kindness, for, being casually shot in
the arm with a pistol by one of our company, I was forced to stay there two or
three days, during which time I received very great civilities from them.

Apr. 1 APRIL*
the Ambassadors left Schonberg, but M. Mandelslo and my self stayed two days
after them, and the third of April overtook them at Lubeck. Lubeck.
This City is so well known, that I need not give any particular description of
it, after so many other Authors that have written of it. Only I shall say, that
it is situated between the Rivers of Traue and Wagenits, at 28. d. 20. m.
longitude, and at 54. d. 48. m. latitude, two leagues from the Baltic Sea.
Those who have chiefly contributed to the building of it, were, Adolphus II.
Count of Holstein, Henry le Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Henry Bishop of
Aldenbourg. The Emperor Frederick I. reunited it to the Empire, and Frederick
II. his Grandson, gave it some of those Privileges, which it enjoyes to this
day. It lies in the Wagria, at the entrance of the Country of Holstein, and is
very well fortified, according to the modern fortification, having, besides the
other advantages which it has equally with the other Imperial Towns, that of
the oversight of the Teutonick Association, whereof all the^ Archivi are kept
in the Guild Hall of this City. How considerable it is in the Empire, may be
judged by the contributions it pays toward the charges of the journey to
Rome, which amount to 21 horsemen, and 177 foot, and, reduced to money to 1980
Livers a mouth. As for its rank at the Diets, it has a place alternatively
with the city of Wor^nes. In this city the Peace between the Emperor Ferdinand
II. and Christian IV. King of Denmark, was concluded, in the year 1629. The
Bishopric of Wagria, which was transferred from Aldenbourg to this city, is
now possessed by John, Duke of Holstein, brother to Frederick, Duke of
Holstein, who lives at Oitin. Here also I escaped another great misfortune; as
I alighted off my horse, I fell upon my wounded arm, but ere I could get up
again, Mandelslo's horse, which was furious and skittish, startingthereat,
stood up on his hinder feet, and very narrowly missed my head with his
fore-feet. We traveled on, in the Afternoon, and came that night to an Inn in
the suburbs of Arnsbock. Arnsbock.
This little city, lying in Wagria, between Lubeck and Pretz, belonged
heretofore to the Carthusians; but now it is possessed by Ioachin Ernest, Duke
of Holstein, by the branch of Sounderborg, who is married to Dorothea Augusta,
our Prince's Sister. Upon which account it was that he sent a coach and six
horses to bring us to the Castle, where the Ambassadors and some of the retinue
supped at his own Table, and lay there the night following.

The next day we broke our fast at the Castle, which done, we were brought in
the Duke's coach to our Inn, whence we continued our journey, and got the same
day to Pretz, Pretz.
where there is a very rich and sumptuous Monastery of young Ladies Nobly
descended, who are maintained there, till they leave the place to embrace a
married life.

April 6. about noon, we came to Kiel, Kiel.
a city situated upon the Baltic Sea, and famous for a Fair kept there yearly
at Twelf-tide, which brings thither all the Nobility about the country, and a
very great number of Merchants. We got the same night to Gottorp, Gottorp.
for which we are to give Almighty God our humble thanks; and the next day, the
Ambassadors made a report of their negotiation. And so much by way of account
of our first Voyage into Muscovy.

THE TRAVELS OF THE AMBASSADORS FROM THE DUKE of HOLSTEIN INTO MUSCOVY, and
PERSIA.
The Second Book.
HIs Highness had no sooner understood, 1635.
that the Great Duke of Muscovy had permitted his Ambassadors to pass through
his country, to go into Persia, but all his thoughts were busied about the
prosecution of the second Voyage, Preparatives for the second Voyage.
whereof the expense was incredible, which he gives order for, causing all
necessary preparations to be made, and presents to be fought out worthy so
great a Monarch.

He also augmented the Ambassadors retinue, and ordered, that, till the time of
their departure, the Gentlemen, Officers, and Servants, should be entertained
at Hambooough, at the house of Otton Brugman, one of the Ambassadors; where
they were very well treated, every one according to his condition and quality,
the Trumpet always sounding when the meat was carried up, which was also done
all along the Voyage.

The retinue consisted of a Mareshal, The Ambassadors retinue.
or Steward, a Secretary of the Embassy, four Gentlemen of the Chamber, and
eight other Gentlemen for ordinary attendance, among whom were the Minister and
interpreter, four Pages of the Chamber, four other Pages, four Grooms of the
Chamber, four Masicians, a Controler, a Harbinger, two Sumpter-men, an Overseer
of the Servants, two Trumpetters, two Watch-makers, eight Halbaldiers, who were
of several professions, as Bakers, Shoe-makers, Tailors, Smiths, Sadlers, etc.
ten Laqueys, a Clark for the Kitchen, with two Head-cooks, and one Under-cook,
a Master of the Wagons and his Servant, ten Servants belonging to the
Gentlemen, an Interpreter for the Muscovian Language, another for the Persian,
and a third for the Turkish. The Sumpter-men, the Musicians, and the Trumpeters
had also their boys, eight in number, besides twelve other persons for the
ordering of things belonging to the Ship, and 30 Soldiers, and four Muscovian
Officers, with their Servants, whom we eatertain'd into our service in Muscovy,
with the Great Duke's permission.

All Summer, They embark.
and some part of Autumn, were spent in preparation for this Voyage, insomuch
that we could not get from Hamborough, till the 21 of October 1635. The 24 we
got to Lubeck, where we staid two days, during which, our Baggage, and Horses,
which were 12. were embarked at Trauemunde. The 27. we followed, and went
aboard about noon, with all our people, into a new Ship, that had never been at
Sea before. The wind served as well as could be wished, to get out of the
Harbor, and yet we met with such a strong current of water, that we could not
avoid falling foul on two great Ships that were in the Port, between which we
were so entangled, that we could not in three hours dis-engage our selves.
Which many among us took for an ill omen of the misfortune that happened to us
some few days after.

Oct. 28. about five in the morning, after prayers said, we set sail with a
West-South-West wind, which growing higher at noon, was at night heightened to a
dreadful Tempest. It continued all night, during which, we discovered, that our
Mariners were as raw as the Ship was new, which had never seen the Sea till
that time; and it was our continual fear that the Mast would slip out of its
place, in as much as, the ropes, being new, stretched so, that they seemed not
to have any hold of it.

The 29. we found our selves to be on the Coasts of Denmark, which our Captain
took for the Isle of Bornholm, and we perceived, that we had directed our
course straight toward the Country of Schonen; so that if we had not at the
break of day, discovered Land, and found we were at 4. fathom water, which soon
obliged us to alter our course, there had been an end of both us and our Ship.
About 9. of the clock we discovered the Island of Bornholm, and the wind being
fair, made all the fail we could. But about ten at night, when we thought our
selves most secure, and made account to rest our selves after the precedent
night's toil, even, while Brugman, one of the Ambassadors, was charging the
Master's Mate to be careful, and the other answered, there was no danger,
since we had Sea-room enough, the Ship, being then under all the sail she could
make, The Ship strikes against a Rock.
struck against a Rock which was covered by the water. The shock made such a
horrible noise, that it made all start up. The amazement we were in surprised
us so, that there was not any one but might easily be persuaded, that the end
of both his Voyage and Life were near at hand.

At first we knew not where we were, and in regard the Moon was but newly
changed, the night was so dark, that we could not see two paces from us, We put
our ^antern at the Castle, and caused some Muskets to be discharged, to see if
there were any help to be had near us. But no body made answer, and the Ship
beginning to lie on one side, our affliction began to turn into despair; so
that most cast themselves on their knees, begging of God, with horrid cries,
that he would send them that relief which they could not expect from men.

The Master himself wept most bitterly, and would meddle no further with the
conduct of the Ship. The Physician and my self were sitting one close by the
other, with a design to embrace one another, and to die together, as old and
faithful friends, in case we should be wracked. Others took leave one of
another, or made vows to God, which they afterward so Religiously kept, that
coming to Revel, they made up a portion for a Poor, but Virtuous Maid, who was
married there. The Ambassador Crusius's Son moved most compassion. He was but
12. years of age, and he had cast himself upon the ground, importuning Heaven
with incessant cries and lamentations, and saying, Son of David have mercy on
me; whereto the Minister added, Lord, if thou will not hear us, be pleased to
hear this Child, and consider the innocence of his age. At last God was so
gracious as to preserve us, though the Ship struck several times, with great
violence, against the Rock.

About one in the morning, we saw fire, whence we inferred that we were not far
from Land. The Ambassadors commanded the Boat to be cast out, with design to
get into it, with each of them a Servant, and to go straight toward the fire,
to see if there were any means to save the rest: but no sooner had they thrown
in two Cabinets, in which were the Credential Letters and some Jewels, ere it
was full of water, which had almost occasioned the loss of two of our people,
who had leapt first into it, thinking to save themselves; in so much that they
had much ado to get into the Ship ere the Boat sunk. We were forced to continue
there the rest of that night, expecting to see a period of that danger.

At break of day we discovered the Isle of Oleand, and saw the ruins of a
Danish Ship, which had been cast away thereabouts a month before. The wind
being somewhat abated, two Fishermen of the Isle came aboard us, and Landed the
Ambassadors, having a very considerable reward for their pains, and after them,
some of their retinue.

About noon, we found the two Cabinets, and when the Sea was a little calmed,
many people of the Isle came in to our relief, to get off our Ship from among
those Rocks: but with this misfortune, that as they would have let down the
Anchor, which they had carried in the Boat about a hundred paces from the Ship,
the Boat over-turn'd, so that those in it were tossed into the Sea. Our Masters
Mate went immediately with one of the Isle boats to their relief; and in
regard, as they were over-turn'd, some caught hold of the Boat, others of an
Oar, or somewhat else, as also that the Wine they had drunk a little before,
had somewhat heightened their Courage, we had the time to send twice to them,
and to save all but our Carpenter, who was lost for want of having fastened on
somewhat that might have kept him above water.

While they were getting off our Ship, the waters increased so, as that the
wind, coming to the North-West, made our passage thence into the Sea the
easier. Whither we were no sooner gotten, but the wind turned again to
South-West, and brought us safely through the straight of Calmer, The straight
of Calmer.
which is so much the more dangerous in that season of the year, in as much as
the Sea thereabouts is full of Rocks, and that even in the Summer time, it is
ill sailing there by reason of the banks of Sand. The Ship stayed for the
Ambassadors, at Calmer, whither they got by Land, upon the first of November,
NOVEM.
and came aboard near an old ruined fort, called Ferstat.

Being come to Calmer, we sent back a Page and a Lacquey to Gottorp, to get
other Credentials, the Seawater having spoiled those we had at first. It was
there also taken into consideration, whether it were not our best course to
take our way by Land, through Sueden, or prosecute our Voyage by Sea. The
latter was resolved on; and that we might do it with the less danger, we laid
out for a skillful Master for the Baltic Sea; but there being none to be had,
we took only two Pilots, who conducted us half a League through the Sand banks,
till we were got into the main Sea.

The 3. we continued our course, and passed by a Rock called, the Suedish Lady,
which we left on the lar-board. From Calmer thither are accounted eight Leagues.

About noon, we spied the Castle of Bornholm, in the Isle of Oeland. At night
we doubled the point of the Isle, with such a Tempest from the North-East, that
the forepart of the Ship was more under water than above it, and ever and anon
our sails were washed by the Waves.

Another misfortune was, that our Pump was out of order, in so much that till
it could be made to do its Office, all the Kettles and other Vessels were
little enough to empty out the water. This trouble lasted till the next day at
noon, with so much danger to us, that if the wind had not changed, it would
have been impossible for us to escape shipwreck. But the wind being somewhat
better for us than it had been, we kept on our course, and came toward night
in sight of Gotland.

The Isle of Gotland is opposite to the Province of Scandinavia, The Isle of
Gotland.
or Schoven, which has also the same name given it, at 58. degr. of Latitude.
It is in length 18. German Leagues; in breadth, between three and four. The
Country is full of Rocks, Firre-Trees, (...) Juniper-Trees, having East-wards,
many commodious Havens; as those of Ostergaar, Sleidaf, Sanduig, Naruig, and
Heiligolm. Ostergaar is a small Isle standing at an equal distance from the two
points of the great one, with a convenient Harbor, for those who can avoid the
Sand-banks, which thereabouts reach out a good way into the Sea. Sleidaf is
higher toward the North, than Ostergaar, and has a safe Har^^^^ against all
winds, the Ships lying under the shelter of four little Isles, or rather Mounts
(...), which break the violence of the Waves. There Is but one Town in all the
Island; but there are above 500. Farms, and the Churches are built within a
League distance one of another, as they are in the Isle of Oeland, so that the
Steeples give a great direction to the Ships that sail that way. The
Inhabitants are Danes, and the Island was subject to the King of Denmark, till
that after a tedious War it submitted to the Crown of Sueden, to which it pays
annually 100. lasts of Pitch. All their Traffic lies in Cattle, and Wood, for
building and fire, and thence the best deal Boards come. I would needs, with
some other Camerades, go and see the Town of Wisby. It is built on the descent
of a Rock, upon the Sea side, encompassed with a good Wall, and fortified with
some bastions. The ruins of 14. Churches, and several Houses, Gates, and Walls
of Freestone and Marble, which we observed there, argue it has been bigger
than it now is. It is said, that the foundations of it were laid, about the end
of the eighth Age, and that it has been since so populous, that it had 12000.
Inhabitants, for the most part Merchants, not accounting the Danes, Suedes,
Vandols, Saxons, Muscovites, Jews, Greeks, Prussians, Poles, and Livonians, who
traded thither. There, they say, were made the first Orders concerning maritime
affairs, which Lubeck, and the other Hanseatick Cities still make use of; But
now the Port is quite lost, so as that Ships cannot get into it.

The 5. the wind became more boisterous than before, so that the Vessel, at
every great Sea, was all under water. About 10. at night, we sounded, at 12.
fathom; whereupon we changed our course, and got into the main Sea, for fear of
running against the Land, which if we had, we must needs have been cast away.

The 6. we met a Holland Vessel, which directed us toward the Isle of
Tageroort, Tageroort*
whither we came at night; but, the same night, we were again forced into the
main Sea.

The 7. at noon, we were upon the point of Tageroort; but the Masters Mate was
mistaken, who, thinking the wind would have carried us Northward, would
persuade us it was Oetgensholm, Oetgensholm.
and upon that presumption, imprudently engaged himself in a most dangerous
passage, called the Hondeshuig. Hondeshuig.
He was not convinced of his error, till he saw the Church-Steeple; so that we
were forced to return into the main, with greater hazard than we had run, at
our entrance into that passage. That day, we met a bark, which had lost its
course; so that understanding we intended for Revel, she followed us a while,
but at night left us, and cast Anchor before Tageroort, and, as we heard since,
came safely the next day to Revel. All the afternoon we lost not sight of the
coasts of Livonia, and at night were within a League of the Isle of Narga,
Narga.
which is at the entrance of the Haven of Revel. Our Master and his Mate, would
ueither go into, nor anchor before Tageroort, choosing rather the main Sea,
though in a great Tempest, which kept us in action all that night, and took
away our Mainmast, which was soon followed by the Mizen, and the fore-castle,
and it was no less than a miracle, that our compass was left us, without which
it had been impossible for us to have kept on our intended course.

The 8. we perceived that we had passed the Haven of Revel, and about ten, the
weather became to foul, that it seemed rather an Earthquake, that should turn
the World upside down, than a storm. Our danger and fears increased till three
in the afternoon, that one of the Seamen having got up into the scuttle of the
sprit-sale, told us, he discovered Hogland. We got thither by 7 at night, and
cast Anchor at 19 fathom water. There we stayed the 9. and resolved, that
thence-forward, Prayers should be said twice a day, to give God thanks for our
deliverance the day before, from a danger we could not have avoided, otherwise
than by passing among the Rocks upon the Coasts of Finland, as we must have
resolved to do, if we had not discovered that Island. The Ambassadors went
ashore, to observe the situation of the Country, and refresh themselves. At
night it was considered, whether we should continue our Voyage by Sea to Narva,
or return to Revel; but the diversity of Opinions was such, that nothing was
resolved on. About 9 at night, the Master came to the Ambassadors Lodgings, to
tell them, that the wind being East, and forcing the Ship toward the Shore, he
saw no liklier way to be safe than by making for Revel. The Ambassadors bade
him do what he thought most convenient, and went aboard: but as they were
weighing Anchor, the wind riss so, that there was no possibility of taking the
course intended, so that the Master and his Counsel changed their design, and
thought it best to ly still at Anchor, for fear of running-a-ground. But all to
no purpose. For being near the shore, the Orders given could not be put in
execution with diligence enough to avoid shipwreck. All could be done was to
let down the Boat, and to set the Ambassadors ashore with some of their
retinue. After the Ship had struck several times against certain pieces of
Rocks, whereof there is abundance all along the Coast, it split and sunk. All
the men were saved, a good part of the goods, and seven horses, whereof two
died the (...) day.

We sheltered our selves in Fishers huts, along the Seaside, where we met with
some Livenians that dwelt thereabouts who could speak nothing but the jargon of
the country. That poor refuge saved their lives who had escaped the wrack;
else, their clothes being all wet about them, most of them would have been
starved to death in the snow, which fell the night following.

The 10. we thought fit to try whether any more of the goods could be gotten
out of the Ship; but the rough weather continuing, none would venture going
near it with a Boat, till that in the afternoon some things were gotten out.
Our Clothes, Books, and other things we laid out a-drying, the Sea water having
injured some, and utterly spoiled others.

The greatest of our losses was that of a Clock, worth four thousand crowns,
which the horses had broke to pieces, by striving to get loose.

This misfortune was followed by another, which though we saw at some distance,
yet distracted us no less; and that was, want of provisions. The Seawater had
spoiled ours, and our fear was, that the frost forcing us to winter in the
Island, we must either be starved, or reduced to the extremities of feeding on
the barks of trees, as some that had been cast away there some years before,
were constrained to do. We had but little bread left, and the Biscuit was so
soaked in Salt Water, that we were forced to boil it in fresh, with a little
Cummin or Fennel, and so made a Pottage of it for our Servants. One day, we
took in a Brook which falls from the Mountains, as many small Fishes as found
us two good meals.

Hogland The Island of Hogland.
has its name from the height of its situation, it being seen a great way into
the Sea, and is about 3 leagues in length, and one, in breadth. You see nothing
but Rocks, Firr-trees, and Thorns. We indeed saw some few Hares, which in
Winter turn white, as they do all over Livonia; but our Dogs could not follow
them through the VVoods, and over the Rocks.

In the mean time, it was reported at Revel, that we were all lost, raised by
this, that there had been dead bodies found upon the coast of Livonia, clad in
red, which was our Livery; as also with this addition, that, the Bark, spoken
of before, had related, that she had seen us carried away with the storm beyond
the bay of Revel. Besides, it was eight days before they heard from us; so that
those of our people whom we had left there, at our return from Muscovy, were
seeking out other services, when M. Vchterits (then Chamberlain to the
Ambassadors, and now Gentleman of the Privy-chamber to his Highness of Holstein
at Gottorp) brought them an account of us. We had the convenience to send him
thither in one of the two Finland barks, which the tempest had forced to that
Island on the 3 of November.

The 17. The Ambassadors embarked themselves, A dangerous attempt of the
Ambassadors.
each of them with a retinue of five persons, in two Fisher-boats, to pass over
to the continent, from which this Island is distant above 12. leagues. Nor were
we in less danger now than before, for as much as the Boats, being small and
old, were not caulked, and were tied above, only with cords made of barks of
trees. The sail was a great many rags fastened together, and so ordered, that
there was no use to be made of it but when the wind blew right a-stern: so that
the wind beginning to shift, after we had come five leagues, the Fishermen
would have tacked about, but we prevailed with them to let down the sail, and
to make use of their Oars, to get to an Island which was within half a league
of us, and where we arrived that night. We found there only two ruined hutts;
we made a fire, and passed over the night, but having neither Bread nor Meat,
we made our supper on a piece of Milan Cheese we had left.

The next day, we prosecuted our Voyage with a very good wind and fair weather,
though the Sea was a little rough. Having made two leagues, a sudden blast
coming from the East, though the wind were North turned the Boat, in which I
was, with the Ambassador Brugman, so much upon one side, that it took in water;
the surges at the same time rising half an ell above the brinck of it. All the
Fishermen could do was to let down the sail, and to run to the other side of
the boat to weigh it down. The blast being over, we kept on our course, till a
second put us to the same trouble. We had three of them in less than two hours;
and this I think the greatest danger we had met with, in our Voyage: in as much
as the Boat being old, and having in it, eight Persons, all the Silver Plate
and other luggage, which in a manner filled it, so as that one wave might have
overwhelmed it, and cast us all away. But afterward, when the Fishermen saw
the blast coming, they turned the side of the Boat to the wind, that the wave
might not come with its full force upon it, and by that means we avoided the
danger. Within three Leagues of Land we had also a violent shower of hail; but
what is most to be admired in all this, was, that the Boat which carried the
Ambassador Crusius, though within Pistol-shot of us, felt nothing of all this,
but had fair weather all along.

Being gotten within half a League of Land, the wind, shifting to the South,
was just in our teeth, and had obliged our Fishermen to return, if the hope of
a three-pint-Flagon of strong water, which we promised them, had not given them
the courage to let down the sail, and to row us ashore. The Ambassadors come
into Livonia.
This was the 18. at night, in Esthonie, after we had roved two and twenty
days upon the Baltic Sea, with all the danger that is to be expected by
those, who trust themselves to the mercy of that Element in so uncertain a
season.

The 22. came to Hogland two other barks forced thither by foul weather: Those
we had left of ours in the Island passed in them to the continent, whither they
came the 24. with the horses and baggage. We went thence to Kunda, a house
belonging to my late Father-in-Law, John Muller, distant two Leagues from the
Sea, where we staid three weeks, to refresh our selves after so much hardship
at Sea. Most of us fell sick, yet none kept their beds above three days.
Thence we went to Revel, To Revel. DECEMBER.
whether we came the second of December, with an intention to sojourn there
some time, which we spent in ordering our Clothes, and the Presents, which the
salt water, and the other inconveniences ensuing upon the wrack, had much
prejudiced.

The Ambassadors having all their people about them at Revel, thought fit to
publish the Order which the Duke would have observed through the whole Voyage.
They had brought it with them sealed with his Highnesse's Great Seal: but they
added some things thereto, the better to prevent the disorders, which are but
too frequent where there are so many Servants. But in regard they contained
nothing extraordinary, we shall not insert them here, and only say, they were
ill observed: for the Ambassador Brugman having armed the Lacquies with
Pole-axes, which had Pistols in their handles, and given order they should not
take any affront from the Inhabitants of Revel, there hardly passed a day
during the three Months we staid there, in expectation of other Credentials,
but there was some falling out and fighting. In so much that Feb. 11. Isaac
Mercier, a Frenchman, that waited on the Ambassador Brugman in his Chamber, a
person of a good humor and not quarrellous, hearing the noise of an engagement
between the Ambassadors Servants and the Apprentices of the City, and desirous
to relieve his friends, was struck over the head with an iron-bar, which
bruised the skull so, as that he dyed the next day. The Magistrate did all lay
in his power to find out the Murderer; but, to no purpose, so that all the
reparation was, that the Senate, together with the Ambassadors and their
retinue, accompanied him to the grave.

Revel Revel described.
is situated at 50. degr. 25. min. latitude, and 48. degrees. 30. min. longitude,
upon the Baltic Sea, in the Province of Esthonie. Waldemar, or Wolmar II. King
of Denmark, laid the foundations of it, about the year 1230. Wolmar III. sold
it in the year 1347. together with the Cities of Narvan and Wesenberg to Gosuin
d'Eck, Master of the Order of Livonia, for 19000. Marks of Silver. About 100.
years since, Livonia groaning under a troublesome War against Muscovy, this
City put it self under the protection of Eric, King of Sueden. It was so strong
in those times, that it endured a notable Siege in the year 1570. against
Magnus, Duke of Holstein, who commanded the Great Duke's Army; and another in
the year 1577. against the same Muscovites, who were forced to raise it with
loss. The situation of its Castle is so much the more advantageous, for that
the Rock on which it is built is steepy on all sides, unless it be toward the
City, which, being fortified according to the modern fortification, is almost
as considerable a place as Riga; whence it came that for some years, it had the
oversight of the College at Novogorod, jointly with the City of Lubeck. It has
been these 300. years numbered among the Hanseatick Towns; but its Commerce
began not to be great till about the year 1477. and at that time it might well
keep up its Traffic, especially that of Muscovy, by reason of her excellent
Port and Haven, which indeed are such, as if God and Nature had intended it for
the convenience of Commerce. Had it not been engrossed into few hands, it had
still continued in the same posture; but having broken with the other
Hanseatick Towns in the year 1550. and the Great Duke having taken Narva soon
after, the Muscovites established, there, the Trading they before had at Revel.
It still enjoyes the privilege of being a Mart, and the Inhabitants have, with
the preference of the Merchandises discharged in their Port, the power to
hinder the Traffic of Livonia into Muscovy, without their permission. These
privileges have been confirmed to it by all the Treaties that have been made
between the Kings of Suoden, and Dukes of Muscovy, as in the year 1595. at
Teusina, in 1607. at Wibourg, and in 1617. at Stoluo^s. It Is true it has lost
some of these advantages since the last War of Muscovy, which were taken away,
left, in imitation of several other of the Hanseatick Towns, it should attempt
a defection from its Prince, yet does it still enjoy many other privileges,
which have been confirmed to it, from time to time, by the Masters of the
Order, while they were Lords of the Country, and afterward by the Kings their
Successors. It observes the same Customs with Lubeck, and has a Consistory
and a Superintendent for Ecclesiastical affairs, professing the Protestant
Religion, according to the Auspourg Confession, as also a very fair School,
whence there come very good Scholars, who consummate their studies at Derpt, or
some other Universities in those quarters. The Government of the City is
Democratical, the Magistrate being obliged to summon the principal of several
Professions, and the most ancient Inhabitants, to consultations that concern
affairs of Importance. There are still to be seen, within half a League of the
City, toward the Seaside, the ruins of a fair Monastery, founded by a
Merchant of that City, at the beginning of the 15th age, out of a particular
devotion he had for St. Bridget, under Conrad de Iungingen, Grand Master of
Prussia, and Conrad de Vitinghof, Master Provincial of Livonia. It consisted of
both Religious Men and Women, and the Book I saw of the foundation of this
Monastery, pleasantly acquaints the Reader, that the Friars and Nuns there had
found out a way to express their meanings one to another by signs, of which
there is in it a little Dictionary.

Livonia has, The description of Livonia.
on the East, Muscovy; on the North, a Gulf of the Baltic Sea, dividing it
from Sueden and Finland; on the West, the same Baltic Sea, and on the South,
Samogitia, Lithuania, and Prussia. It is above 120. German leagues in length,
and about 40. in breadth, and is divided into Esthonie, Lettie, and Courland.
The first of these Provinces is subdivided into five Circuits, called Harrie,
Wirland, Allentaken, Ierwe, and Wiecks, its chief City Revel, as Lettie has
Riga^, and Courland, Goldingen.

Livonia, and its Lords, the Masters of the Order, of whom we shall speak
hereafter, were subject to the Emperor of Germany, not only since the Conquest
of that Island from the Infidels by the Germans, but also, particularly since
that in the year 1513. the Archbishop of Riga, with his Suffragans, and the
Master of the Order, who had freed himself from the subjection of that, of
Prussia, were received among the Princes of the Empire. Let us now see how it
is gone from the Empire. The Muscovite looking on this Province as lying very
convenient for him, entered it, in the year 1501. with a powerful Army; but
Gualtier de Plettenberg, Master of the Order, gave him battle, wherein above
40000 Muscovites were killed upon the place. This defeat produced a Cessation
of 50 years. In the year 1558. John Basilouits, Great Duke of Muscovy, having
added to his territories the Tartars of Cassan and Astrachan, and willing to
make his advantages of the differences between the Master of the Order, and
Archbishop of Riga, entered Livonia, and having made incursions into the
Bishopric of Derpt, and Wirland, retreated into Muscovy. During these
troubles, the Livonians were importunate with the Estates of the Empire, to
send them relief against so cruel and barbarous an enemy; but none being to be
expected, the City of Revel, which was the most exposed to danger, offered it
self to the King of Denmark, and upon his refusal, applied it self to Eric King
of Sueden, and desired of him a considerable succor of men and money. His
answer was, that his Kingdom was not in a condition to supply them with either,
but if the Town would put it self under his protection, he would maintain all
its Privileges, and defend it against the Muscovite. Upon which, the City,
having advised with the adjacent Nobility, broke off from the Master of the
Order, and put it self under the protection of the King of Sueden, in the year
1560. The year before, 1559. the Archbishop of Riga, and the Coadjutor of the
Order, had made their addresses to Sigis^und Augustus, King of Poland, for
assistance against the same enemy, and had promised him the sum of 600000.
Ducats toward the charges of the War, engaging to him, for his security, nine
of the best Baylywicks of the Country. But in the year 1561. the King of
Poland, perceiving that all Livonia was likely to be lost, through the
divisions of the Province, and that the City of Revel, with part of Esthonie,
had submitted to the King of Sueden, refused to execute the Treaty, and to send
the relief promised, unless the Archbishop, and Master of the Order, would
acknowledge the Sovereignty of the King of Poland. This extremity forced them
to put all the Acts and Privileges they had obtained from the Empire and Pope,
with the Seal, and other marks of Sovereignty, into the hands of the Prince of
Radzivil, Commissioner from Poland, to whom also they took the Oath of
fidelity. Upon which the King of Poland gave Courland, with the title of a
Duchy, to Godard Ketler, Master of the Order, who took the Oath of Allegiance
to the Crown of Poland, on the 5 of March 1562.

By the Treaty concluded between the King of Poland, and the Great Duke of
Muscovy, Jan. 15. 1582. the Duke restored to the Crown of Poland all the places
of Livonia, those excepted which the King of Sueden was possessed of in
Esthony. Now, it is in a manner all under the power of the Suede.

Livonia is, Its fertility
in all parts, very fertile, and particularly in Wheat. For though it has
suffered much by the Muscovites, yet it is now more and more reduced to
tillage, by setting the Forests afire, and sowing in the ashes of the burnt
Wood and Turf, which for three or four years produce excellent good Wheat, and
with great increase, without any Dung. Which is the more to be admired, in that
it is known there remains to generative quality in the ashes: So that it is to
be conceived, that the Sulphur and Saltpeter, which remain with the Cinders
upon the earth, leave behind them a heat and fatness able to produce, as well
as dung. Which conceit is not dis^onant from what Strabo says, at the end of
his fifth book, where he speaks of the fertility of the Lands near the Mountain
Vesuvius and Mont-gibel, in Sicily. There is also abundance of Cattle, and
Fowl, so cheap, that many times we bought a young Hare for four pence; a
Heath-Cock for fix, and accordingly others, so that it is much cheaper living
there than in Germany.

The Inhabitants were a long time Heathens, Its Inhabitants.
it being in the 12 age that the rays of the Sun of righteousness began to
break in upon them, occasioned by the frequentation of certain Merchants of
Bremen, and the Commerce they were desirous to establish in those parts. About
the year 1158. one of their Ships having been forced by a Tempest into the Gulf
of Riga, which was not yet known, the Merchants agreed so well with the
Inhabitants of the Country, that they resolved to continue their Traffic
there, having withal, this satisfaction, that, the people being very simple,
they thought it would be no hard matter to reduce them to Christianity. Menard,
a Monk of Segeberg, was the first that preached the Gospel to them, and was
made first Bishop of Livonia, by Pope Alexander III. in the year 1170. Menard
was succeeded in the Bishopric of Livonia, by Bertold, a Monk, of the Order of
white Friars; but he, thinking to reduce those people rather by Arms than the
word of God, met with a success accordingly, for having incensed them, they
killed him in the year 1186. and with him 11000. Christians. Albert, a Canon of
Bremen, The Orders of Livonian Knights.
succeeded Bertold, in the Bishopric. He laid the first foundations of the
City of Riga, and of the Order of the Friars of the short sword, by authority
from Pope Innocent the third, and by virtue of a power he had given them, to
allow them the third part of that they should Conquer from the Barbarians. They
observed the same rule as the Templars, and were called Friars or Knights of
the short sword, because they had on their white Cloaks a red short sword, with
a star of the same color, which they have changed since into two short Swords,
Saltar-wise. But in regard this new Religious Profession was not fully settled,
it was joined to the Order of St. Mary of Jerusalem, in the person of Herman
Balk, Grand-Master of Prussia, in the year 1238. And it is since that time that
the Master Livonia had a dependence on the Grand-Master of Prussia, which was,
till Sigismond King of Poland changed that quality into that of Duke of
Courland, in the person of Godard Ketler, as is said before.

All the Champain Country, of the two Provinces of Letthie and Esthonie, is to
this day peopled with these Barbarians, who have nothing of their own, but are
slaves, and serve the Nobility in the Country, and the Citizens in Cities.
They are called Unteutche, that is, not-Germans, because their language was not
understood by the Germans, who went to plant in those quarters; though that of
Letthie has nothing common with that of Esthonie, no more than there is
between them, as their Clothes and manner of Life. The Women of Esthonie wear
their Petticoats very narrow, and without any folds, like sacks, adorned above
on their backs with many little brass Chains, having at the ends Counters of
the same metal, and below set out with a certain lacing of yellow glass. Those
who would express a greater bravery, have about their Necks a Necklace of
plates of silver of the bigness of a Crown, or half-Crown, and upon the breast,
one as big as a round Trencher, but not much thicker than the back of a knife.

Maids wear naught on their heads, Summer nor Winter, and cut their hair as the
men do, letting it fall negligently down about the head. Both Men and Women are
clad with a wretched stuff made of Wool, or a coarse Linen. They are yet
unacquainted with Tannage, so that, in Summer, they have barks of Trees about
their feet, and in the Winter, raw Leather of a Cow's hide. Both Men and Women
do ordinarily carry all the Wealth they have about them.

Their Ceremonies of marriage are very odd. The Ceremonies of marriages in
Livonia.
When a Country fellow marries a Lass out of another Village, he goes a
hors-back to fetch her, sets her behind him, and makes her embrace him with the
right hand. He has in his hand a stick cleft at the top, where he puts a piece
of brass money, which he gives to him who opens the wicket, through which he is
to pass. Before, rides a man that plays upon the Bag-pipe, as also two of his
friends, who, having naked swords in their hands, give two strokes therewith,
cross the Door of the House, where the marriage is to be consummated, and then
they thrust the point of one of the swords into a beam, over the Bridegroom's
head, which is done to prevent Charms, which, they say, are ordinary in that
Country. It Is to the same end that the Bride scatters little pieces of Cloth,
or red Serge by the way, especially where cross-ways meet, near Crosses, and
upon the Graves of little Children dead without baptism, whom they bury in the
Highways. She has a Veil over her face while she is at the Table, which is
not long; for, as soon almost as the Guests are set down, the married couple
rise, and go to bed. About two hours after they get up, and are brought to sit
down at the Table. Having drunk and danced till such time as they are able to
stand no longer, they fall down on the floor, and sleep altogether like so many
Swine.

We said the Gospel was pteach'd in Livonia in the 12. age; They are sad
Christians.
but the Livonians are never the better Christians for it. Most of them are
only such in name, and can hardly yet abstain from their Heathenish
Superstitions. For though they are Lutherans, by profession, and that there is
hardly a Village but has its Church and Minister; yet are they so poorly
instructed, and so far from regeneration, that it may be said, Baptism
excepted, they have not any Character of Christianity. They very seldom go to
Sermons, and never almost Communicate. They excuse their backwardness in
frequenting the Sacraments, by alleging the great slavery they are in, which,
they say, is so insupportable, that they have not time to mind their Devotions.
If they go at any time to Sermon, or to the Communion, it is by force, or upon
some other particular account. To this effect is a story was told me by Andrew
Besiq, Provost of the Church of Luckenhausen, which was, That having been sent
for to comfort, and administer the Communion to a Country-fellow who lay very
sick, he asked him how he came to send for his Pastor in the condition he was
then in, when for so many years before he had never bethought him of
reconciling himself to God? The fellow ingenuously answered, that, for his own
part, he should not have minded it then, but what he did, was by the advice of
a friend, who told him, that if he did it not, he could not be buried in the
Churchyard, nor carried to the ground with the ordinary Ceremonies. It Is true,
the gross and inexcusable ignorance of most of the Pastors in those quarters,
who might well come to be Catechized themselves, has contributed much to the
obduration of those poor people: but the late King of Sueden has taken order,
therein enjoining, by a severe Ordinance, the Bishop of the Province, who has
his residence in the Cathedral Church of Revel, to convocate a Synod once a
year, for the regulation of Church affairs, and then to examine, not only the
Recipiendaries, but also the Pastors themselves, thereby to oblige them to
apply themselves to the constant study of the holy Scripture.

It must be acknowledged, Their slavery.
the slavery these people are in is great, and indeed insupportable; but it is
true withal; that upon the least liberty given them, they would break out into
any extravagance. For being persuaded that their Predecessors have been Masters
of the Country, and that only force has enslaved them to the Germans, they
cannot forbear their resentments of it, and discovering, especially in their
drink, if any opportunity of regaining their liberty should offer it self, a
readiness to prosecute it. Of which they gave an evident example, when, upon
the irruption of Colonel Bot, the Peasants would side with the Enemy, and head
together, to secure their Masters and deliver them up to the Polanders.

They believe there is another life after this; Their opinion of eternal life.
but their imaginations of it are very extravagant. A Livonian woman, being
present at her husband's burial, put a Needle and Thread into the Grave, giving
this reason for it, that, her husband being to meet, in the other World, with
persons of good Rank, she was ashamed he should be seen with his Clothes rent.
Nay, they so little mind what is to happen in the next World, that in the Oath
they take to decide any difference at Law, instead of interessing the salvation
of their Souls therein, they are obliged to consider their present and temporal
advantages, and so they are sworn, as follows: I, N. N. am here present
before thee: since thou, O Judge, desire to know, and ask me, whether this
Land, on which I now am, is God's and mine with a just title, I swear to God
and his Saints, and accordingly God judge me at the last day, that this Land
belongs to me of right, that it is God's and mine, and that my father has been
possessed of it, and has enjoyed it a long time. And if the Oath I take prove
to be false, I consent, that the Curse of God fall upon my Body and Soul, upon
my Children, upon whatsoever appertains to me, even to the ninth generation.
And to show that their Language has nothing common with any of those,
wherewith the most learned have any acquaintance, we shall here set down the
same Oath, word for word, as they take it.

Nucht seisen mina N. N. Seihn. Kui sinna sundia minust tahat, eht minna se
Kockto perrast tunnis tama Pean, Their Oath in Law-sutes.
eht sesinnane mah, Kumba pehl minna seisan, jumla ninc minnu verteenitut
mahon, Kumba pehl minna minno eo aial ellanut ninck prukinu tollen seperast
sihs mannut an minna jumla ninck temma poha de eest. Ninc kui nued jummal peph
sundina selh wihmb sell pehwal; and ses in nane mab jumla ninck minnu
verteenitur permah on, Kumba minna ninck minno issa igkas prukinut ollemei, kus
ma ulle Kock so wannutan, sihs tulke sedda minno tho ninck hinge pehl, minno
ninck Keick minno lapsede pehl, nink Keick minna onne pehl emmis se uduya polwe
tagka.

It Is the same in Esthonie; but about Riga, when the Peasants swear at Law,
they put a Turf upon their heads, and take a white stick in their hands,
expressing thereby, that they are content, that they, their Children, and
Cattle, may become dry as that Turf, and that stick, if they swear falsely.

These customs favor of their ancient Idolatry. The Ministers do all they can
to weed it out of them by little and little: to which end we saw, at Narva, the
Catechism, Epistles, and Gospels, with their explications, which Henry Stahl,
Superintendent of Ecclesiastical affairs in those parts (a person much esteemed
for his Learning and pains in instructing those Barbarians) had caused to be
translated and Printed in their Language, to give them some apprehensions of
Christian Religion. But Idolatry and Superstiton are too deeply rooted in them,
and their stupidity and stubborness too great to give way to any hope, that
they will ever be susceptible of instruction. They do their devotions commonly
upon hills, or near a tree they make choice of to that purpose, and in which
they make several incisions, bind them up with some red stuff, and there say
their prayers, wherein they desire only temporal blessings. Two leagues from
Kunda, between Revel and Narva, there is an old ruined Chapel, whither the
Peasants go once a year on Pilgrimage, upon the day of our Lady's Visitation.
Some put off their clothes, and in that posture having kneeled by a great stone
that is in the midst of the Chapel, they afterward leap about it, and offer it
Fruits and Flesh, recommending the preservation of themselves and their Cattle
to it for that year. This piece of devotions is concluded with eating and
drinking, and all kind of licentiousness, which seldom end without quarrels,
murders, and the like disorders.

They have such an inclination to Sorcery, Their Sorcery.
and think it so necessary for the preservation of their Cattle, that Fathers
and Mothers teach it their Children, so that there is scarce any Peasant but is
a Sorcerer. They all observe certain superstitious Ceremonies, by which they
think to elude the effects of it, upon which account it is, that they never
kill any Beast, but they cast somewhat of it away, nor never make a Brewing,
but they spill some part of it, that the Sorcery may fall upon that. They have
also a custom of rebaptizing their Children, when, during the first six weeks
after their birth, they chance to be sick or troubled with fits, whereof they
think the cause to be, that the name, given them at their baptism, is not
proper for them. Wherefore they give them another; but in regard this is not
only a sin, but a crime which the Magistate severely punishes in that Country,
they conceal it.

As they are stubborn in their superstitions, Their obstinacy.
so are they no less in the exact observation of their Customs. To which
purpose we had a very pleasant, but true, story, related to us at Colonel de la
Barr's, concerning an old Country fellow. Being condemned, for faults enormous
enough, to lie along upon the ground, to receive his punishment, and Madam de
la Bar, pitying his almost decrepit age, having so far interceded for him,
as that his corporal punishment should be changed into a pecuniary mulct of
about 15. or 16. pence, he thanked her for her kindness, and said, that, for
his part, being an old men, he would not introduce any novelty, nor suffer the
Customs of the Country to be altered, but was ready to receive the
chastisement which his Predecessors had not thought much to undergo, put off
his clothes, laid himself upon the ground, and received the blows according to
his condemnation.

This is accounted no punishment, but an ordinary chastisement in Livoniae For,
the people, being of an incorrigible nature, must be treated with that
severity, which would elsewhere be insupportable. They are not permitted to
make any purchase, and to prevent their so doing, they have only so much ground
to manage, as will afford them a subsistence. Yet will they venture to cut down
wood in some places of the Forests, and, having ordered the ground, sow wheat
in it, which they hide in pits under ground, to be secretly sold. When they are
taken in this, or any other fault, they make them strip themselves naked down
to the hips, and to lie down upon the ground, or are tied to a post, while one
of their Camerades beats them with a Switch, or Hollywand, till the blood comes
of all sides; especially when the Master says Selcke nack maha pexema, Beat him
till the skin falls from the flesh.

Nor are they suffered to have any money; for as soon as it is known they have
any, the Gentlemen and their Officers, who are paid by the Peasantry, take it
from them, nay force them to give what they have not. Which cruelty of the
Masters puts these poor people many times into despair, whereof there happened
a sad example. A Peasant pressed by his Officer to pay what he neither had, nor
ought, and being deprived of the means whereby he should maintain his Family,
strangled his Wife and Children, and when he had done hung himself up by them.
The Officer coming the next day to the house, thinking to receive the money,
struck his head against the man's feet that was hanging, and so perceived the
miserable execution, whereof he was the cause.

The Nobility of Livonia, The Nobility of Livonia.
especially of Esthonie, is free from all charges and taxes. Their courage, and
the services they have done against the Infidels and Muscovites, have acquired
them this liberty, and most of their privileges. Volmar II. King of Denmark,
first gave them Manors to be held by Fealty, which have been since confirmed
by Eric VII. who gave them Letters Patents to that purpose. The Masters of the
Order of the Short Sword, and the Grand Masters of the Order of Prussia,
augmented them. Conrad de Iungingen extended the succession of such Manors, in
Harrie and Wirland, to the daughters and their issue, to the fifth degree: and
Gaultier de Plettenberg, who was chosen Grand-Master, in the year 1495. and
acknowledged Prince of the Empire in 1513. absolutely exempted the Nobility of
Esthonie from all subjection; excepting only the service which Gentlemen are
obliged to do in person, upon the account of their Manors. Once a year there
is a review made of them, and that body of Nobility is looked upon as a
Nursery, that has furnished and still does furnish Sueden with a great number
of Officers, even to Generals of Armies; besides the Noble Cavalry it is able
to raise, for the service of that Crown. The said Nobility came not under the
protection of the King of Sueden, till such time as, being forsaken by all
their Neighbors, and not able to oppose their enemies any longer, they were
forced to make their applications to a foreign Crown, which has promised to
secure unto them all the Privileges, they have by their courage acquired.

The Government of the Country, The Government of Livonia
both as to Policy and Justice, is in the Nobility, who commit the
administration thereof to twelve of themselves, who are the Council of the
Country, and have for their President, him who is Governor of the Province for
the Crown of Sueden. In the time of our Embassy Philip Scheiding was President,
who has been since succeeded by Eric Oxienstern, Baron of Kimilko, Counselor
of the Crown of Sueden, and he, by Henry, Count de la Tour.

They meet yearly, in January, and then decide all differences between parties,
all their proceedings consisting in a Declaration and an Answer, upon which
they immediately give judgment. To this purpose is chosen a Gentleman, who
has the quality of Captain of the Province, and represents to the Governor
and Council the grievances of the people, if there be any, and this employment
is not continued in the same person above three years. And whereas, during the
Wars with the Muscovites and Polanders, private men's Inheritances in the
Provinces of Harrie, Wirland, and Wieck, have been so confounded, that the
suits occasioned thereby could not be peremptorily decided; there are appointed
certain Judges from three years to three years, who take cognizance thereof,
and if any one find himself aggrieved by their judgment, he may appeal to the
Governor and Council of the Country, who appoint Commissioners, who having
been upon the places in question, do either reverse or confirm the former
Judgment. They have also particular Judges for the Highways, which are there
very bad, because of the Fenns, Bridges, and Causwayes, which are frequent all
over the Country.

To return to our Voyage. The cont^nuation of our Voyage
We said before, that the Ambassadors, coming to Calmer, in the beginning of
Novembor, had sent a Page and a Lacquey to Gottorp, for other Credentials,
instead of those the Seawater had spoiled. John Arpenbeck our Interpreter, had
been sent to Musco^, to give an account there of our delay, as also of the
particulars of our wrack. Being all returned to Revel, FEBRU.
we prepared for the prosecution of our Voyage, and the 24 of Febr. the
Ambassador sent away the Controller of their house with 31 sledges, with part
of the train and baggage. MARCH The Ambassadors leave Revel. Kunda. Come to
Narva.
We all went along with the rest. March 2. the Magistrate and some of our
friends brought us a league out of the City. We lay that night at Kolka, a
house belonging to the Count de la Guard, Constable of Sueden, 7 leagues from
Revel. March 3. we came to Kunda, whereof we have spoken elsewhere; and the 4.
to a house belonging to M. John Fock, 5 leagues from that of the Count de la
Garde's.

March 5. after five leagues traveling, we came to Narva. It Is a small Town,
but strong, and has a very good Castle. It is situated at 60 degrees of the
Aequinoctial, in the Province of Allentaken, so called from the River Narva or
Nerva. This River rises out of the Lake Peipis, and falls into the Gulf of
Finland, two leagues below this Town. It is in a manner as broad as the Elbe,
but much swifter, and its water is very brownish. About half a league above
this Town, there is a fall of water, which makes a dreadful noise, and is so
violent, that breaking upon the Rocks, it is reduced as it were to powder,
which filling the Air affords a strange sight, by reason that the Sun shining
upon it, makes a kind of Rainbow, no less pleasant than that framed in the
Clouds. This fall occasions the unlading of all Merchandises which pass that
way from Plescon and Derpt for Narva, to be sent into the Gulf of Finland. It Is
said that Volmar II. K. of Denmark, built it in the year 1213. John Basilouits,
G. D. of Muscovy, took it in the year 1558. and Pontus de la Guard, General of
the Suedish Army, recovered it from the Muscovites, on the 6 of September 1581.
and ever since the Suedes have been masters of it. Nielis Asserson was
Governor of it, at the time of our Embassy, who was succeeded since by Eric
Gyllenstierna Governor and Lieutenant General for the Crown of Sueden, in
Ingermania. It has a long time enjoyed the same privileges with the other
Hanseatick Towns: but the Wars between Muscovy and Sueden had so far destroyed
the commerce of it, that it is within these few years that there are some hopes
conceived of its re-establishment, which cannot increase but as that of Revel
abates. The War between the English and Hollanders was so much to its
advantage, 1636.
that the Commerce of Archangel being by that means interrupted, the Ships that
were wont to go to Muscovy made use of the Haven of Narva, whither there came
in the year 1654. above sixty Ships, and took up, there, Merchandises amounting
to above 500000 Crowns. Upon this they took occasion to cleanse and augment the
Town, to build new and regular streets for the convenience of strange
Merchants, and to facilitate the passage of Ships into the Haven. Queen
Christina of Sueden, exempted this City out of the general Jurisdiction of the
Governor of the Province, and gave it a particular Lieutenant, to judge of
affairs Secular and Ecclesiastical, without appeal to any other place.

The Castle is on this side the River, and on the other, Juanogorod.
that of Iuanogorod, which the Muscovites have built upon a very steepy Rock,
whereof the River of Narva makes a peninsula, so that the place was judged
impregnable, till Gustavus Adolphus took it, in the year 1617. At the foot of
this Castle is a Town called Narva Muscovite, to distinguish it from the
Teutonick or German Narva, whereof our discourse has been. This Town is
inhabited by natural Muscovites, but Subjects of the Crown of Sueden, to which
the said Gustavus has also joined the Castle of Iuanogorod, where Nichola
Gallen governed, at our passage that way, in quality of the King's Lieutenant.

The Country between Revel and Narva, as also generally all Ingermania and
Livonia, have in the Woods, a great number of Beasts that are yellowish and
black; and among others such abundance of Wolves and Bears, that the Peasants
have much ado to keep them off their Cattle and themselves. In Winter, when the
ground is covered with snow, the Wolves, not meeting with ought abroad, will
come, in the day time, into men's yards, and carry away the Dogs that keep
them, and will break through the VValls, to get into the Stables.

We were told, A remarkable story of a Wolf.
that in the year 1634. upon the 24. of January, a Wolf, not of the biggest,
had set upon 12. Muscovian Peasants, who were bringing Hay to the City. He took
the first by the throat, got him down, and killed him; he did the like to the
second. He flead the third's head; eat off the nose and cheeks of a fourth, and
hurt two more. The other six got together, put themselves into a posture of
defense, struck down the Wolf, and killed him. It was afterward discovered,
that he was mad, for all those he had hurt dyed so. The Magistrate of Narva had
caused the skin to be preserved, which was showed as a thing very remarkable.

We were told also that a Bear, finding a Vessel of Herrings, which a Peasant
had laid down at an Alehouse door, fell a-eating of them, and went thence into
the Stable, whither the Peasants followed him; but having wounded some of them,
the rest were glad to get away. Thence he went into a Brewhouse, where meeting
with a fat of new Beer, he got so drunk, that the Peasants perceiving he reeled
every step, and at last fell asleep in the Highway, pursued and killed him.
Another Peasant having turned out his Horse a-grazing in the night, found him
next morning dead, with a Bear lying by him, who had fed very heartily upon
him. But as soon as the Bear perceived the Peasant, he leaves the Prey he was
already assured of, got hold of the Peasant, and was carrying him away between
his paws to his Den; but the Peasants Dog having got the Bear by the foot, made
him let go, and, while they were engaged, the Master had time to get up a Tree
and save himself.

In the year 1634. A Bear dug up thirteen Carcasses out of a Churchyard,
belonging to a little Village near Narva, and carried them away with the
Coffins. Not is it long since that a Lady of quality in those parts met one
carrying away a Carcass, with the shroud trailing after it, which frighted the
Horse that drew the Lady's Sledge, so as that he ran away with her, cross the
fields, to the great hazard of her life. Many other stories were told us; as
that of a Bear who had kept a Woman 15 days together in his Den, and the manner
how she was delivered thence; but we shall forbear any further account of them,
as relating more to natural History than Travels. I shall only add, that the
Peasants, who are not secure from these Creatures when they go but into the
fields, especially in the night time, are of opinion, that the noise of a
stick, they fasten to the Sledges, frights the Wolves, and makes them run away.

March 7. We left Narva, The Ambassadors leave Narva
and lodged at night at Lilicnhagen, Lilicnhagen.
seven leagues from it. The 8. we traveled six leagues, to Sarits. Sarits.
The 9. before noon, we got four leagues to Orlin, Orlin.
where the Interpreter we had sent before, to give notice of our departure from
Revel, met us, with this news, that a Pristaf waited for us upon the Frontiers.
And whereas many disorders were crept into our retinue, insomuch that some
expressed but little respect to their Superiors, the Ambassadors caused all to
come before them, and told them, that being upon their entrance into Muscovy,
where they judge of the quality of the Embassy, and the greatness of the Prince
that sends it, by the honor which the Ambassadors receives from those that are
about them, they should be mindful of their duty.

We all promised not to fail therein, provided we were mildly treated, every
man according to his place and quality. Which the Ambassadors having promised
for their parts, we parted cheerfully, to go and meet the Pristaf. We found him
in a Wood within a league of Orlin, where he stayed for us, in the Snow, with
twenty four Strelits about him, and ninety Sledges.

As soon as the Pristaf, whose name was Constantino Iuanouits Arbusou, had
perceived us, and saw that the Ambassadors were a lighting, he also came out of
his Sledge. He was clad in a Garment of green flowered Velvet, which came down
to his Hams, with a great Golden Chain crossing over his breast, and an upper
Garment lined with Sables. As the Ambassadors advanced, he also came forward,
till that being come up to them, and the Ambassadors having put off their hats,
the Pristaf said, Ambassadors, be uncovered. The Ambassadors returned him
answer by the Interpreter, that he saw, they were uncovered, whereupon the
Pristaf read out of a Paper, That Knez Peter Alexandrowits Repuin, Weywode of
Novogorod, had sent him, by order from the Grand Seigneur, Czaar, and Great
Duke Michael Federouits, Conservator of all the Russes, etc. to receive the
Ambassadors Philip Crusius, and Otton Brugman, and to accommodate them with
Horses, Carriages, Provisions, and what else were necessary for the continuance
of their Voyage to Novogorod, and thence to Moscon. After we had returned him
our thanks, he gave us the precedence, inquired how we did, and of the
particulars of our voyage, and causing the Horses to be put before the Sledges,
he made us travel six leagues further that day, Tzuerin. Desan. Mokriza. Come
to Novogorod.
to a Village named Tzuerin.

March 10. About noon, we came to Desan, and at night to Mokriza, a Village 8
leagues from Tzuerin.

The 11. We came to Novogorod. At the entrance of the City, the Pristaf took
precedence of the Ambassadors, though they endeavored to hinder him. But as
soon as we were lodged, he desired the Interpreter to excuse the incivility he
had been guilty of, and to satisfy, the Ambassadors, that what he had done was
by express order from the Weywode, who would have done him some ill Office
about the Great Duke if he had not obeyed him.

From Narva to Novogorod are counted 40 German leagues; thence to Plescou 36.
and to Moscou 120. leagues. A description of the City of Novogorod.
Novogorod is situated upon the River Wolgda, at 58 degrees, 23 min. elevation.
Lundorp in his Continuation of Sleidan, puts it at 62. and Paulus Iovius, at 64
degrees: but at the exact observation I made of it on the 15 of March 1636. I
found, that, at noon, the Sun was above the Horizon 33 degr. 45 min. and that
the declination of the Sun, by reason of the Leap-year, because of 55. degr.
was 2 degr. and 8 min. which being subtracted out of the elevation of the Sun,
that of the Equinoctial line could be but 31 degr. 27 min. which taken out of
90 degr. there remains but 58 degrees, 23 minutes. Which almost agrees with the
calculation made of it by Bureus, some time Ambassador for the Crown of Sueden
in Muscovy, who puts the City of Novogorod, at 58 degrees, 13 minutes. It is
seated in a spacious plain upon the River Wolgda, or Wolchou, which has its
rise out of the Lake of Ilmen, half a league above this City, and crossing the
Lake of Ladoga, does, in its way, pass through the River Niova, near Notebourg,
and by the Gulf of Finland, falls into the Baltic Sea. It abounds with all
sorts of fish, especially Breme, which are there excellent good, and very
cheap. But the greatest advantage accrews to this City from this River, is by
Commerce. For being Navigable from its very source, and the Country abounding
in Wheat, Flax, Hemp, Honey, Wax, and Russia Leather, which is better dressed
at Novogorod, than in any other City of Muscovy, the easiness of the
transportation of these Commodities, brought thither not only the Livonians and
Suedes, who are Neighbors, but also Danes, Germans, and Flemmings, who settled
themselves there so well, that it was, without dispute, the greatest City for
Trade in all the North. The Hanseatick Towns had an Office of Address in this
City, which enjoying many great Privileges under its Prince, who had no
dependence on the Great Duke, was grown so powerful, that it grew into a
Proverb, Ochto Moschet stoiati protif Bocho dai welik Novogorod? Who can oppose
God and the great City of Novogorod?

Some would compare it, for greatness, with Rome; but they are mistaken. For
though it be called Weliki Novogorod, the great Novogorod, yet can it not be
compared to Rome. It Is not unlikely, it has been greater than it is now, not
only because it was the greatest for Commerce of any in the North, but also for
that all about may be seen the ruins of Walls, and several Steeples, which, no
doubt, had been part of the City. The number of its Steeples promises yet
somewhat more great and noble, than what may be now seen; since that coming to
the City, we see only VValls of VVood, and Houses built with Beams laid one
upon another.

Vithold, Great Duke of Lithuania, and General of the Polish Army, was the
first that, in the year 1427. obliged it to pay a considerable Tribute, which
some would have amount to 100000 Roubles, which come to above 200000 Crowns.
The Tyrant John Basili Grotsdin, having after a seven years War, gained a great
victory over an Army raised by this City, in the month of November 1477 forced
the Inhabitants to submission, and to receive a Governor from him: but
considering withal that he could not make himself as absolute as he would be
there, and that it would be hard for him to settle himself there by force, he
thought it best to go thither in person, pretending some concernments of
Religion, and that he would prevent their embracing the Roman Catholic. The
Archbishop Theophilus, who had most authority there, was the most forward to
promote his design, and the first rewarded for his pains. For no sooner was the
Tyrant got into the City, but he pillaged it, so that, at his departure thence,
he carried away three hundred Wagons laden with Gold, Silver, and Jewels,
besides the rich stuffs and other sumptuous movables, which he disposed into
other Wagons, and conveyed to Moscou whither he also transported the
Inhabitants, and sent Muscovites thither in their stead. But nothing
contributed more to the destruction of this City, than the brutish cruelty of
John Basilouits, Great Duke of Muscovy. This Tyrant, upon a mere suspicion he
had conceived of the Inhabitants of Novogorod, entered the City, in the year
1569. and caused to be killed or cast into the River 2770. persons, without any
respect of quality, age, or sex, besides an Infinite number of poor people who
were trampled to death by a party of horse. A Gentleman, sent by the King of
Denmark, to this Tyrant, eight years after the taking of the City, relates in
his Itinerary, that persons of quality had assured him, that there were so many
bodies cast into Wolgda, that the River stopping overflowed all the
neighboring fields. The Plague which soon followed this cruelty, was so great,
that, no body venturing to bring in Provisions, the Inhabitants fed on the dead
Carcasses. The Tyrant took a pretense from this inhumanity to cause to be cut
in pieces all those who had escaped the Plague, Famine, and his former cruelty,
which was no doubt more dreadful than all the other chastisements of God. I
shall allege only two Examples relating to Novogorod. An example of cruelty.
The Archbishop of this place, having escaped the first fury of the Soldiery,
either as an acknowledgement of the favor, or to flatter the Tyrant entertains
him at a great Feast in his Archiepiscopal Place, whither the Duke fayl'd not
to come, with his Guard about him: but while they were at Dinner, he sent to
pillage the rich Temple of St. Sophia, and all the Treasures of the other
Churches, which had been brought thither, as to a place of safety. After Dinner
he caused the Archbishops Palace to be in like manner pillaged, and told the
Archbishop, that it would be ridiculous for him to act the Prelate any longer,
since he had not to bear himself out in that quality; that he must put off his
rich habit, which must thence-forward be troublesome to him, and that he would
bestow on him a Bagpipe and a Bear, which he should lead up and down, and teach
to dance, to get money; That he must resolve to marry, and that all the other
Prelates and Abbots that were about the City should be invited to the Wedding,
setting down the precise sum which it was his pleasure that every one should
present to the new-married couple. None but brought what he had made a shift to
save, thinking the poor Archbishop would have had it. But the Tyrant took all
the money, and, having caused a white Mare to be brought, said to the
Archbishop; There is thy wife, get up on her, and go to Moscou, where I will
have thee entertained among the Violins, that thou may teach the Bear to
dance. The Archbishop was forced to obey, and, as soon as he was mounted, they
tied his legs under the Mare's belly, hung about his neck some Pipes, Fidle,
and a Timbrel, and would needs make him play on the Pipes. He escaped with this
punishment, but all the other Abbots and Monks were either cut to pieces, or,
with Pikes and Halbards, forced into the River.

Nay, he had a particular longing for the money of one Theodore Sircon, a rich
Merchant. He sent for him to the Camp near Novogorod, and, having fastened a
rope about his waste, ordered him to be cast into the River, drawing him from
one side of it to the other, till he was ready to give up the ghost. Then he
caused him to be taken up, and asked him what he had seen under water. The
Merchant answered, That he had seen a great number of Devils thronging about
the Tyrant's soul, to carry it along with them to Hell. The Tyrant replied,
Thou art in the right on it: but it is just I should reward thee for thy
prophecy, whereupon calling for seething oil, he caused his feet to be put into
it, and continued there, till he had promised to pay him ten thousand Crowns.
Which done, he caused him to be cut to pieces, with his brother Alexis.

The Baron of Herberstein, who traveled into Muscovy, in the time of the
Emperor Maximilian the first, and about his Affairs, says, that heretofore,
before the City of Novogorod was converted to the Christian Faith, Perun.
there was an Idol called Perun, that is, the God of Fire, perun, in the
Muscovian language signifying fire. This God was represented with a
Thunderbolt in his hand, and hard by him was kept a constant fire of Oak,
which was not to go out, but at the peril of their lives who kept it. The same
Author adds, that the Inhabitants of Novogorod having received Baptism, and
being made Christians, cast the Idol into water, that it went against the
stream of the River, and that being near the Bridge, it called to the
Inhabitants, and casting a stick among them, bid them keep it for his sake;
That in his time, on a certain day in the year, the voice of Perun was heard
there, and that thereupon the Inhabitants fell a-fighting with sticks, so
earnestly, that the Weywode had much ado to separate them. But now there is no
talk of any such thing, there being no monument of Perun left, other than that
there is a Monastery called Perumski Monastir, which they say is built in the
place where the Temple of the Idol stood before.

Without the City, and on the other side of the River, is a Castle, encompassed
with a stonewall, where live the Weywode and the Metropolitan, or Archbishop,
who has the oversight of Ecclesiastical affairs all over the Province. This
Castle joins to the City by a great Bridge, from which, Duke John Basilouits
caused a great number of Inhabitants to be cast into the River, as was said
before. Over against the Castle, on the same side with the City, is a Convent,
dedicated to St. Anthony. St. Anthony's Monastery.
The Muscovites say, he came from Rome into those parts upon a Millstone, upon
which he came down the Tiber, crossed the Sea, and so up the River Wolgda, to
Novogorod. They add, that, by the way, he met certain Fishermen, with whom he
bargained for the first draught they should make: that they brought up a Chest
full of Priests Vestiments to say Mass in, Books, and Money, belonging to this
Saint, and that afterward he built a Chapel there, in which they say he lies
interred, and that his Body is there to be seen, as entire as when he departed
this World. Many Miracles are wrought there, as they say; but they permit not
strangers to go in, thinking it enough to show them the Millstone, upon which
the Saint performed this pretended voyage, and which indeed may be seen lying
against the Wall. The Devotions performed there have been such as have built a
very fair Monastery in that place.

We staid at Novogorod, five days, during which the Weywode sent us a Present
of 24 sorts of meat, dressed after their way, and 16 sorts of drink. The
Chancellor, Bogdan Foederouits Oboburou, who had been our Pristaf in the former
Voyage, sent us also diverse delicacies. The Ambassadors presented the Weywode
with a new Coach. The Ambassadors leave Novogorod.


March 16. We had brought us 129 fresh Horses for our Sledges, and we got that
day four leagues to Brunits, Brunits.
where we took up fresh Horses again, wherewith, the next day, we traveled in
the forenoon 8 leagues to Miedna, Miedna.
and in the afternoon, four and a half to Kressa. Kressa.
The 18 we got before dinner six leagues to Iaselbitza; Iaselbitza.
in the afternoon, four to Simnagora. Simnagora.
The 19. nine leagues to Columna; Columna.
and the 20. five, to Wisna wolloka, Wisna wolloka.
where we saw a young man of 12 years of age that was married. At Tuere, we saw
a married woman that was but 11. and this is ordinary in Muscovy, as also in
Finland. The same night we came to Windra Pusk, Windra Pusk.
having traveled that afternoon seven leagues. In this last place, there were
but three houses, and the stoves so nasty and stinking, that we had a very ill
night of it, though indeed in other places the stoves are not kept much better
than stables in our Country.

The 21 we got 7 leagues, to Torsock. Torsock.
The 22. six, to Troitska Miedna; Troitza Miedna.
and the 23. six more, to Tuere, Tuere.
mentioned before. Here the snow beginning to melt in several places, we
quitted our Sledges, and took the Wolgda, which was still frozen, and traveled
that day six leagues, to Gorodna. The 24. we went by land again, for the Ice
began to give way, and got to Sawidoua; Sawidowa
and thence to Saulkspas, Saulkspas.
seven leagues from our last lodging, having, by the way, passed several Brooks
with great difficulty, by reason the Ice was loose. The 25. we passed by a
great Village called Klin, Klin.
behind which is the Brook Sestrea, which falls into the River Dubna, and, with
it, into Wolgda. We were forced to stay the flakes of Ice with stakes, which we
made a shift to fasten in the Brook, to hinder them from carrying us away. The
next day we passed it again, by reason it winds it self up and down in those
parts, and lodged that night at Beschick, Beschick.
seven leagues from Klin. The 27. we passed two other little Brooks, and got 6
leagues forwards, to Zerkizouo. Zerkizouo
The 28. we got but three leagues, to Nicola-Darebna, Nicola-Darebna.
which the Author, in the first Book calls Nicola Nachinski, within two leagues
of Moscou, where the Ambassadors are wont to expect the Great Duke's pleasure,
and the order he would have observed in their entrance. In the mean time we
fitted our Liveries, and set our selves in order for our Cavalcade, which we
made the next day at Noon, as follows.

First, Their entrance into Moscou.
went the 24 Musketeers who had conducted us from the Frontiers, being all
Cosaques. After them our Marshall alone.

Then the Officers and Gentlemen, three abreast, and those of best quality
first.

Three Trumpetters, with silver Trumpets.

Then the Ambassadors, each in his Sledge, having before them six with
Carabins, and on both sides as many, with Partisans.

Next the Sledges, came the Pages, and after them, the rest of the retinue on
horseback, and the baggage, all in very good order. The Pristaf took place of
the Ambassadors. Being come within half a league of the City, there met us many
Troops of horse, Muscovian, Tartars, and some Germans, who having rid about our
Cavalcade, returned to the City. After these came several other Troops, which
divided themselves, and encompassing us on both sides, conducted us to the City.

About a quarter of a league from the City we met two Pristafs, with a very
noble attendance, and the same equipage they had at our former reception. Being
come within 20. paces of us, they sent word to the Ambassadors, that they
should alight out of their Sledges, and come to them. The Pristafs neither
alighted, nor uncovered themselves, till the Ambassadors had done both. They
are enjoined to proceed with this reservedness, and to stand very much upon the
grandeur and reputation of their Prince, upon pain of being cast out of favor,
which disgrace is many times attended with whipping or cudgeling.

Our reception was after the same manner as the first time, the more aged
Pristaf beginning in these terms; The reception of the Ambassadors.
The Grand Seigneur, Cza^r, and Great Duke, Michael Federouits, etc. (repeating
all the other Titles) has commanded us to receive thee, Philip Crusius, and
thee Otton Brugman, great Ambassador from the Grand Seignor, Frederick Duke of
Holstein, and to conduct you to his Capital City of Moscou. To which the other
added; His Majesty has appointed these Tumoronins, or Gentlemen, here present,
Iuan Iuaniosin Salmosin, and my self Andrew Iuanouits Zabaro^, to be your
Pristafs during the abode you shall make there. Then the Master of the Horse
presented himself, made his complement, and brought the Ambassadors, two very
stately Horses, white as snow, and twelve others for the chief of their
retinue. From the Gate to our Lodgings, we passed through a double file of
Musketeers, to the number of above 3000. and we were lodged in that quarter of
the City which is called Cataigorod, not far from the Castle, in a stone-house,
built by an Archbishop named Susinski, who fell into disgrace some years
before, and was banished.

As soon as we had alighted, there were brought in, from the Great Duke's
Kitchen and Cellar, Their allowance*
all sorts of meats and drinks. And from that time during our stay at Moscou,
we were allowed, every day, sixty two Loaves, a quarter of Beef, four Sheep, a
dozen of Pullets, two Geese, one Hare, and one Heath-cock, alternately, fifty
Eggs, ten pence toward Candles, and five pence for small things used in the
Kitchen, one Pot of Sack, eight of Hydromel, three of Beer, and three small
pots of Strong-water. Besides all this, for a common stock, a Tun of Beer, a
lesser Tun of Hydromel, and a Barrel of Strong-water. With this we had, by way
of extraordinary in the week, a poude, that is, forty pound of Butter, and as
much Salt, three Pails of Vinigre, two Muttons, and a Goose. This allowance was
doubled at our arrival, as also upon Palm Sunday, Easter Day, and the young
Prince's Birthday; but we had them dressed by our own Cooks. The house-door
was kept by a Desetnick, or Corporal, who had nine Musketeers about him: but
the Pristaf's came every day, to entertain and divert us; and immediately after
our first public Audience, or as soon as we have been so happy as to have seen
the bright eyes of his Majesty the Czaar, as they express it, they gave us the
same liberty as we had at our former Voyage.

Arril 3. APRIL
we had our first public Audience, to which we were conducted with the same
Ceremonies as before, and, in our Cavalcade, we observed the same order as we
had at our entrance; unless it were, that the Secretary went next the
Ambassadors carrying the Credential Letters upon a great piece of Crimson
Taffata. The Musketeers had made a lane from our Lodging to the Castle, but all
could not keep off the people from thronging in to see us.

The Courriers went and came, as their custom is, to give directions for our
march; to order it so, as that the Great Duke might ascend his Throne, just at
the arrival of the Ambassadors.

The Ceremonies of the Audience were as is before mentioned. And the
Propositions made contained only complements, thanks for his Majesty's favor,
in granting the Ambassadors a passage into Persia, and desires to have some
secret conferences.

As soon as we were returned to our Lodgings, came one of the Great Duke's
Carvers, named Knez, Simon Petrouits Luon, with forty dishes of meat from his
Majesty, all Fish, fried things, and pulse, it being in their Lent: and twelve
pots of several sorts of drinks.

The Cloth being laid, and the meat served up, he presented, with his own
hand, to the Ambassadors and those of their retinue, to every one a Gobelet
full of a very strong Aquavitae, took himself a great Vermilion gilt-cup, and
drunk the Great Duke's health, then the young Prince's, and then that of his
Highness, obliging all to pledge him. He was presented with a piece of Plate
gilt, and those who brought in the meat had two Crowns a-piece given them.

We sat down; but most of the dishes being dressed with Onions and Garlic, we
eat very little, and sent the rest to our friends in the City. But what we
spared in meat, we made good in drink, whereto we were partly encouraged by the
Persian Ambassadors, who being lodged near us, gave us the divertisement of
their Bagpipes, and Hautbois, and partly by the excellent Wines, which the
Great Duke had sent us.

Apr. 5. we had our first private Audience, with the ordinary Ceremonies,
having the same Commissioners we had in our former negotiation, except the
Chancellor Iuan Tarassouits Grammatin, who, by reason of age, had resigned his
charge, which was conferred upon Fedor Fedorousin Lichozou. While we were at
this Audience, there died at our Lodging one of our Lacqueyes, who, some few
days before, having been overturned in one of the Sledges, had been hurt by
the Ambassador Brugman's Cabinet, which fell upon his breast. Being of the
reformed religion, his body was carried to the Church of that Profession, where
he had a Funeral Sermon, after which he was buried in the Churchyard belonging
to the Germans. The Great Duke sent us for the solemnity of the enterment, a
Pristaf, and 15. white Horses out of his own Stables.

The 9. The Palm Sunday Procession.
We had our second private Audience. The 10. being Palm Sunday, the Muscovites
had a noble Procession, to represent our Savior's entrance into Jerusalem,
and, that we might the more conveniently see it, having expressed our desires
to that purpose, the Great Duke sent the Ambassadors their ordinary Horses, and
fifteen others for their retinue. He ordered also to be kept for us a place,
near the Castle-Gate, whence they drove out the people which had thronged in to
the number of 10000. The Persian Ambassadors were placed behind us, in the
little Theater we have spoken of before.

The Great Duke having been at service in our Lady's Church, came out of the
Castle with the Patriarch in very good order.

First, came a very large Chariot, made of boards nailed together, but low,
drawing after it a Tree, on which hung abundance of Apples, Figs, and Grapes.
In it were four little Boys with surplisses, who sung the Hosanna.

Then followed many Priests, in their surplisses and copes, carrying Crosses,
Banners, and Images, upon long Poles; some of them sung, others cast Incense
among the people. Next came the Goses or Duke's Merchants; after them the
Diaken, Clerks, Secretaries, Knez and Bo^ares, having, most of them Palms in
their hands, and went immediately before the Great Duke, who was most richly
clad, with a Crown upon his head, supported by the two principal Counselors of
State, Knez Iuan Borisowits Cyrcaski, and Knez Alexey Michaelouits Won, and
led, himself, by the bridle, the Patriarch's Horse, which was covered with
Cloth, and made to represent an Ass. The Patriarch, who rid on him, had on
his head a round white Satin Cap, beset with rich Pearls, and about it a very
rich Crown. He had in his right hand a Cross of Diamonds, wherewith he blessed
the people, who received his benediction with great submission, bowing their
heads, and incessantly making the sign of the Cross. About and behind him were
Metropolitans, Bishops, and other Priests, whereof some carried Books, others
Censers. About fifty little Boys, most clad in red, put off their Casacks and
scattered them along the way: others had pieces of Cloth about an Ell-square,
of all colors, which they laid on the ground, for the Great Duke and Patriarch
to pass over. The Great Duke being come over against us, made a halt, and sent
his principal Interpreter, John Helmes, to ask after our health, and went not
on till our answer was brought him. This done, he went into the Church, where
he stayed about half an hour. In his return, he stopped again at the same
place, to give the Ambassadors notice that he would send them a Dinner from his
own Table: which yet was not done, but instead thereof, our ordinary allowance
was doubled.

The honor the Great Duke did the Patriarch in leading his horse, is worth to
him 400 Crowns, which the Patriarch is obliged to give him. Upon Pain-Sunday,
the same Ceremonies were observed all over Muscovy; the Metropolitanes and
Bishops representing the person of the Patriarch, the Weiwodes or Governors,
that of the Great Duke.

April. 17. was their Easter Day. It Is the greatest of all their Festivals, and
they celebrate it with abundance of Ceremonies, The Muscov an celebration of
Easter.
and great rejoycings, as well in remembrance of our Savior's Resurrection, as
that it puts a period to their Lent. The streets were all full of a sort of
Merchants, who sold Eggs of all sorts of colors, which the Muscovites send by
way of Present one to another, for a fortnight together after Easter, during
which time, when they meet, they kiss each other, and their salutation is in
these words, Christos wos Chrest, that is, Christ is risen, whereto the other
answers, Wostin wos Chrest, that is, He is risen indeed. No person, what
condition, sex, or other quality soever he be of, dares refuse these kisses, or
the Eggs, that are presented to him. The Great Duke himself has Presented some
to the principal Counselors, and Lords of his Court. He is wont also, on
Easter Day, betimes in the morning, to visit the Prisoners before he goes to
Church, and to order every one to have an Egg given him, and some sheep-skin
for bestowed on them, exhorting them to rejoice, since Christ died for their
sins, and was now truly risen again. That done, he causes the Prison-doors to
be shut again, and goes to his Devotions. Their greatest rejoycings consist in
Feasts, and good Cheer; but especially in debauches, in common drinking-houses,
which are full of all sorts of persons, Men and Women, Ecclesiastic and
Laics, who get so drunk, that the streets are paved with Drunkards. The
present Patriarch has prohibited them, and ordered that on Easter Day no
drinking places should be open; but he is not much obeyed.

April 29. Brugman has a private audience.
The Ambassador Brugman desired, and had, a private audience of the Bojares; to
which he went alone, without his Colleague, and but few persons about him. It
was given him in the Exchequer, and lasted above two hours; what he treated
about we could never learn, till afterward, by the charge put in against him at
our return home.

May 6. MAY.
The Ambassadors had together their third conference with the Bojares; the 17.
the fourth; and the 27. the fifth and last private audience.

May 30. The Great Duke permitted the young Prince's Governor, to go
a-hawking, and to invite, to that Divertisement, the Gentlemen of our retinue.
He sent us Horses, and carried us two Leagues from the City into most pleasant
Meadow grounds. Having sported two or three hours, we were treated with a
Collation, under a Tent pitched there for that end. The treatment was ordinary,
Strong-water, Hydromel, Ginger-bread, and preserved Cherries.

June 1. JUNE.
The Muscovites celebrated with great solemnities the birthday of their young
Prince, Knez Iuan Michaelouits. Our ordinary allowance of Provisions was
doubled.

The 3. The Ambassador Brugman had a second private conference with the
Bojares. June 14. being Whitsun-eve, the Great Duke gave public audience to
all the Ambassadors then in Mosco, in order to their departure. That of Persia
went first to audience: he was a Cupz^n, or Merchant; as he came back he had on
his other Clothes* according to the Persian custom a Garment of Crimson-Satin,
lined with the best kind of Sables which the Great Duke had Presented him with.

After him went the Greeks, Armenians, and Tartars, who in their return, caused
their Letters, and the Presents they had received, to be carried before them.

The 12. Arrived there our Controller, who had stayed at Dantzick, to look
after the finishing of some Presents which we were to carry into Persia. The
Great Duke was gone on a Pilgrimage out of the City, and the Chancellor durst
not permit the Controller to enter in without his Majesty's express order;
which occasioned his staying three days in the Suburbs.

The 15. The great Duchess her Cavalcade.
The Great Duke and Duchess returned to Moscou. The Duke was attended by a
great number of Lords: the Duchess had about her 36. Ladies, or Maids of
honor. They were all on Horseback, sitting a-stride, clothed in red, white
Hats on their heads, with great red bands dangling at their backs, white Scarfs
about their necks; they were most wickedly be-painted.

The 17. I was sent to the Chancellor, to speak to him concerning our
dispatches. He would do me the greatest honor I could expect, and ordered, I
should be brought in to audience by a Pristaf. That importunate civility cost
me two hours attendance in the Antichamber, till a Pristaf was found. The
Chancellor and Vice Chancellor received me kindly, and dismissed me well
satisfied. The Table in the Audience Chamber was covered with a very rich
Persian Carpet, upon which was a silver Standish, but without any Ink in it: I
was told afterward, that they were set there only for the time I was to stay
in the room, which was but poorly furnished without them.

The 20. The Pristafs came to tell us, that we might take our journey for
Persia when we pleased, and that at our return thence, we should have the
honor to kiss his Majesty's hand, it being not fit they did it then, since the
Ambassadors were not to return into their own Country, and that at the last
public audience only, the Great Duke was obliged to answer the Credentials
they had brought.

We accordingly prepared for our departure, got Boats to be provided to carry
us upon the River to Nisa, and took into our service, three Lieutenants, four
Sergeants, and twenty three Soldiers, Scots and Germans. The Great Duke gave
us leave to take them out of his own Guard, for our security against the
incursions of the Tartars, which make traveling near Wolgda very dangerous. We
also hired certain Muscovites, for ordinary Employments. The 24. and 25. were
spent in putting our things aboard, and sending away certain brass Guns we had
brought out of Germany, and some Cabinets we had bought at Moscou, and part of
our Baggage, ordering the Conductor to stay for us at Nisa.

The 26. The entrance of Ambassadors from Poland.
came in Ambassadors, or, as the Mvscovites call them, Courriers of quality,
from the King of Poland. We went out of the City, to observe their entrance. As
soon as they perceived us, they saluted us very civilly, putting off their
Hats, but their demeanor toward the Muscovites was much wanting of respect,
never offering to be uncovered. They also obliged the Pristefs to alight, and
uncover themselves first, saying, they were not there to do the Muscovites any
honor, but to receive it from them. There were no Horses out the Great Duke's
Stables at the entrance of these Ambassadors, because another Polish
Ambassador, had, some few days before, refused them, and made use of his own.

This other Polish Ambassador had been sent to the Great Duke immediately after
the defeat of the Muscovites before Smolensco, The fierceness of a Polish
Ambassador.
which gave him occasion to be so insolent as he was, during his stay at Mosco.
He would needs make his proposition sitting, and perceiving that, when he
pronounced the name and titles of his King, the Bojares were not uncovered, he
stopped, till such time as the Grand Duke had commanded them to be so* The King
of Poland had sent the Great Duke no Present, but the Ambassador gave him, as
from himself, a very fair Coach* and yet when the Duke sent him a rich Present
of Sables, he refused them. Whereupon the Great Duke sent back his Coach, which
the Ambassador being angry at, took that occasion to tumble the Pristaf from
the top of a high pair of stairs to the bottom. The Great Duke was so incensed
thereat, that he sent one to tell the Ambassador, that he knew not, whether
this demeanor of his was according to his Master's order, or that the rudeness
proceeded from his own passion; that if his King had commanded him to do so,
patience must be had, till God enabled him to express his resentment of it,
that the event of War was in his hands, and that another time he might be the
more fortunate: but that if he had done this without order, and upon his own
account, complaint should be made of it to the King his Master.

The 26 of June, the Pristaf brought us the Great Dukes Pass, which for the
odness of the style, The Great Duke's Pass.
we think fit to insert here, faithfully translated out of the Muscovian
language.

From the Grand Seigneur and Great Duke of all the Russes, Michael Federouits;
We enjoin all our Bojares, Weiwodes and Diaken, and all our Commanders from the
City of Moscou to Columna, and thence to Perestaf, Resansky, and Kasimoua, to
Murama, and Nise-Novogorod, to Casan, and Astrachan, to let pass Philip Crusius
and Otton Brugman, Ambassadors and Counselors from Frederick, Duke of
Holstein, whom we have permitted to go from Moscou into Persia, to Schach Sefi
of Persia: by virtue of a Treaty made for the Passage and Commerce of the
Merchants of Holstein. We have also permitted them to take along with them
their Germans of Holstein, to the number of 85 persons, and for their convoy 30
Soldiers, chosen, with our consent, out of the Germans, who serve in Muscovy,
which number they may augment, for the safety of their Voyage of Persia, at
Nisa, Cassan, or Astrachan, by eleven men, Germans or Muscovites, volunteers.
We also permit them, at Nisa, to hire two Pilots, who are acquainted with the
course of the Wolgda. We consent, and in like manner permit the said
Ambassadors of Holstein, if, at their return from Persia, they stand in need of
a Convoy, or other people for business, to take at Cassan, or Astrachan, or any
where else they shall think fit, forty men, or such other number as they shall
think requisite for the prosecution of their Voyage: provided, that those of
our people who shall hire themselves to the said Ambassadors, gave in their
names to the Boj^res, Weiwodes, and Diaken of the place of their abode, as well
at their departure thence, as at their return thither, that there may be a
Register kept thereof. And if they return from Persia in the Winter, it shall
be lawful for them, for their money, to take into their service such a number
of men, and Sledges, as they shall think requisite for the continuation of
their Voyage.

We have also appointed Rodiuon Gaba^o, Gentleman of Astrachan, to conduct the
said Ambassadors from Moscou to Asttachan, Wherefore we command you, our
Bojares; Weiwodes, Diaken, and Commanders, to let pass the said Rodiuon, with
the Ambassadors of Holstein, Without any let. And if after their Voyage of
Persia, at their return thence, they are desirous to to repass through the
Countries in our obedience, you shall permit them to take into their service,
for labor, or for convoy upon the Wolga, forty men, or such other number as
they shall stand in need of, which they shall take by virtue of this present
Passport, at Astrachan, Cassan, or any other place they shall think fit. And
our said Subjects shall be obliged to cause their names to be enrolled, as well
at their departure as at their return, to the end notice may be taken, that no
Robbers, Golops, or fugitive Slaves get in among them. In like manner at the
return of their Voyage, if they pass through Muscovy in the Winter time, it
shall be lawful for them, at their own charge, to hire such a number of
Sledges, as they shall think fit, so as that they be not hindered in the
prosecution of their Voyage, either in Cities or in the Country. Enjoining
further, that all respect be given to the Ambassadors of Holstein, and all
civillity done their people, both going and coming, not permitting that they
should suffer any violence, or be robbed: obliging them also, for their part,
not to take any provisions by force of any whatsoever; but it shall be lawful
for them, to buy, for their money, of those that shall be willing to sell to
them, both going and coming. Writ at Moscou, in the year 7144. June 20. and
signed, The Czaar, and Great Duke of all the Russes, Michael Federouits; and
lower, Deak Maxim Matuskin; and sealed with the great Seal.

The Pristaf having given us our Passport, The Ambassadors leave Moscou.
we appointed Iun. 30. for our departure. Mr. David Ruts gave us another
entertainment that day, and kept us till the last hour of the day, which (the
Muscovites beginning it at Sunrising, and ending it at Sunset) having struck,
the Pristaf caused to be brought out the Great Dukes Horses, and hastened our
departure, being accompanied by several persons of quality, who brought us as
far as the Monastery of Simana, three leagues from Moscou, where our Boat
waited for us, avoiding by that means the many windings of the River from
Moscou thither.

But it were not handsome to leave Moscou without giving some account of that
great City, A description of Moscou.
the Metropolis of all Muscovy, to which it gives the name, as it takes its own
from the River Moska. This River, which passes through, and divides all the
rest of the City, from that quarter of it which is called Strelitza Slauoda,
rises out of the Province of Tuere, and having joined its waters with those of
the Occa, near Columna, it falls together with the other, about half a league
thence, into the Wolga. The City is elevated 55 degr. 36 min. its longitude 66
degrees, in the midst of all the Country, and almost at an equal distance from
all the Frontiers, which is above 120 German leagues. It is about three leagues
about, and, no doubt, has been heretofore bigger than it is now. Mathius de
Michou, a Canon of Cracovid, who ^ourish'd at the beginning of the last age,
says, that, in his time, it was twice as big as the City of Prague. The Tartars
of Crim and Precop, burnt it in the year 1571. and the Poles set it a-fire in
the year 1611. so as that there was nothing left of it but the Castle; and yet
now there are numbered in it above 40000 houses, and it is out of all
controversy one of the greatest Cities in Europe.

It Is true, that, the Palaces of great Lords, and the Houses of some rich
Merchants excepted, which are of Brick or Stone, all the rest are of Wood, and
made up of beams, and cross-pieces of Firr laid one upon another. Its building
most of Wood.
They cover them with barks of trees, upon which they sometimes put another
covering of Turfes. The carelessness of the Muscovites, and the disorders of
their housekeeping are such, that there hardly passes a month, nay not a
week, but some place or other takes fire, which, meeting with what is very
combustible, does in a moment reduce many houses, nay, if the wind be any thing
high, whole streets into ashes. Some few days before our arrival, the fire had
consumed the third part of the City; and about 5 or 6 years since, the like
accident had near destroyed it all. To prevent this, the Strelits of the Guard,
and the Watch, are enjoined, in the night time to carry Pole-axes, wherewith
they break down the houses adjoining to those which are a-fire, by which means
they hinder the progress of it, with much better success than if they attempted
the quenching of it. And that it may not fasten on other more solid structures,
the doors and windows are very narrow, having shutters of Latin, to prevent the
sparks and flashes from getting in. Those who have their houses burnt, have
this comfort withal, that they may buy houses ready built, at a market for
that purpose, without the white-Wall, at a very easy rate, and have them taken
down, transported, and in a short time set up in the same place where the
former stood.

The streets of Moscou are handsome, and very broad, but so dirty, after rain
has ever so little moistened the ground, that it were impossible to get out of
the dirt, were it not for the great Posts, which set together make a kind of
bridge, much like that of the Rhin, near Strasbourg which bridges, in foul
weather, serve for a kind of pavement.

The City is divided into four quarters, Catayrogod.
or circuits, whereof the first is called Catayrogod, that is, the mid-City, as
being in the midst of the others. This quarter is divided from the rest by a
brick-wall, which the Muscovites call crasne stenna, that is, red stone. The
Moska passes on the South Side of it* and the River Neglina, which joins with
the other behind the Castle, Cremelena.
on the North side. The Great Duke's Palace, called Cremelena, and which is of
greater extent than many other ordinary Cities, takes up almost one half of it,
and is fortified with three strong walls, and a good ditch, and very well
mounted with Canon. In the midst of the Castle are two Steeples, one very high,
and covered with Copper gilt, as all the other Steeples of the Castle are. This
Steeple is called Iuan Welike, that is, the Great John. The other is
considerable only for the Bell within it, made by the Great Duke Boris Gudenou,
weighing 33600. pounds. It is not tolled, but upon great Festivals, or to
honor the entrance and audience of Ambassadors: but to stir it there must be
24 men, who pull it by a Rope that comes down into the Court, while some others
are above to help it on by thrusting. The Great Duke's Palace stands toward
the further side of the Castle, with that of the Patriarch, and appartements
for several Bojares, who have places at Court. There is also lately built a
very fair Palace of stone, according to the Italian Architecture, for the young
Prince; but the Great Duke continues still in his wooden Palace, as being more
healthy than stone-structures. The Exchequer, and the Magazine of Powder and
provisions are also within the Castle.

There are also within it two fair Monasteries, one for men, the other for
women, and above fifty Churches and Chapels, all built of stone; among others,
those of the B. Trinity, St. Mary's, St. Michael's, wherein are the Sepulchers
of the Great Dukes, and St. Nicholas's.

At the Castle-Gate, but without the Walls, on the South Side, is a fair Church
Dedicated to the B. Trinity, and commonly called Jerusalem. When it was
finished, the Tyrant John Basilouits, thought it so magnificent a structure,
that he caused the Architect's eyes to be put out, that he might not afterward
do any thing that should be comparable to that. Near this Church are two great
pieces of Canon, with the mouths toward that street by which the Tartars were
wont to make their irruptions; but these pieces are now dismounted, and useless.

In the spacious place, before the Castle, is the chief Market of the City
kept; all day it is full of people, but especially slaves, and idle persons.
All the Marketplace is full of Shops, as also all the streets abutting upon
it: but every Trade has a station by it self, so as the Mercers intermingle
not with the Linen or Wollen-Drapers, nor Goldsmiths with Sadlers, Shoemakers,
Tailors, Furriers, and the like, but every Profession and Trade has its proper
street: which is so much the greater convenience, in that a man does, of a
sudden, cast his eye on all he can desire. Sempstresses have their shops in the
midst of the Market, where there is also another sort of Women Traders, who
have Rings in their mouths, and, with their Rubies and Turquoises, put off
another commodity which is not seen in the Market. There is a particular street
where are sold the Images of their Saints. It Is true, these go not under the
name of Merchandise, among the Muscovites, who would make some difficulty to
say they had bought a Saint; but they say, they receive them by way of Exchange
or Trucking, for money: and so when they buy, they make no bargain, but lay
down what the Painter demands.

There is yet another place, in this quarter, called the Hair-market, because
the Inhabitants go thither to be trimmed, by which means the place comes to be
so covered with hair, that a man treads as softly as if it were on a
Feather-bed. Most of the principal Goses, or Merchants, as also many Knez and
Muscovian Lords have their houses in this first circuit.

The second quarter is called Czaargorod, Czaargorod.
that is, Czaar's City, or the Citie-Royal, and includes the former as it were
in a Semicircle. The little River Neglina passes through the midst of it, and
it has its particular Wall, called Biela stenna, that is, the white Wall. In
this quarters is the Arsenal, and the place, where Guns and Bells are cast,
which is called Pogganabrut, the management whereof the Great Duke has
bestowed on a very able man, one John Valk, born at Nuremberg, whom he sent for
out of Holland, for this reason, that he was the first who found a way to
discharge a Bullet of sixteen pound weight with five pound of powder. The
Muscovites who have wrought under this man, have so well learnt the Mystery of
founding that now they are as expert at it as the most experienced Germans.

In this quarter also there live many Knez, Lords, Sinbojares, or Gentlemen,
and a great number of Merchants, who drive a Trade all the Country over, and
Tradesmen especially Bakers. There are also some Butchers shambles, and
Tipling-houses, which sell Beer, Hydromel, and Strong-water, Storehouses of
Wheat, Meal shops, and the Great Duke's stables.

The third quarter is called Skoradom, Skoradom
and includes the quarter called Czaargorod, from the East, along the
North-side, to the West. The Muscovites affirm, that this quarter was five
German Leagues about, before the City was burnt by the Tartars, in the year
1571. The little River Iagusas passes through it, and in its way fails into the
Mosca. In this quarter is the Market for Wood and Houses before mentioned;
where you may have Houses ready made, which may be taken asunder, transported
thence, and set up any where else, in a short time, and with little pains and
charge, since they consist only of beams, and posts, set one upon the other,
and the vacuities are filled up with Moss.

The fourth quarter is called Strelitza Slauoda, Strelitza. Slauoda.
because of the Strelits, or Musketeers of the Great Duke's Guard, who live in
it. It is situated toward the South of Citarogod, on the other side of the
Mosca, upon the Avenues of the Tartars. Its Ramparts and Baltions are of Wood.
The Great Duke Basili Iuanouits, father of Basilouits, who built this quarter,
designed it for the quarters of such Soldiers, as were strangers, as Poles,
Germans, and others, naming that place Naeilki, or, the quarter of Drunkards,
from the word Nali, which signifies, power out: for, these strangers being more
inclined to drunkenness than the Muscovites, he would not have his own people,
who were apt enought to debauch themselves, to become so much the worse by the
others bad example. Besides the Soldiery, the poorer sort of the people have
their habitations in this quarter.

There is, The number of Churches and Chapels in Moscou.
in the City and Suburbs of Moscou, a very great number of Churches,
Monasteries and Chapels. In the former Impression of these Travels, we said,
there were above fifteen hundred; but whereas John Lewis Godefrey, Author of
the Archontologia Cosinica, thinks that number so excessive, that he sticks not
to speak of it as a thing not likely to be true, I must indeed needs
acknowledge, that I was much mistaken, and, now affirm for certain, that where
I said there were 1500. there are above 2000. No Muscovite that has lived at
Moscou, nay no stranger, any thing acquainted with that City, but will confirm
this truth, as knowing, there is no Lord but has his private Chapel, nor any
Street but has many of them. It Is true, they are most of them very small ones,
and but fifteen foot square; nay, before the Patriarch commanded they should be
built of Stone, they were all of Wood: but that hinders not, but that the
number of them may amount to what we have said.



THE TRAVELS OF THE AMBASSADORS FROM THE DUKE of HOLSTEIN INTO MUSCOVY, and
PERSIA.
The Third Book.
THE City of Moscou, which those of the Country call Moskwa, 1636*
derives its name to the Province, wherein it is seated, and to all Muscovy,
which was heretofore known under that of Russia, or white Russia. Muscovy
described.
It is doubtless, the greatest of all the Estates of Europe, since it reaches
in length near thirty degrees, or 450. leagues; and, in breadth, sixteen
degrees, or 240. German leagues. Its Frontiers reach, Northward, beyond the
Arctick Circle to the frozen Sea. On the East, it has the River Oby; toward
the South, the Tartars of Crim and Precop; and toward the West, Poland,
Livonia and Sueden.

Muscovy is divided into many great Provinces, The Province of Woledimer.
most of which we have named elsewhere with the Titles of the Great Duke. That
of Wolodimer, or Vladimer, was heretofore the chiefest. Its capital City,
whence it has its name, was built by Prince Wolodomer, who lived about the
year 928. It is 36. leagues distant from Moscou, Eastward, between the Rivers
of Occa, and Wolga, in a Country so fruitful, that one Bushel of Wheat sown,
yields 25. or 30. The River Clesma, which passes by it, falls into the River
Occa near the City of Murom. The Great Dukes had chosen it for the most
convenient place for their residence, till Prince Danilou Michaelouits
translated the Emperial Seat to Moscou.

The Province of Smolensko has, Smolensko
on the East, the Province of Muscovy, on the North, Siberia, on the South,
Lithavie, and toward the West, Livonia. The Metropolis of the Province,
Smolensko, is seated upon the River Nieper, which they say is the same the
Ancients called Boristhenes, though that of Berezine comes nearer to that name.
The other eminent Cities of it, are, Prohobus, upon the Nieper, Wesma, upon a
River of the same name, and Mosaysko. The City of Smolensko has, on the side
of the River, a Citadel, fortified with great Chains and good Ditches, with a
good Counterscarp well palisadoed. The Muscovites took this City from the Poles
in the year 15^4. Sigismond King of Poland Recovered it again in the year 1611.
and the late Great Duke Michael Federouits besieged it in the year 1633. but
was forced to raise the siege, as we shall have occasion to relate anon. The
Great Duke that now is took it by composition, in the year 1654. and is still
possessed of it.

The Province of Rhesan lies between the Rivers Don and Occa, Rhesan.
having on the West, Muscovy, from which it is divided by the River Aka. This
is the most fruitful Province of all Muscovy, and produces abundance of Wheat,
Honey, Fish, and all sorts of Venizon and Fowl. Besides the chief City, which is
upon the River Occa, it has also those of Corsira, and Tulla, upon the River
of that name.

Permie is one of the greatest Provinces of all Muscovy, and distant from
Moscou 250. or 300. German leagues, toward the East and North. Its chief City,
whence it has its name, lies upon the River of Vischora, Permie.
which falls into Kam, 15. leagues thence. The Inhabitants of this Province
have a Language and Characters peculiar to themselves. They eat Herbs instead
of bread, and instead of Tribute, send the Great Duke, Horses and Furrs. Its
neighbors Eastward are the Tartars of Tumen.

The Baron of Herberstein says, Jugarie.
that the Province of Iugarie, is that whence the Hongrians came, who now live
in the Country that lies upon the Dannow,

The Province of Wiathka, Wiathka.
is 150. German leagues distant from the City of Moscou, toward the East,
beyond the River Kam. The River of Wiathka gives it the name; which falls into
Kam, which falls into Wolga 12. leagues below Casan. The Country is woody and
barren, and much subject to the incursions of the Tartars Czeremisses, who were
the Masters of it, till Basili, Great Duke of Muscovy, united it to his Crown.

The Principality of Bielsk derives the name from Biela its chief City; Bielks.
as does the Province of Rschouie from that of the City of Rschewa; Rschouie.
and that of Tuere, Tuere.
from the City of that name.

The City and Duchy of Plescou was governed by its own Princes, Plescou.
till the Great Duke John Basilouits reunited both to his Crown, in the year
1509. The Muscovites call it Pskow, from the Lake upon which the chief City is
seated, and out of which rises the River of the same name, that passes through
the City.

Siberia is of great extent, Siberie.
and had a long time its own Princes, who paid Tribute to the Kings of Poland,
upon the account of Lithuania, on which they had some dependence. They revolted
from Casimer, son of Iagellon, King of Poland, and became subject to the Great
Duke of Muscovy. The Czaar Basili, ejected the Duke of Siberie, and united the
Province to his Crown. The chief City is Novogorod, but to distinguish it from
others of the same name, it is called Novogorod Siebersky, that is, Novogorod,
or the New City of Siberie. Its other eminent Cities are Starodub, Petivola,
Czernigou, and Bransko.

The Dutchies of Iarostaf, Jarostaf.
Rosthou, Rosthou.
and Susdal Susdal.
were a long time enjoyed by the younger Brothers of Muscovy, till John
Basilouits reunited them to the Crown, in the year 1565.

The Province of Dwina is the greatest, Dwina.
and more Northern of all Muscovy, and was heretofore subject to the Duke of
Novogorod. The River of Dwina falls into the white Sea, near Archangel. It is
not long since that this Province, which is a hundred leagues in length, had
but one City in it, of the same name seated in the midst of it: but now that
the Muscovites have Translated into those parts, the Trade which the English,
Dutch, and Hanseatick Towns, were wont to bring to Narva, it is become one of
the most considerable Provinces of all Muscovy. The greatest place of Commerce
is called Archangel, Archangel.
from the Archangel, St. Michael, and situated at the mouth of the Dwina, where
it makes the Island of Podesemski. The City is not very great, but of great
Trading, by reason of the many Ships that come every year, which bring thither
the Muscovian Merchants, especially those strangers that live at Moscou, with
the commodities of the Country, to truck for those that are brought thither.
The Great Duke makes great advantages of it; but the Impositions he lays upon
all Merchandlses are so great, that it is not unlikely Strangers will, in time,
return to Narva, where the King of Sueden takes but two in the hundred, and, to
which, navigation is not so dangerous.

In the Gulf, which the Sea makes near the mouth of Dwina, are three Islands,
called Solofka, Anger, and Coloua. There was heretofore in the former of these
the Sepulcher of a Muscovian Saint, but 3. or 4. years since, the Great Duke
caused the Body to be translated thence to Moscou. Some report, that the Great
Dukes, Predecessors of him that now reigns, had hidden a great Treasure there,
as being a place inaccessible, by reason of its high and steepy Rocks.

The Province of Vstiugha is next to that of Dwina, Ustiugha.
but more Southerly, and was also subject to the Duke of Novogorod. The chief
City, of the same name, is so called from the word Vst, which signifies the
mouth of a River, as the Latin word, Ostium; and Iugh, because it was seated
at the place where the River of Iugh falls into Suchana, from which it is now
half a league distant. Its Inhabitants eat no Bread, but are content with Fish
and Venison dried in the Sun. Thence are brought the fairest black-Foxes skins.

Vologda, Vologda.
seated in the Province of the same name, is the only City in all Muscovy that
has a stone wall about it, being the place whither the Great Duke, in time of
War, was wont to send some part of his Treasures. It sometime belonged to the
Duke of Novogorod, but is now, together with the Province, reunited to
Muscovy. The River of Vologda, whence it takes its name, falls, with the Dwina,
into the white Sea.

The Duchy of Bielejezoro is also one of the Northern Provinces of this great
State, Bielejezoro.
but so full of Woods and Rivers, that it is in a manner inaccessible, unless
it be when the Fenns and Rivers are frozen.

The Province of Petzora reaches along the frozen Sea, Petzora.
toward the East and North. The River of Petzora, whence it has the name,
falls into the Sea near the Straight of Weigats, below the City of Pustioziero,
by six several channels. The mountains, which the Muscovites call Zimnopoias,
that is, the Girdle of the Earth, (the same, as it is believed, as the Ancients
called the Riphaean and Hiperborean mountains) lie on both sides of it, and
afford the best Sables, and excellent Hawks. The City is but little, and the
cold so great in this Province, that the Rivers are frozen from August to May.
Upon this Province border the Samoicdes, a people we shall have occasion to
speak of hereafter.

The Province of Obdorie derives its name from the River Oby, Obdorie.
which rising out of the great Lake of Kataisko, and running from the East
toward the North, falls into the frozen Sea, and is so broad at the mouth,
that with a very good wind a Ship will have much ado to cross from one side to
the other in two days.

As for the Tartarian Provinces that are subject to the Great Duke, The source
of Wolga.
we shall give an account of them in the prosecution of our Travels along the
River Wolga; of which River we shall only say by the way, that in the Province
of Rschouie, two leagues from its chief City, and in the great forest of
Wolkowskiles, is the Lake of Wronow, out of which rises a River, that, two
leagues off that place, falls into the Lake of Wolga, from which it derives its
name, and is thence forward called Wolga. The Tartars call it Edel, and it is
the same as Ptolomy calls Rha. It Is doubtless, the greatest River in all
Europe; since that from the City of Nise-Novogorod, near which we went into it,
out of the River Ocea, to the Caspian Sea, we have counted above 500 German
leagues, not accounting above a hundred leagues more there is from its source
to the place where the Occa falls into it.

The Boristhenes, Boristhianes.
which those of the Country call Dnieper, rises out of the same Province, ten
leagues from the Lake of Fronowo, near a Village called Dniepersko. It divides
Lithuania from Muscovy, and after it has taken its course toward the South,
where it passes near Wiesma, and thence toward the East, bathing the Cities of
Progobus, Smolensko, Orscha, Dubrowna, and Mohilouw, it turns again toward the
South, and passing by Kiouie, by the Circasses, and thence toward Otzakow, a
City of the Tartarians of Precop, it falls into the Euxine Sea.

There are, Dwina
in Muscovy, two Rivers called Dwina; one rises out of a Lake of the same name,
ten leagues from the Lake of Fronowo, and the source of Dnieper, and falls into
the Baltic Sea, below Riga. The other rising at the conjunction of the Rivers
of Iagel and Sachana, gives its name to the Province before mentioned, and
falls into the White Sea, near Archangel. The Rivers of Mosca and Occa are
pleasant and very considerable; but, they lose their names, with all the other
Rivers in the Country, when they fall into those we have before spoken of.

Muscovy then being of such extent, as we have said, it is not to be imagined,
that in Provinces so distant, The Air of Muscovy.
and situated in so different climates, Air and Earth are alike qualified every
where. About Moscou and the adjacent Provinces, the Air is good and healrhy, so
that there is no talk of the Plague, or any other Epidemical disease. Which was
the reason, that in the year 1654. at the beginning of the War of Smolensko,
when the Infection made such havoc in that great City, people were the more
surpised thereat, in regard the like had not been known in the memory of man.
It was so great, that those were seen dying in the streets, who thought
themselves well enough when they came out of their houses; and all Muscovy was
so astonished at it, that all the Avenues of Moscou were blocked up.

The cold is so piercing, Extremely cold.
that no fur can prevent the Nose, Ears, Feet, and Hands from freezing and
falling. At our first Voyage thither, in 1634. the cold was so sharp, that, in
the great Marketplace, before the Castle, we saw the earth open above twenty
fathoms in length, and a foot broad. We could not go 50 steps, without hazard
of losing some of our members. I saw there by experience, what others have left
in writing, that spittle froze before it came to the ground, and water as it
dropped.

I observed withal, that the earth is open there in a manner as soon as in
Germany, and that the Spring fruits come much about the same time; for the more
the earth is covered with Snow, the more it keeps in the heat requisite to
promote vegetation. The Ice and Snow together make the ways so even, that it is
much easier traveling there than any where else. For Winter-travelling, the
Muscovites make use of Sledges, made very low, of the bark of Trees, covered
with some coarse kind of Cloth. We lay all along in them, and covering our
selves with sheepskins, and the Sledges being covered with Sackcloth, or
some coarse Cloth, we not only felt not the cold, but even sweated in the
depth of Winter.

The Muscovian Horses are very low, yet fit enough for this kind of traveling,
for being swift and indefatigable, they will go 8. 10. nay many times 12
leagues without staying by the way. I have my self traveled twice from Tuere
to Torsock without any halt by the way. Hence is it that traveling is so
cheap, that a Country fellow shall bring you fifty leagues for three or four
Crowns at most.

If the cold be sharp in the Winter, the heat is no less troublesome in Summer,
not proceeding so much from the scorching rays of the Sun (which is there in a
manner always above the Horizon, Very hot in Summer.
and makes the day 18. hours long) as occasioned by the Flies, Wasps, Gnats,
and other insects, which the Sun produces in the Moors and Fens, which take up
a great part of the Country, in such abundance, that night and day they are
extremely troublesome,

But, Fertility.
the Fens and Forests, which Muscovy is well stored with, hinder not but the
Land they cultivate is very Fertile. For unless it be about Mosco, where the
soil is barren and gravelly, let them take ever so little pains with their
grounds in other places, they will bring forth more Wheat and Pasture than the
Country can consume. The Hollanders acknowledge, that Muscovy is to them what
Sicily was sometime to Rome. You never hear talk of dearth, though in the
Provinces that have not the convenience of Rivers to transport their Corn, the
Inhabitants manure only so much ground as will afford them a bare subsistence
for the present year, not minding the future, as confident their ordinary
increase will never fail them. Thence it comes that so much excellent ground
lies fallow, producing only Hay, whereof they mow no more than will serve their
Cattle.

There is so great difference between this soil, Muscovy more fertile than
Livonia.
and that of the Province of Allentaken in Livonia, though there lies only the
River Narva between them, that as soon as a man is over he perceives it.
Muscovy and the Northern Provinces of Livonia have this common with
Inguermannia and Carelia, that they sow not their Corn till within three weeks
of Midsummer; for the cold having, The seed-time.
as a man might say, pierced to the Center of the earth, it must have leisure
to unfreeze: but the Wheat is no sooner in the ground but it puts forth, and
the heat of the Sun, which, as we said, is always above the Horizon, advances
and ripens it. So that Sowing and Harvest is all over in two months. Their
harvest.
Wherein the Muscovites have this advantage over the Livonians, that they put
in their Wheat dry, and ready to be thrash'd, whereas the Livonians are forced
to use fire to dry it, by the help of a great Oven, built in the midst of a
Barn, where they put their sheaves upon beams laid across, till such time as
the heat has so dried them, that beating them with a stick, the Grain falls
out, so as that there is no need of thrashing or treading it, as they do in the
East. There is yet this further inconvenience, that the Wheat thus dried is not
good for seed, and many times the Barns take fire, which spreads into the
houses about them, and consumes all.

In those Provinces which are not so much toward the North, The fruits of
Muscovy.
especially near the City of Mosco, their are excellent fruits, as Apples,
Cherries, Plums, and Goos-berries. I have seen Apples in beauty and color much
like those which are called Appians, and so transparent, that holding them
between your sight and the Sun, you may easily tell the Kernels. It Is true this
fruit having not time to bake in the Sun, (it being rather a moderate slow
heat, than an excessive scorching, that consumes the superfluous moisture) will
not keep, as it would do in Germany and other more Southerly Countries: but the
Commentator upon the Maps of Atlas is nevertheless mistaken, when he says,
after the Baron of Herberstein, and Guagnin, that the cold is so great in
Muscovy, that the Country cannot produce Apples or other Fruits that are worth
sending up to the Table. They have also all manner of Pulse, Pot Herbs,
Asparagus, Onions, Garlic, Roots, Cowcumber, Citruls, or Gourds, and Melons,
and of these last abundance, excellent good, and so big, that at my being in
Muscovy in the year 1643. a friend presented me with a Melon, Extraordinary
Melons.
that weighed forty pound. The Muscovites are very expert in the ordering of
their Melons. They steep the seed, for the space of 48. hours, in Cow's milk,
or an infusion of fair water and Sheep's dung: their beds they make of Horse
dung, as it is carried out of the Stable, six foot deep, and then cover them
with the best mold, in which they make flat Trenches, about a foot and a half
broad. They thrust the seed so deep into the bed, as that it may not only be
secured from the cold, and receive the benefit of the Sunshine, but also have
the advantage of the heat which the dung sends up from below, covering it in
the night, and some times all day long, with bells of the Country-glass, or
talk. They do not transplant them, but are careful to take away what is
superfluous, and do what other things are commonly practiced in other places,
about that plant.

We were credibly informed, that near Samara, between Wolga and the Doa, there
is a kind of Melons, or rather Gourds, that are formed like a Lamb, whereof
this fruit represents all the members, being fastened to the ground by the
stalk, which is as it were its navel. As it grows it changes place, as far as
the stalk will give way, and, as it turns, makes the grass to wither. The
Muscovites call this browzing, or feeding, adding, that when it is ripe, the
stalk withers, and the fruit is clothed with a hairy skin, which may be
dressed and used instead of Furr. They call this fruit Boranez, Boranez.
that is to say, the Lamb. They showed us some of those skins, taken off the
covering of a bed, and swore they came from that fruit, but we could hardly
believe it. They were covered with a soft frizling Wool not unlike that of a
Lamb newly weaned, or taken out of the Sheep's belly. Julius Scaliger makes
mention of it, Exerc. 181. and says this fruit grows till the grass fails it,
and that it dies not but for want of nourishment. He adds, that no Beast will
feed on it, but the Wolf, and that it is used as a bait to take him, which the
Muscovites also confirmed.

It is not long that they have had Flowers and sweet Herbs, the Great Duke
Michael Federouits being the first that bestowed any expense in Gardening,
which he did with very good success. Flowers,
Nor is it long that they have had any other than wild Roses. Peter Marcellis,
Commissary from the King of Denmark and Duke of Holstein, brought the first
Provence-Roses thither.

The Holand and German Merchants have but lately planted Asparagus there,
Asparagus.
which take very well, and are as big as a man's thumb. Nor have the Muscovites
been long acquainted with Lettice and other Salad-herbs, and laughed at the
Strangers who fed on them; but now they begin to like them. There are no
Hazel-trees, nor Vines in Muscovy; but the Dutch bring such quantities of
several sorts of Wine thither by the way of Archangel, that there is no want of
any. There is also within these few years some brought in from Astrachan, upon
the River of Wolga.

Muscovy, abounds in Hemp and Flax; and there is so much Honey and Wax, even
in the VVoods, that, besides what is spent in Hydromel, and in Wax-Candles, in
this Commodity consists the greatest part of the commerce which the Muscovites
have with Strangers, to whom they put off yearly above twenty thousand Quintals
(or hundred weight) of Wax.

All Muscovy being but a continued Forest, Venison and Fowl.
those places only excepted where they have fired the Woods in order to
agriculture, it must needs be very well furnished with all sorts of Venizon and
Fowl. Whence it comes, that Heath-cocks, Feasants of several kinds, and
Patridges are very cheap; as also wild Geese, and Ducks; Herons and Swans are
not much esteemed; much less Thrushes, Fildevars, Quails, Larks, and other
small Birds, which the Country people will not take the pains to look after.
There are no Storks in Muscovy, nor yet in Livonia; but abundance of Birds of
prey, as Faulcons, Tassels, etc. In the more Northerly Provinces there are
white ones, which are much esteemed because of their ratity.

There is all sorts of Venison, No Deer.
Deer excepted; Of Elks and wild Boars abundance. The Hares are gray, but in
some Provinces they turn white in Winter, as in Livonia; and yet in Courland,
which is contiguous to that Province, and divided from it only by the River
Dune, the Hares change not their color. It Is no hard matter to find the reason
of this change, which must proceed from external cold; since I have known,
that, even in Summer, Hares have changed their color, when they have been kept
some time in a Cave.

The same Forests breed also abundance of Bears, Furre.
Wolves, Linxes, Tigres, Foxes, Martins, and Sables, the skins whereof are the
most considerable Traffic of the Country, since that some years, the
Muscovites sell to Strangers as many as come to a Million of Gold, besides what
is spent in the Country, or presented to the Great Duke. The most esteemed
Furrs are the skins of black Foxes, Sibles, Castors, white Bears, Ermins, and
Squirrels.

The Bears and Wolves do abundance of mischief, and are as dangerous upon the
highways as the Robbers. For what we have said of Livonia is no less true of
Muscovy, viz. that, in the Winter time, they break open houses, and take away
peoples Cattle, etc. as we have related in the second Book of these our
Travels. We could add many other stories of these Creatures, but in regard,
they would hardly, for the strangeness of them, be credited, at least by such
as never heard any talk of these things, we forbear. When the Muscovites take
any of the Bears Whelps, they tame them, and teach them a thousand tricks, and,
in time, come to get a livelihood by them.

The Lakes, No Carps in Muscovy.
Ponds and Rivers affords all sorts of Fish, Carps excepted, which are not to
be had either in Muscovy or Livonia. At Astrachan, we met with abundance of
them, very large, but tough and unsavory; which is the reason the Muscovites
make no great account of them.

Heretofore there were no Mines in Muscovy, Mines.
but some years since there was one found out near Tula, upon the Frontiers of
Tartary, 120 leagues from Mosco, which affords only Iron, where the Workmen are
such as the Elector of Saxony sent over to the Great Duke. Peter Marcellis, a
Merchant, born at Hamborough has the management of it, who having built a
Forge in a very pleasant Valley there, which has a Brook running through it,
has taken it of the Great Duke, furnishing him every year with a certain
number of Iron Bars, pieces of Artillery and Bullets. About 15 year since,
information was brought to the Great Duke Michael Federouits, that Gold might
be found in a certain Province in Muscovy, if any would be at the expense to
dig for it; but he who brought the first news of it, instead of enriching
himself, was utterly undone. Heretofore the Muscovites were simple enough to
credit these informations, and to advance money upon the propositions that were
made thereupon; but for some years past, they have been content to hearken to
them; or if they advance any money, it is upon good security put in by the
undertaker. I have seen an example of this in an English Merchant, who was
persuaded that Gold would infallibly be found, and upon that imagination
engaged some of his friends to be answerable to the Great Duke for the money he
should advance. But, after a great expense, to no purpose, he was put in
prison, and his friends were forced to pay the money he had taken up.

Having not seen the more Northerly Provinces of Muscovy, as Dwina, Iugarie,
Permie, Siberie, and Samojede, I should content my self with what I have said
of them in the beginning of this Book: But in regard this last named Province
is absolutely unknown to all the rest of Europe, Samojede.
and that I have had the opportunity to discourse with some Samojedes, and to
learn from their own mouths the particularities of their Country, I hope it
will not be thought much if I make a short digression concerning them. Being at
Moscou, in the year 1643. in the Great Duke's Antichamber, or Posolse-Pricas,
staying till a Persian Ambassador were come out from Audience, that I might go
in to have mine, I had the convenience to discourse with two Deputies of the
Samojedes, who had been sent to the Great Duke with a present of many Elks, and
white Bear-skins, which the Muscovian Lords use to adorn their Sledges. I laid
hold on this occasion to enquire of them some part of what I was desirous to
know concerning their manner of life; which I did with the more ease, in that
both of them understood the Muscovian Language.

It Is certain, these people were anciently comprehended under the name of those
whom they called Schites, and Sarmates, and that they were not called
Samojedes, till after they became Subjects to the Great Duke: for that word is
Muscovian, signifying Eaters of themselves, as being compounded of that of Sam,
himself, and Geda, I eat. They would argue thence, that these people are
Anthropophagi; for indeed, they did feed on man's flesh, even that of their
deceased friends, which they mixed with Venison, which was, and is still their
ordinary nourishment. The difference between Samojede and Samogitia.
What we have said discovers the difference there is between this Province and
that of Samogitia, which the Muscovites call Samotska sembla, situated between
Lithuania and Livonia, and is part of the Kingdom of Poland; whereas Samojede
lies toward the Hyperborean Mountains, on both sides of the River Oby, upon
the Tartarian Sea, and toward the straight of Weigats, as we said before. I
can hardly be persuaded, that it is of the Samojedes, Quintus Curtius would
speak, when he says that the Abii sent their Ambassadors to Alexander the
Great, and that instead of Abii we should read Obii, because they lived upon
the River Oby; but of the Tartars, who are near the River Don, or Tanais, which
divides Asia from Europe. It Is of them rather than of the Samojedes, that Q.
Curtius might affirm, that they had no Cities, nor settled Habitations, but
lived in Woods and Deserts, shunning the conversation of men, and that if
Alexander went thither, he must have Conquered impenetrable Forests, Rivers,
Ice, and Snow, The habitations of the Samojedes
after he had triumphed over the Inhabitants. For though the Samojedes have
indeed no Cities, yet are they not Nomades, nor change their habitations as the
Tartars do. On the contrary, their Cabans or Huts, which are covered
vault-wife, are built half underground, and have in the middle a hole, which
does not only serve for a Chimney, but also for a door when the Snow is so
high, that they are forced to make use of that hole to let in air; Since that
the Country being in the Frigid Zone, the Snow, which is there sometimes the
depth of a Pike, makes their doors useless. They have walks under their Huts,
by the means whereof they may visit and converse one with another. And this
kind of life is so much the more supportable to them, for that the Sun going
beyond the Line, and leaving them in continual darkness for six months
together, the liberty they might have to go abroad would be of no advantage to
them. During this long night, they have no other light than what their Lamps
afford them, which is but a sad and melancholy one, as being maintained by the
Oil of a certain fish, of which they make provision in the Summer. Which Season
begins with them, as soon as the Sun comes to the Aequinoctial line, and,
entering into the Septentrional Signs of the Zodiac, melts the Snow, and brings
them a day as long as the night had been tedious. Upon this account it is, that
Olaus Magnus, Alexander Guagnin, and others, have grounded fables of people
that sleep six months of the year, or, as Swallows, and Frogs, die in the
beginning of Winter, and rise up again in the Spring. They do not cultivate the
Earth, nor keep any Cattle, which is, no doubt, because the Earth would not
require their pains, and affords no Grass. So that having no Corn, Their
nourishment.
they have no bread to make; and having no Wool, they are forced to Cloth
themselves with what nature and their Country can afford them. Their food is
fish, dried in the Wind and Sun, Honey and Venison. They are of low stature,
their faces large and flat, wearing their hair very long; they have little
eyes, and short legs, and are not much unlike the Groenlanders, of whom we
shall have somewhat to say anon.

The Clothing of the Samojedes is of Renes skins, Their clothing.
whereof there are abundance in that Country, as indeed there is all over the
North. This Creature, which is thought to be the Tarandius of the Ancients, is
called by the modern Latins Rangifer, from the word Reen, by which name the
Laplanders call it, a beast not known in these parts. It Is as big as a Stag,
but somewhat stronger, the hair gray or white, as they are in Samojede, having
the breast high with a long and rough hair, the hoof cloven, and the horn so
hard, that making an impression in the Ice, this animal goes as securely as if
it were upon the ground, and so swiftly, that it will run above 30. German
leagues in a day. The horns are higher than those of the Elk, and larger than a
Stag's, having two brow-anklers on the forehead, wherewith he breaks the Ice to
get water in Winter. It Is a sociable beast, feeding in herds. It is tamed
without any trouble, and is very serviceable, especially in traveling, being
set before little Sledges, made like a Boat, which they draw with incredible
force and swiftness.

The Samojedes wear very large Caps, made of fur, or pieces of Cloth of
several colors, which they buy of the Muscovites, and are so big that they
fall down to their necks. Their shirts are made of the skins of young Renes,
which are very soft, and have a short hair. They wear drawers under their
shirts, and upon their shirts, Garments falling down to the mid-leg, bordered
below with a very long fur. These Garments are made like those which are called
Cosaques, open only at the neck. Their Mittens are fastened to the end of their
sleeves, and the fur of all their Clothes is turned on the outside. When the
cold is extraordinary, they put their Cosaques over their heads, and let the
sleeves hang down, their faces being not to be seen, but at the cleft which is
at the neck. The error of certain Geographers.
Whence some have taken occasion to write, that in these Northern Countries,
there are people without heads, having their faces in their breasts. As also
that there are some have feet so big, that one of them shades the whole body,
and that having covered themselves with their feet, neither Sun nor Rain can
come at them. But the error came thus, that the Samojedes, as also the
Laplanders and Finlanders, wear a kind of shoes or patins, in the Winter time,
to go upon the Snow, which are an Ell and a half long toward the Toe. The
Finlanders and Laplanders make them as long toward the Heel as the Toes, and
call them Saksit; but the Samojedes do not lengthen them at all toward the
heel, and call them Nartes. All make them of barks of Trees, or some very thin
Wood, and use them with a strange agility. Colonel Port, Governor of Narva,
who had many Finlanders among the Soldiers of his Garrison, would needs give us
the pleasure of seeing them, when we passed that way, having ordered them to
run down a Hill near the City, which they did with such swiftness, that a horse
at full speed would hardly have overtaken them.

The Nerves and Veins of the Rene serve for Thread, among the Samojedes, to sow
their Clothes; their Boots they make of the same stuff, and after the same
manner. They scrape the inside of the bark of Beech, and what comes off is as
fine as the shavings of Parchment or Ivory, and very soft, and serves them
instead of Handkerchers. They take a handful of it, and wipe their hands,
faces, or noses therewith.

The Relations of the second Voyage which the Hollanders made toward the
North, in the year 1595. give the same account of the Samojedes as we do, and
say, that some of their men going ashore Aug. 31. near Weigats, after they had
gone about a league, discovered 20. or 25. Samojedes, so accoutred as we have
described them. They at first took them for Savages, and were confirmed in that
opinion by the posture into which the Samojedes put themselves, making ready
their Bows and Arrows, to shoot at the Hollanders: but the Muscovian
Interpreter, which the Hollanders had with them, having told them they were
friends, and that they needed not to be afraid of them, they laid down their
Arms, came up to them, and discovered many particulars of their Country. They
were much taken with the civility of the Hollanders, and one of them took a
Bi^ket that was presented to him; but he betrayed much distrust in the eating
of it; especially, when they heard a Musket shot, toward the Seaside, though
far enough from them, they were so frightened, that it was no easy matter to
satisfy them, that they were far enough from any danger.

I had the curiosity to ask one of those Samojedes, what he thought of Muscovy,
and whether it were a better Country than theirs, and the Muscovian manner of
Life, the more pleasant. He answered, that Muscovy was indeed a pleasant
Country, and the provisions of it not to be disliked; but that their Country
also had those conveniences and pleasures, that were not to be had elsewhere,
such as were so inviting, that he was confident, if the Great Duke had once a
taste of them, he would leave Moscou, and come among them, to enjoy the
security, quiet, and delightfulness of their manner of life. They were, till
within these few years, Pagans and Idolaters, insomuch as when the Hollanders
made the Voyage I spoke of there, they found the Seaside (...) of Idols, for
which the Samojedes had so much affection, that they would not suffer one of
them to be carried away. But they have been since baptized, and have embraced
Christian Religion, by the means of a Bishop of Vladimer which the late Great
Duke sent among them, with some Priests, to instruct them.

The Author, A description of Groenland
who has here made one digression, to speak of the Samojedes, though not
falling under the Subject of his Travels, thinks he may make another to say
somewhat of Groenland, as well in regard of the consonancy there is between the
people of that Country and those he had now spoken of, and also the Tartars, of
whom he will have occsion to speak hereafter, as for that he has seen, and
discoursed with, some Inhabitants of Groenland, who have told such
particularities, as would not be undelightful, if M. de la Pcreire had not said
before himall that could be said of a Country, which is as little known, as
those parts of the World that have not yet been discovered. The Treatise he
has published upon this Subject is such, that we shall not need to repeat what
he has clearly and elegantly expressed, but only add, together with the
opinion of our Author, (who thinks Groenland is a Continent, and borders upon
Tartary toward the East on one side, and on America, Westward, on the other.)
That Frederick III. King of Denmark, coming to the Crown, in the year 1648.
had, besides all other Royal Virtues, a great desire to advance the Trade of
Groenland. Henry Muller, Farmer General of the outland customs of Denmark, a
curious person and rich, undertook it, and, to that end, set out a Ship in the
year 1652. commanded by Capt. David Dannel, one of the most experienced Masters
of his time. The first Voyage having had the success was expected from it, the
said Muller sent him again to Groenland the next year, 1653. But as men of
business, how curious soever they may be, are carried away with some other
predominant passion, there was nothing learnt in these two Voyages, at least
those employed in them neglected to make any relation thereof that ever could
be seen: but in the year 1654. a Ship was set out, which going from Copenhagen
in the beginning of the Spring, arrived not on the Coasts of Groenland, till
the 28 of July, at a place where the mountains were still covered with snow,
toward the shore the waters frozen, and the bottom so hard, that it being
impossible the Anchor should fasten, they were forced to let the Ship float
upon the water, because there were Rocks all about. As soon as this Ship
appeared upon the Coasts of Groenland, the Inhabitants set out above a hundred
Boats, and came to view that strange structure, which was much different from
what they ordinarily saw. At first they would by no means come near it, but
seeing they were entreated to come into the Ship, they at last came, and in a
few days were so familiar, that with their commodities, which they truckt for
such toies as we had, they brought also their Wives, out of an intention to
make advantage of them by another kind of Commerce, which though it be not less
known elsewhere, yet is not so publicly practiced as among them, where
fornication is neither crime nor sin.

The Danes thought this freedom of the Groenlanders a good opportunity to carry
away some of them. The Ship being ready to set sail for its return, and the
Savages coming still aboard with their Commodities, a Woman that had a great
mind to a pair of knives which one of the Seamen wore at his G^rd^e, offered
him for it a Sea-Dogs skin, which the Seaman refusing as too little, she
proffered him a kindness into the bargain. The Seaman had no sooner expressed
his being well satisfied with the proffer, but she begins to unty the point
(for they as well as the men wear Drawers, and would have laid her self down
upon the Deck. But the Seaman made her apprehend that he would not have all
see what they did, and that she must go under Deck. The Woman, having got her
Father's leave, followed the Seaman with two other aged Women, a young Boy,
and a Girl of about 12 years of age, who were to be present at the consummation
of the bargain. But as soon as they were down, the hatch was shut, they laid
hold also of another Man, and set sail. The Savages perceiving they were
trappan'd, made a hideous noise in the Ship. Those who were upon the Deck got
into their Boats, and followed the Ship a great way into the Sea, to see if
they could recover the Prisoners. The Boy, who went down with the Women; got
out at one of the holes the Cable is put out at, and swam ashore. They also
sent back one of the Women, as being too old to be transported; so that they
had but four persons, one Man, two Women, and a Girl. The trouble they were in
to be among people they knew not, was extraordinary; but at last, the kindness
and good cheer wherewith they were entertained, won their hearts, together with
the hope they were put into, that within a short time, they should be brought
back again into their Country: so that when they came to Bergues in Norway,
their affliction seemed to be quite over, nay, the Man thought the Women of the
Country so handsome, and was got into so good a humor, that, a Lady of quality
being come out of curiosity to see these Savages, he proffered to try what she
had under her apron. This man died in the Ship before we came to Denmark. His
Daughter seeing him in the agony of Death, bound up his head in his Casaque,
and so let him die. His name was Ihiob, aged about 40 years. The older of the
two women, aged about 45 years, was called Kuneling; she by whose means they
were taken, was about 25. her name Kabelau, and the Girls name was Sigoka. The
Plague then very rife all over Denmark, had obliged the King to retire to
Flensbourg, in the Duchy of Holstein, where these Groenlanders were presented
to him. He boarded them at a Surgeons, and ordered them to be well
entertained, as that at their return to Groenland, whither he intended to send
them with the first opportunity, they might have occasion to celebrate the
liberality of his Majesty, and the civil entertainment of his Subjects. The
King honored the Duke my master so far, as to send them to him to Gottorp,
where they were lodged in my house for some days, which I spent in sifting our
their humor and manner of life.

They were all three low of stature, Of the Inhabitants.
but strong, being well proportioned in all parts, save that their faces were
somewhat too broad, and their eyes little, but black and very lively,
especially the more aged of the two women and the Girl, their hands and feet
short, in all things else like the Samojedes, or Tartars of Nagaia, save that
they were beyond comparison much more black, those being of a brown Olive-like
color, their bodies much more swarthy than their faces, and their skins much
softer than those other people we have spoken of. The third whose name was
Kabelau, was not so black as the two others. Her eyes were also bigger, and she
discovered more wit, subtilty, and compliance, than the other two. We conceived
she might be descended of those ancient Christians, who some time lived in
Groenland, in that she was observed to have somewhat of Religion in her, or
rather a particular Superstition, by the aversion she had for flesh, which the
other two did eat, such as that of those Beasts, which, being held unclean, are
not eaten in Europe. Their hair was blacker than Jet, and having rolled it up
together they bound it up on their crowns. As soon as their Maids become
marriageable, they make several blew strakes in their faces, as the Americans
do. These strakes reach from the lip to the chin, or they are drawn larger at
the upper end and above the nose, between the two eyes; nay there is one
divides it self and reaches over the eyebrows into the Temples, where it ends
with a little branch. These marks they make with a very small thread steeped in
Train-oil, or some other black fatness, which being brought between the flesh
and the skin, leaves a mark, which through the skin seems bluish, much like
the veins in a smooth and delicate complexion. They showed me that their ears
had been holed through, and that they were wont to wear Pendants in them. Their
breasts were very unhandsome, the nipple black as a coal, and the Breasts
flagging and falling down upon their bellies, wherein the Girl had no advantage
of the other two. They suckle their Children, whom they carry on their backs,
over their shoulders. I have been told by those who have long observed them,
that they have no hair any where but on their heads, and are not troubled with
women's monthly diseases.

The Groenlanders speak fast, Their language.
and from the throat, somewhat like the Tartars, especially they they pronounce
very roughly the words that have a G. in them. They have no R. in their
language, and when they are obliged to pronounce it, they turn into L. It Is
true, among so many words as their language consists of, there are some Danish,
but very few; the rest have nothing common with the languages that are either
spoken, or learnt, or known in Europe; unless it might be said that the word
Keiling comes from coelum, ilioun, from the Greek (...), as signifying the same
thing. It may be said also that the word Igne is Latiue, but among all the
rest, we shall hardly meet with three or four that any way relate to any other
language. And to the end the Reader may himself judge, we will furnish him with
some of those which are most common in ordinary conversation.

Keiling, Heaven. Vbleisin, a Star. Agakwugoo, yesterday. Petting, a Man.
Kajoictuinas, young. Ekiken, deformed. Niakau, the head. Siuta, an ear. Vkang,
the tongue. Tikagga, a finger. Nasekka, the belly. Ennowan, a Wast-coat.
Kaksua, an arrow. Kalipsi, a pot. Vglessin, a bird. Kalulisen, dried Haberdine.
Towak, the Fish that has the Horn called the Unicorn's horn. Touwaksen, the
Horn it self. Kapissiling, a Salmon. Pauting, an Oar. Vgaggan, a stone. Kaming,
a Boot. Pisickse, a Bow. Iugeling, a Knife. Kejuta, a Spoon. Emeisa, a Cup.
Tukto, flesh. Kack sluton, a Drake. Kalulia, Haberdine. Nau, a Boat. Iglun, a
house. Iliout, or Ilioun, the Sun. Aningang, the Moon. Vblau, day. Vnuwoa,
night. Itaguptan, to morrow. Kona, a Woman. Pannien, a Child. Kannoctuina, old.
Pinallu, fair. Vbia, Father. Nulia, Mother. Isiken, an eye. Keinga, the Nose.
Kanexua, the mouth. Kiguting, a Tooth. Vimixuin, the beard. Akseita, the hand.
Kablan, the thumb. Kuggie, a nail. Kana, a leg. Sikadin, a foot. Neizin, a
doublet. Naglein, breeches. Karlein, stockins. Suwigming, Iron. Mingakisin,
fish. Kajakka, a little Boat. Keisuin, Wood. Ipsaw, the Earth. Ipgin, grass.
Nidlong, Ice. Upon, Snow. Siruksua, rain. I Am, water. Imak, the Sea. Igne,
fire. Igga, smoke. Kisakaun, hot. Kaigenakaun, cold. Vanga, I. Akagoo, to day.
Ab, yes. Nagga, no. Pissiak, a Dog. Amiga, the skin. Mekkone, a Needle.
Mikkakaun, little. Angewo, great. Sua, what would? Magluna, two. Sassema,
four. Akbukmen, six. Pingenguen, eight. Tellimen, ten. Agnessui, high. Eipa,
low. Kachain, hungry. Ibling, thou. Kasilakaun, full. Kepsiun, to eat.
Iemektaun, to drink. Keigerson, to weep. Iglakton, to laugh. Aliasukton, to be
troubled. Tabatton, to be glad. Ieptone, bring. Nikatin, go thy ways. Kia
mecle, which signifies. Suna, what is it. Tansi, one. Pingegua, three. Tellima,
five. Arleng, seven. Sissemen, nine.
The Groenlanders call those of their Country Inguin, Their clothing.
and strangers Kablunassouin, and Cloth themselves with the skins of Sea-dogs,
and Sea-calves, and Renes, much like the Samojedes. They wear under their
Clothes Wastcoats, of the skins of birds, as Swans, Geese, wild Ducks, and
Teals, turning the feathers either inward or outward according to the seasons.
The difference of Sex is not easily discovered, unless it be that the Women are
known by a piece of skin that hangs down before and behind to the half-leg, and
by the capuche of their Wastcoats, which is made like that of the Recollects,
and large enough to hide their hair, whereas that of the men is narrower, and
cut like that of the Franciscans. The men's breeches come down to their knees,
and sometimes lower; but those of the women are shorter, and hardly cover half
the Thigh.

They live by hunting and fishing, Their ordinary exercises.
and make use, in these two exercises, only of Bows and Arrows, which are the
only Arms they have. They have also a kind of hook, which they call Karlusa,
made of the tooth of the fish Towak, which some would have thought the
Unicorn's horn. Of this bone they make also the instrument they use in
Whale-fishing, at which they are very expert, taking that Creature much after
another manner than is done by the Biskayans, and others who drive that trade.
To that end, they have a very long thong, cut out of a Whale's skin, and fasten
to one end of it the said instrument, which they cast at the Whale, and at the
other the skin of a Sea-Calf or Dog blown up, which floating upon the water,
discovers the track of the wounded Whale. If she be not mortally wounded, they
pursue her, and Dart two or three times more at her, with the same kind of
instrument, till such time as blood and strength failing her, they come up,
kill her, bring her ashore, and divide her. The Whales fat is one of their
greatest dainties, but especially the Oil, which is their best sauce, and the
drink they best love. Their ordinary drink is only water; the Women I have
seen, would never drink any Wine, nor eat of our bread, or sawces: for having
no Salt, Spice, Sugar, nor Vinegar in their Country, it is not to be wondered
that we could not bring them to like meats dressed after our way. Yet do they
not eat their meat raw, as some would persuade, but dressed, either by boiling
or roasting. It Is true, they love dried Haberdine, or Stockfish, and sometimes
eat it raw; but that is not extraordinary even in Germany, where I have seen,
at a desert at the Duke of Wolfembuttel's, Gammons of Bacon, and dried Salmon
served up unboyl'd. Their ordinary food, are Sea-Dogs, and Calves, Renes,
Foxes, Hous-Dogs, and Fish. When they eat, with one hand, they put a piece of
the flesh into their mouths, and with the other cut off what they cannot get
in, so that the bits being as much as their mouths can hold, they make very
strange faces to get it down.

Their way of living is so different from what is seen elsewhere, They are
Savages.
that it is no injury to call them Savages. They have no discretion, civility,
virtue, or shame. Their countenances are ever frowning, and they very seldom
laugh: they are timorous and distrustful, and withal insolent, stubborn, and
indisciplinable. They are very nasty, and their Tongues serve them for
Handkerchers, as well for their Clothes as their Bodies, so that they may very
justly be said to live like beasts. Which yet admits of some distinction,
according to the situation of several parts of the Country, it being certain,
that the English Pilot, who went from Denmark, with Godtske Lindenau, of whom
Mr. Pereire makes mention, and who took his course more toward the South-west,
met with a people much more docile, and less Savage, than that which Lindenau
met withal toward the North. Our three women, who had been taken at the
entrance of Davis-streight, were rational enough, and easily learnt what they
were taught. One of them imitated pretty well a head or hand, I was drawing
with a piece of Charcoal, and the other came in a short time to do those
things, which women and maids ordinarily employ themselves about in our parts.
They danced after a strange manner, but with such exactness as to time and
cadence, that the King of Denmark, having a Ball danced at Flensbourg, would
needs bring in those three Groenlanders, who came off very hansomly, to the
satisfaction of all: But they would never be got to learn our language, though
they pronounced the Danish and German words dictated to them very distinctly.

There is no money in the Country, The Groenlanders have no Gold nor Silver in
their Country.
being yet so happy as not to know the value of Gold and Silver. Iron and Steel
they most esteem, and prefer a Sword or a Hatchet before a Golden Cup, a Nail
before a Crown piece, and a pair of Cisers, or a Knife, before a Jacobus. Their
trucking is thus; they put all they have to sell together, and having picked
out among the Commodities that are brought to them, what they like best, they
put them also together, and suffer those they deal with to add or diminish till
such time as they are content with the bargain. What they most value, are
Knives, Cisers, Needles, Looking-glasses, Iron and Steel; and the Commodities
they sell are the fat and Oil of Whales, the skins of Sea-dogs and Calves, the
Horns, or rather the Teeth of the Fish Towak, whereof Mr. Pereire makes a large
and true description, in his Treatise of Groenland. It is granted, to be an
excellent Antidote against poison, but it is long since men have been
undeceived in the opinion they had of it. The Duke of Holstein has one that is
eight foot and two inches long, and weighs eighteen pound: but the King of
Denmark's is six inches longer. There is also in Groenland Talk, and Marble,
white, and of all other colors, and it has been argued from the vapors which
were seen rising out of the earth, at the place where the English Pilot came
ashore, that there are Mines of Sulphur. It is reported also, that in the time
of Frederick II. King of Denmark, some Oar was brought thence, whereof the
hundred weight yielded twenty six Ounces of Silver; which is the more credible,
in that it is certain, the more Northerly parts of the Country produce both
Gold and Silver, since there has been seen at the King of Denmark's, a Wedge
of Silver of sixty Marks, which had been taken out of the Mines of Norway.

Of the Groenland Religion, Are Pagans.
I must confess I could never have any account; but it is most likely they are
Pagans and Idolaters, for we have in our custody an Idol, which we bought out
of the Study of Doctor Paludanus, a Physician at Enck-huysen, who had fastened
a Note to it, expressing it is being found at Davis-streight. And indeed, our
Groenland women presently knew it and called it Nalim-qui-sang. 'Twas very
roughly made, of a piece of Wood a foot and a half long, covered with Feathers
and a hairy skin, having about the neck Sea-dogs Teeth. The women would make me
understand, that the Children were wont to dance about those Idols; and our
Groenland women were seen in fair mornings to prostrate themselves and weep, at
sunrising; whence it is to be inferred, that those people adore the Sun.
Zeiler, in his Itinerary, says, that the Groenlanders are for the most part
Sorcerers, and sell Winds, as the Laplanders do: but that is more than the Danes
have observed in their Voyages. Only it was noted among those that were in
Denmark, that when any of them fell sick, one of the Camerades lay down upon
his back by him, and the sick person sitting up bound about his head who ailed
nothing, putting a stick between the forehead and the cloth that bound it, the
other raising up his head, so as that the sick person might, at first, think it
light, afterward heavy, pronouncing and muttering certain words. After which
he begun again, and he who had his head bound up, leaned it down very heavy at
first, afterward more lightly, the sick person still continuing his prayers
and imprecations; none being able to guess at the mystery of this Ceremony.
They have neither Magistrate nor Superior among them; their condition is equal
in all things, only he that has most Children, most Bows and Arrows, and kills
most Wildfowl, is the richest and most considerable among them.

For the color of these people, Inhabitants of Septentrional Countries swarthy.
it might be admired that in the coldest Climate in the World, the Men should
be of an Olive-colour, or rather swarthy, if what Lib. 2. c. 78.
Pliny says be true, that it is the heat of the Sun that burns the skin, and
makes the hair curl, and that cold whitens the skin, and makes the hair of an
Ash Color. But we find the contrary by experience, not only in the people we
have spoken of, but also in those who live at the Magellan Straight, who are
white, though as near the Sun as the Negroes of Africa. The Inhabitants about
the Cape of good Hope, are black, and yet the Spaniards and Italians, as also
the Persians, who are in the same degree, are white. The Ethiopians are but of
a duskish color, and the Malabares and Inhabitants of the Isle of Cedon, who
are equally distant from the Line, are black. In like manner, all over America,
there are no Blacks, but only at Quaerca, though that vast part of the Universe
reaches from one Circle to the other, through all the Climates of the World.
It Is no more than conjecture to say, that this diversity of colors proceeds
from certain qualities of the Country and Air, whereof the causes are not
known. Nor is there any more certainly to affirm, that that color in the skin
proceeds from the constitution of the body, since that in any Climate
whatsoever, the conjunction of a Black Man and White Woman shall produce a
swarthy Child, or of such a color as the Spaniards call Mulatas; which is so
much the more probable, in that the Sun does not always blacken, but on the
contrary, whitens some things, as Wax and Linne: it being also known, that the
Sun makes a picture look more lightsome, and that the Portuguez expose their
hair thereto, to take off somewhat of their die. But to give a more Christian
account thereof, it may be said, with the Learned Mr. Bochart, in his
incomparable Phaleg; That the black color is a mark of the curse in the
posterity of Cham, which spread it self in these places of Asia and Africa
where the Negroes live.

But it is time we return to our Muscovites, whom we shall consider, first, in
relation to their habit and stature, then to that of their humor and manner of
life.

They are for the most part corpulent, fat, and strong, and of the same color
as other Europaeans. The stature of the Muscovites.
They much esteem great beards (when the mustaches hide the mouth) as also
great bellies; so that those who are well furnished about the mouth, and have
good fat paunches, are very considerable among them. The Goses, or Great Duke's
Merchants, whom we found in the Antichamber, when we were brought to our
public Audience, had been chosen particularly for those two perfections, for
the greater honor of their Prince.

The great Lords shave their heads; persons of lower condition cut their hair,
and Priests, and others belonging to the Church, wear their hair so long, that
it hangs down over their shoulders to half their backs. Those Lords that are
out of favor at Court, let their hair grow and hang negligently about their
heads, thereby expressing their affliction; no doubt after the example of the
ancient Greeks, whom the Muscovites are apt to imitate in all their actions.

The Women are well proportioned, neither too big, nor too little; having
passable good faces, The Women paint.
but they paint so palpably, that if they laid it on with a brush, and had a
handful of meal cast in their faces when they had done, they could not
disfigure themselves as much as the paint does. But the custom is so general,
that the most handsome must comply, lest they should discred it the artificial
beauty of others: whereof we saw an example in the wife of Knez Iuan
Borissowits Cirkaski, who was the handsomest Lady of all Muscovy, and was loath
to spoil with painting, what the rest of her Sex took so much pains to preserve
thereby: but the other Women informed against her, and would not be quiet, till
their husbands had forced that Prince to give way that his wife might dawb her
face after the ordinary manner. So that painting is so common in Muscovy, that
when any are to be married, the Bridegroom, that is to be, sends among other
Presents some paint to his Bride, as we shall see anon when we come to speak of
their marriages.

Married Women put up their hair within their Caps or Coifs, Their habit
but the Maids let their; hang down their backs in two tresses, and tie it at
the ends with a piece of Crimsonsilk. Children under 10 years of age, as well
Girls as Boys, have their hair cut, all except two mustaches which are left
over the temples; so that there being no difference in their habits, that of
their Sex is discovered only by the brass or silver Rings, which the Girls wear
in their ears.

Their habit is somewhat like that of the ancient Greeks. Their shirts are
broad, but so short that they hardly cover the thighs. They are not gathered at
the neck, but lined with a triangular piece from the shoulders to the reins,
which piece is sowed down with Crimson silk. Some have under the Armpits, and
in the seams, a fringe of silk of the same color. The more rich have the
neckpiece, which is an inch broad or better, the end of the sleeves, and the
breast, embroidered with silk of several colors, and sometimes Gold and
precious stones, and leave open so much of their Wast-coats, that the
embroidery and the two great Pearls, or buttons of Silver or Gold, which fasten
the shirt before, may be seen. Their Breeches are large, and gathered toward
the waste, so that they may be made larger or straightened, as our Drawers. Upon
these they wear a kind of VVastcoat, which they call Kaftan, reaching to the
knees, with the sleeves so long, that they cannot thrust their hands through
without making many folds upon the arm. The Collar of this Wastcoat is above
half a quarter both in height and breadth, so that it covers the head behind.
And because that is very much seen, the better sort face it with Plush or
Satin. Upon the Kaftan they wear a close Coat, which falls down to the mid-leg,
and is called Feres. These are adorned with cotton; and indeed, both the Kaftas
and Feres are made of Cotton, Taffeta, Damask, or Satin, according to their
quality who wear them. When they go abroad they put on a Garment that reaches
down to their heels, made of a violet color, or dark green cloth, with
buttons behind, down to the bottom. Those of the Knez and Bojares are made of
Damask, Satin, or other rich stuff. Of this last kind are all the clothes taken
out of the Great Duke's Wardrobe, for those persons by whom he is attended at
public ceremonies.

Their Feres, or Hongrelines, or close Coats, have a very broad Collar, falling
down upon their shoulders, with loop-buttons of Gold and Silver, nay some with
embroidery at the open places before, and the sides. The sleeves are as long as
the Coat it self, but narrow; so that when it is on, they hang down, and have
this convenience that they serve to hide a cudgel, or stones, wherewith they
many times surprise and kill those, whom they intend to rob.

All Muscovites wear Caps instead of Hats. The Knez, Bojares, and Ministers of
State, have them of black-Fox skins, or Sables, half an ell high, when they are
present at any public Ceremonies; but in their houses, and about the City,
they are of Velvet, lined with the said Furrs, but with narrow brims, laid all
over with buttons and loops of Gold and Silver, or embroidered with Pearls, The
common People, in the Summer time, wear Caps of some coarse stuff, and
in-Winter, of cloth, lined with Sheep skins, or some ordinary Furr. Their
boots are short, as those of the Polanders, and picked toward the toe, and are
made of Russia Leather, or Goats skin brought from Persia, They have not yet
the art of dressing Spanish Leather, nor the invention of tranning Ox-hides,
otherwise than the soles. The Women's shoes are half a quarter high at the
heel, set on with little nails, in so much that they can hardly go in them.

The Muscovian Women are habited much after the same fashion as the Men, save
that their Hongrelines, or Coats, are wider, and of the same stuff as their
Wastcoats. The richer sort have them laid over very thick with Gold, Silver, or
Silk-Lace, and have buttons and loops of the same stuff, or great buttons of
Silver or Tinn; to fasten them. The sleeves are so put on, as that they may
thrust their hands into them, or let them hang down. They wear no Kaftans; much
less use those high collars, which are thought so ornamental for the Men. Their
Smock sleeves are four or five else long, and are set in little folds upon the
arm. They wear very wide Caps or Coifs of Damask, plain or purfled Satin,
embroidered with Gold and Silver, and lined with Castors, the hair whereof does
in a manner cover all their forehead. Maids that are marriageable wear cloth
Caps, lined with Fox-skin.

It is not long since, that strangers, whether Physicians, or Merchants, as the
French, English, Hollanders and Germans, went in Muscovian habits, to avoid the
insolence of the people, who many times took occasion to affront them, out of
no other reason than the diversity of their clothes. But the present Patriarch,
having observed in a Procession, that the Germans who had thrust in among the
Muscovites to see it pass by, betrayed a certain irreverence at their
Ceremonies, especially at the Benediction he gave the people, was incensed
thereat, and said, that those strangers, being not worthy to participate of the
Benediction which was given to the faithful, it were fit the Great Duke put out
an Ordinance, obliging strangers to cloth themselves according to the fashions
of their own Countries. The contempt of any Law is severely punished in
Muscovy: but the observation of this was so much the more difficult, in that,
for want of Tailors, it was almost impossible for people to get other clothes
within the time limited by the Ordinance. Yet were they forced to obey, which
occasioned very good sport, in that those who were servants to the Great Duke,
being obliged to be every day at the Court, and not daring to appear there in
Muscovian habits, they were forced to put on what they could meet withal, and
to make use of those clothes which their Grandfathers, and Great-grand-fathers
had worn, when the Tyrant John Basilouits forced them out of Livonia, to go and
live at Moscou. 'Twas a strange sight to see them all in clothes that were
either too big, or too little, as having not been made for them, besides that
there was no acquaintance at all between Breeches and Doublet, or any
correspondence between the age wherein they had been made, and that they were
then worn in. Ever since that time every Nation is clad according to their own
modes.

The Muscovites never change their fashion, nor can I remember any more than
one Lord, who took a fancy to the French mode. His name is Knez Mikita
Iouanouits Romanou, very rich, and of near kin to the Great Duke, who is much
taken with his humor and conversation. This Lord has a particular affection
for Strangers, and goes in the French and Polish modes in his clothes,
especially when he goes either into the Country or a-hunting. But the
Patriarch, who disliked that feedom in him, and was displeased also with
another, which that Prince took, to speak somewhat slightly of their Religion,
enjoyed him not to speak any further of Religion. Nothing so wretched as the
clothing of the Country people. It is of a very coarse Canvase, and their
shoes of barks of trees, which they have the art to sow and interlace like
paniers, with a miraculous industry. There is hardly any Muscovite but is good
at this Trade, and does exercise it; so that it may be said, Muscovy has as
many Shoomakers as men, or at least, that there is no Family, but has its
particular Shooemaker. It is upon the same account said of the Elector of
Brandenburg, that he has a Baylywick in the Duchy of Prussia, which is that
of Insterbourg, where there are above 15000. shooemakers, for all the Peasants
of that Baylywick make their own shoes.

If a man consider the natures and manner of life of the Muscovites, Their
manner of life.
he will be forced to avow, there cannot any thing be more barbarous than that
people. Their boast is that they are desended from the ancient Greeks, but, to
do them no injustice, there is no more comparison between the brutality of
these Barbarians, and the civility of the Greeks, to whom all other parts of
the World are obliged for all their literature and civilization, than there is
between day and night. They never learn any Art or Science, nor apply
themselves to any kind of Study: on the contrary, they are so ignorant, as to
think, a man cannot make an Almanac unless he be a Sorcerer, nor foretell the
Revolutions of the Moon and Eclipses, unless he have some communication with
Devils. Upon this account it was, that the Muscovites generally grumbled when
the Great Duke would have entertained me into his service, in the quality of
his Astronomer and Mathematician, as we returned from our Voyage into Persia,
and raised a report, that their Prince was going to bring a Magician into his
Court. This aversion I discovered in the Muscovites, took off that little
inclination I sometime had to embrace that employment, which was offered me,
not so much upon the account of my abilities in Astronomy, as, to engage me to
continue in the Country, because they knew, that I had exactly observed, and
drawn into a Map the whole course of the River Wolga, whereof they were
unwilling that strangers should have any knowledge. When I came to Muscovy,
upon the affairs of the Duke of Holstein my Master, in the year 1643. I showed
them upon a Wall of an obscure Chamber, through a little hole I had made in the
shutter of the window, by the means of a piece of glass polished and cut for
Optics, all was done in the street, and men walking upon their heads: This
wrought such an effect in them, that they could never after be otherwise
persuaded than that I held a correspondence with the Devil.

They esteem Physicians, and Medicine, but will not permit that people should
make use of the same means as is done elsewhere to gain the perfection of that
Science. They will not suffer the body to be opened, that so the causes of
diseases may be found out, and they have a strange aversion for Skeletons There
is to this purpose a pleasant story of a Dutch Surgeon who lived at Moscou some
years since. His name was Quirin, one much favored by the Great Duke, because
of his facetious humor, and his experience in the Art he professed. It
happened one day, that this good man diverting himself in his Chamber, and
playing a Lesson on the Lute, the Strelitz, who are spying up and down every
where, drew near to the place where that Music was: but perceiving through a
chink, a Skeleton hanging behind him, which the wind coming in at the window
caused to move, they were frightened, and reported, that the strange Surgeon had
a dead Carcass that moved at the sound of his Music. The Great Duke and the
Patriarch desirous to be truly informed of the business, sent others to make a
further discovery; and these not only confirmed what the others had reported,
but added, that they had seen the Skeleton dance, while the Surgeon played. The
business was thought to be of such importance, as that it were fit to be
communicated to the Council, where, nemine contradicente, it was declared, That
it was done by Magic. That, consequently, the Surgeon was a Magician, and as
such, ought to be burnt, together with the Skeleton. The Surgeon hearing of
this sentence, entreated a Merchant of his acquaintance, who had much credit at
Court, to represent to Knez Iuan Borissowits Cirkaski, that most Surgeons and
Physicians in Germany make use of those Skeletons, to find out the composure of
the body, and juncture of the bones, that so they might the better know how to
cure what may happen in those parts. Upon this Lord's representation, the
former sentence was reversed; but Quirin was forced to leave the Country, and
the Skeleton was dragged along the streets, and burnt on the other side of the
River Moska. A German Painter ran the same hazard about six years since. For
the Strelits, who were got into his house, with intent to pull it down, to
hinder the Progress of a fire, which had already done mischief enough, meeting
with a dead man's skull, or death's head, would have cast both it and the
Master of the house into the fire, and had done it, if his friends had not
delivered him out of the hands of those Barbarians, and convinced them of the
innocent use of that head, in the art he professed.

It Is true, The Muscovites do not want ingenuity, but they employ their wit so
ill, that not any of their actions is directed to virtue and the glory which
ever attends it. They are ingenuous naturally.
The Danish Gentleman, who published the Embassy be was sent upon, into
Muscovy, from Frederick II. gives the Muscovites a very true Character, in two
Lines, when he says, That they are subtle, overreaching, humourous,
self-willed, obstinate, insolent, and impudent, that they regulate their reason
according to their power, and that they have shaken hands with all virtues, to
run themselves into all manner of vice.

Their industry and subtilty is chiefly seen in their Traffic, in which there
is no craft or cheat but they make use of, rather to circumvent others, than to
prevent being deceived themselves. I wondered to see them sell Cloth at three
Crowns and a half the Ell, which they had bought of the English at four, and
yet I was told they made a good profit thereby; for buying the Cloth at a
twelve months time for payment, and selling it for ready money, though at a
lower rate, they made use of the money, and employed it in other things, which
brought in more profit, than they would have made by selling the Cloth upon
time, though they sold much dearer than it cost them. They make a conscience to
retain what is paid them more than their due, and are so honest as to return
what they have received by mistake: but they think it no sin, in their
dealings, to surprise those who Trade with them, giving this reason, that the
Merchant is to make his advantage of the Wit and industry God has bestowed on
him, or never meddle with Traffic. According to this principle, a certain
Dutch Merchant having notoriously over-reached several Muscovites, these
Gentlemen were so far from being troubled at it, that they spoke of him, as of
an excellent ingenuous man, and desired they might go partners with him, out of
a hope they conceived, that he would discover some great secret to them.

And whereas cheating cannot be exercised without treachery, lying, and
distrust, which are its constant attendants, they are marvellously well versed
in these qualities, as also in the Lectures of Calumny, Are liars and
distrustful.
which they commonly make use of against those on whom they would be revenged
for theft, which among them is the most enormous of all Crimes, and the most
severely punished. To this end, they are so cunning, as to pawn at, or get
secretly conveyed into their Lodgings, whom they would accuse, those things
which they would have believed were stolen from them, or they thrust them into
their Enemies Boots; for in them the Muscovites commonly carry their money and
Letters. To make some provision against these abuses, the Great Duke made an
Edict in the year 1634. enjoining that for the future, all Promises or
Obligations, whether for borrowing of money or pawning; though it were between
Father and Son, should be set down in writing and signed by both parties, else
the debt to be lost. Heretofoe, especially in the Reign of the Tyrant John
Basilouits, there needed no more to procure a man's death or banishment, than
to accuse him of High Treason, without any Process, Evidence, or Defense
allowed, all that were charged being punished, without any distinction of Sex,
Age, or Quality. Calumnies, and false suggestions were so common under that
Prince, that many strangers, even public persons, many times fell into those
misfortunes, the Tyrant never regarding their Character as Ambassadors, nor
that of the Princes by whom they were sent. He banished, into Siberia, the
Emperors Ambassador, and caused him to be so ill-treated, that the poor man
resolved at last to change his Religion, hoping by his Apostasy to alleviate
his misery. The Great Duke Michael Federouits, showed no more respect for the
late King of France, when he sent the Marquess of Exiducil into Siberia,
where, by the Artifices of his Colleague, James Roussel, he was a Prisoner 3
years, as we have mentioned elsewhere.

To this purpose, A pleasant story.
Martin Baar, Pastor of Narva, who lived at Moscou under the reign of the Great
Duke Boris Gudenou, told us this story. The Great Duke being troubled with the
Gout caused to be proclaimed, that whoever could give him any ease should have
very great rewards. The wife of a certain Bojare, exasperated by the ill usage
she had received from her husband, went and informed, that the Bojare had an
excellent remedy for the Gout; but had so little affection for his Majesty,
that he would not communicate it. They sent for the man, who was not a little
astonished when he understood the cause of his disgrace; but what excuses
soever he made, all was attributed to his malice. He was whipped, even to
blood, and cast in Prison, where he could not forbear breaking out into
passion, and saying, that he saw well enough it was his wife had put that trick
upon him, and that he would be revenged on her. The Great Duke imagining these
menaces proceeded from the trouble it was to him that his wife had revealed
what he would have kept secret, ordered him to be whipped more cruelly than the
time before, and sent one to tell him, that if he did not apply his remedy, he
should prepare himself for present death. The poor fellow perceiving his
destruction unavoidable, said at last, that he knew indeed a remedy, but
doubting of its certainty, he durst not try it on his Majesty; yet if they
would allow him fifteen days to prepare it, he would apply it. Having that
time granted him, he sent to Czirback, two days journey from Moscou, upon the
River Occa, whence he had brought him a Wagon full of all sorts of Herbs, good
and bad, and therewith prepared a Bath for the Great Duke, who thereupon grew
somewhat better. For whether it were that the Disease was declining, or that
among so many Herbs of all sorts, there were some good for his Disease, he had
some ease. Then were they confirmed in the opinion they had before, that the
Bojares denial to apply his remedy proceeded from his malice, whereupon he had
a more cruel whipping than the two former times, and there was given him a
present of four hundred Crowns, together with eighteen Peasants to be his
slaves; with a strict charge, not to entertain any animosity against his wife,
who made this advantage thereby, that, ever after, they lived very lovingly
together.

But now they proceed with more caution, and no man is condemned without an
exact information of the Crime laid to his charge. And for the utter taking
away of all calumny, the Accuser must be content to endure the Torture first;
and if, while he is in the Torment, he persist in his accusation, the accused
person is also put to it, nay, many times he is condemned without so much as
being heard. We saw an example of this in the wife of one of the Great Duke's
Farriers, who desirous to be rid of her husband, charged him that he would have
poisoned the Horses, and had he the opportunity, even the Great Duke himself.
She endured the Torture without varying in her accusation, and her husband was
sent to Prison into Siberia. We were showed the woman, who was still paid the
one half of her husband's Pension. From this kind of demeanor among the
Muscovites, and their infidelity one to another, it may be judged, what
strangers are to expect from them, and how far they are to be trusted. They
never proffer their friendship, nor contract any with others, but for their own
interest and advantage. The ill education they have when young, never learning
any thing beyond reading and writing, and certain vulgar prayers, makes them
blindly follow that which in Beasts is called Instinct; so that Nature being in
them depraved and corrupted, their whole life must needs be a constant course
of viciousness. Thence it comes, they are brutish, doing all things according
to their unbridled passions and appetites.

The fierceness of all other Nations, some Islanders excepted, argues something
of Spirit and Generosity; but the opinion the Muscovites have of themselves and
their abilities, is sottish, gross, and impertinent; and the pride and vain
glory of those who are ever so little advanced in Honors or Estates, is
insupportable. They dissemble it not, but all their behavior, words, and
actions, discover what they really are. Upon this principle they ground the
fond conceit they have of the greatness, power, and wealth of their Prince,
whom they prefer before all the other Monarchs of Europe. Thence it is also,
that they would not have other Princes assume those qualities which may denote
their competition with him. They sottishly and insolently command Ambassadors
to be uncovered first, and by force take all advantage over them, imagining it
were a great injury to themselves and their Prince, to treat Strangers with any
civility. Private persons write and speak in unhandsome terms, but such as give
the less offense, in that they bear with the same treatment from others. It Is
true, they began to learn a little civility, since they became sensible of the
advantages arising to them from the Commerce they have with Strangers, and
there are some use them with discretion: but of these there are very few, and,
excepting Nikita, whom we have spoken of, and two or three more, it would be
hard to find as many others that deserve this commendation.

Nor have they any more compliance one for another, Have no civility.
than they have difference for strangers; for instead of being civil one to
another, they take place, and all other advantages, one of another. When we
were at Nisenovogorod, the Chancellor's Steward coming to see us, the
Ambassadors invited him to Dinner; but when they were to sit down, the Pristaf
would take place of him, which begat a contestation concerning their quality.
One, as he was a Sinbojar, or Gentleman, pretended to precedence before the
Pristaf, who was not a person eminent by birth; the later, being there upon the
account of his Prince, would not have the other to make any comparison with
him. Whore's son and dog were the mildest of their term; for half an hour and
better, and that without any respect for the Ambassadors, who were at last
forced to tell them, that they had invited them to be merry, and not to be
troubled with their contests, and entreated them, at that time, to eat and
drink, and to take some other, to decide their differences. They took their
advice, and grew such good friends, as if the entertainment had been appointed
for their reconciliation, which seemed to be very sincere in their Wine, which,
according to their custom made them kindly drunk.

They are all much given to quarrelling, Quarrelsome.
in so much that in the streets they will rail at, and abuse one another like
Fish-Wives, and that with such animosity, that those who are not acquainted
with their humor think they will not part without fighting; but they seldom
come to those extremities, or if they fight, it is with their fists, or
switches, and the height of their rage is kicking, as much as they can, in the
belly and about the sides. 'Twas never yet known that any Muscovite fought with
Sword or Pistol, or that they are sensible of that gallantry wherein many would
unjustly place true courage. The great Lords, Knez and Bojares, fight on
horseback, but the weapon is a good Whip, and so they soon decide what
differences happen between them.

When they quarrel, Insolent in their expressions.
they forbear cursing, swearing and blaspheming, but rail at one another in
such bitter and horrid expressions, as no Country being able to parallel them,
it is but discretion to forbear defiling this relation therewith. The language
of Fathers and Mothers to their Children* and of the Children to them again, is
such as cannot be expressed without horror, much beyond what the most
debauched persons elsewhere are guilty of. Some years since the Great Duke
prohibited these insolences upon pain of whipping, and the Magistrate was
ordered to send Strelits and Sergeants among the people to surprise Offenders,
and to see them immediately punished. But it was sound by experience, that the
remedy came too late, and that the mischief was so deeply rooted, and so
generally spread, that it was, not only hard, but absolutely impossible to put
those prohibitions in execution. So that, for the vindication of persons of
quality an order was made, that he who affronts any such, or any of the Great
Duke's Officers, either by word or deed, should be fined, which fine they call
Biscestia, and sometimes amounts to 2000. Crowns, according to the quality of
the Person injured. If an Officer of the Great Duke's makes his complaint of
injury done him, his reparation will be according to his relation to the Court.
To a Lady, it is doubled, to a Son, it is augmented by a third part; to a
Daughter, there is an abatement of a third part: and the penalty is paid as
many times as there are persons injured, though they were dead many years
before. If the Offender has not to pay, he is put into his Adversaries hands,
who disposes of him so as to make him his Slave, or cause him to be whipped by
the common Executioner. One John Barnley, an English Merchant, of whom we shall
speak elsewhere, was sentenced to pay the Biscestia to another English man, Dr.
Day, Physician to the Great Duke; and Capt. de la Cost, a French Gentleman
found means to make an exchange of the penalty laid upon him at the suit of a
German Colonel, for that which the same Colonel was to pay another French man,
named Anthony le Groin, who was pleased thereby to oblige his friend, la Cost.

There is nothing polite in their conversation; on the contrary, they are not
ashamed to yawn, belch, and stretch themselves, where ever they are, their
belching being the more offensive, by reason of the abundance of Onions and
Garlic they use in all theit meat, which make their breaths strong enough,
without those exaltations. This they are so accustomed to, that they stick not
to do it in any company, the Great Duke's presence only excepted.

They do not apply themselves to the study of any Art or Science, Not addicted
to any study.
nor inquire into the affairs of other Countries, and consequently never
discourse of any such thing: but it were well on the other side, if they could
forbear talking of their uncleanness and brutalities, which they make their
divertisement in their debauches. I speak not of the Entertainments of Great
Lords, but of the ordinary company keeping of the Muscovites, where all their
discourse is of the abominations which they themselves have done, or seen
committed by others, making ostentation of the crimes which here would be
expiated by fire, and the memory thereof buried in their ashes. But as they are
wholly given up to all licentionsness, even to sins against Nature, not only
with Men, but also with Beasts, he who can tell most stories of that kind, and
set them out in most gestures, is accounted the bravest Man. Their Fiddlers put
them into Songs, and their Mountebanks make public representations of them,
and stick not to show their Breeches, and sometimes all they have to their
Spectators. Those who lead Bears about, Juglers; and Puppet-players, who erect
a Stage in a moment, by the means of a coverlet, which, being tied about their
wast, is brought over their heads, and within it show their Puppets,
representing their brutalities, and sodomies, make sport to the Children, who
are thereby induced to quit all sentiments of shame and honesty.

Nay these are quite discarded by the Muscovites. Shameless
The postures of their dancing, and the insolence of their Women, are
infallible marks of their bad inclinations. We have seen at Moscou both Men and
Women come out of the public Brothell-houses stark naked, and incite some
young people of our retinue to naughtiness by filthy and lascivious
expressions. Idleness, which is the Mother of all Vices, and seems to have been
bestowed on these barbarous people as their portion, is that which makes them
run into these excesses, whereto their drunkenness does also contribute; in as
much as being naturally inclined to luxury, when they are once got into their
Wine they mind nothing else. I have to this purpose a story, which the Great
Duke's Interpreter told me when we were at Novogorod: how that in the said
City, there is an anniversary devotion, to which come abundance of Pilgrims. He
who is allowed to keep a tipling-house, gets a permission from the
Metropolitan, to pitch several Tents, for the accommodation of the Pilgrims of
both Sexes, who are sure to be there betimes in the morning before service, and
to take off some Cups of strong-water. Nay some of them instead of minding
their devotions spend the day in drinking, whence arise such strange disorders,
that he told me, he saw a Woman got so drunk there, that coming out of the Tent
she fell down; and fell asleep, naked as she was, in the street, in the day
time. Which gave occasion to a Muscovite, who was also drunk, to lie down by
her, and, having made use of her, to fall also asleep in sight of many people,
who having made a ring about them, only laughed at the posture they were in,
till at last an old man, conceiving a horror at the spectacle, covered them
with his own garment.

There Is no place in the World where drunkenness is more common than in
Muscovy. Drunkards.
All, of all conditions, Ecclesiastics and Laics, Men and Women, Old and
Young, will drink strong-water at any time, before, at, and after their meals.
They call it Tzarkowino, and fail not to offer of it to those who visit them.
The lowest sort of people, Peasants and Slaves, refuse not the Cups which are
given them by some person of Quality, but will drink of it till they lie down,
and many times dye in the place. Nay their Great ones are not free from this
vice, as for example, the Muscovian Ambassador, sent to Charles King of Sueden,
in the year 1608. who, forgetting his quality and the affairs his Master had
entrusted him with, took so much strong-water the night before he was to have
audience, that the next day being found dead in his bed, they were forced to
carry him to his Grave, instead of conducting him to Audience.

The meaner sort of people think it not enough to stay in the Tipling-house
till they have not a Copec left in their purses, but many times pawn their
clothes there even to their shirts, which is no more than what is seen daily
during our abode at Moscou. Being lodged at Lubeck-house, as I went to
Novogorod, in my Voyage to Muscovy in 1643. I saw coming out of an Alehouse
not far thence, several of those Drunkards, some without Caps, others without
Shoes or Stockins, some without Wastcoats, and only their Shirts. One I took
notice of above the rest, who came our first without his Kaftan, and in his
Shirt, but meeting a friend by the way going to the Tipling-house, he went back
with him, and came not out again till he had left his shirt behind him. I
called to him, and asked him what he had done with his shirt, and whether he
had been robbed? He answered with the ordinary civility of the Muscovites,
Iabut fui matir, Mind thy own business; Good Wine has put me into this
posture: but since the shirt has stayed behind, the Drawers shall go and keep
them company, which he had no sooner said, but he returns to the house, whence
I saw him come presently afterward naked as an Adamite, covering his privy
parts with a handful of flowers, which he had taken up at the door, and so went
very ^^cundly to his own house.

Being in the same City of Novogorod at the time of our second Embassy, I saw a
Priest coming out of the Tipling-house, who coming by our Lodging would needs
give the benediction to the Strclits, who stood Sentinel at the door, but as he
lifted up his hands, going to make the inclination used in that Ceremony, the
head, fraught with the vapors of the Wine, was so heavy, that weighing down
the whole body, the Pope fell down in the dirt. Our Strclits took him up with
much respect, and received his daggled benediction; it being, it seems, a thing
very ordinary among them.

The Great Duke Michael Federouits, who was a sober person, and hated
drunkenness, considering with himself that it was impossible absolutely to
prevent those excesses, made in his time several orders for the moderating of
them, causing the Tipling-houses to be shut up, and prohibiting the selling of
strong-water or Hydromel without his permission, and that those places where
they were sold, should sell only by the Quart and Pint, and not by Cups. This
had some effect, in that there was no more Adamites seen in the streets, but
hindered not their being strewn with Drunkards, the Neighbors and such of
their friends, as had a design to be merry, sending to the Tavern for several
Pottles of Strong-water, which they would be sure to turn off ere they parted.

The women are no less given to drink than the men. Women given to drink.
I saw a pleasant example of it at Narva, in the house where I lodged, whither
many Muscovian women came one day to their husbands, sat down with them, and
took off their Cups as smartly as they did. The men being got drunk, would have
gone home, but the women thought it not yet time to draw off, though invited
thereto by a good number of boxes o'th'ear, and got their husbands to sit down
again, and to drink roundly as before, till such time as that the men being
fallen down asleep upon the ground, the women sat upon them, as upon benches,
and drunk on till they also were forced to lie down by them.

James de Cologne, at whose house I lodged at Narva, told me he had seen such
another Comedy at his Wedding; at which, the Muscovites having given their
Wives good banging, sat down and drunk with them, till that being laid on the
ground, the Women sat upon them, and grew so drunk, till at last they lay down
among them.

Tobacco was heretofore so common there, Tobacco forbidden among them.
that it was generally taken, both in smoke and powder. To prevent the
mischiefs occasioned by the use of it, which were not only, that the poorer
sort of people ruined themselves thereby, in as much as if they had but a
penny, they would rather bestow it in Tobacco than bread, but also because many
times it set houses on fire and those that took it presented themselves with
their stinking and infectious breaths before their Images, the Great Duke and
the Patriarch thought fit in the year 1634. absolutely to forbid the sale and
use of it. Those who are convicted of having either taken or sold any, are very
rigorously punished. They have their Nostrils slit or are whipped, as we have
often seen done; of the manner of which punishment we shall speak when we come
to treat of the administration of Justice in that Country.

The perverse disposition of the Muscovites, They are born to slavery.
the baseness of their education, and the slavery they seem born to, cause them
to be treated like beasts, rather than people endued with reason. They are
naturally so much inclined to ^^leness, that it were impossible to bring them
to take any pains, but by the Whip and the Cudgel, which yet they are not much
troubled at, as being hardened to blows, by the custom which the younger sort
have to meet on Holy Days, and to divert themselves by cuffing or fighting
with staves, never being angry at what happens. Those who are freeborn, but
poor, do so little value that advantage, that they sell themselves with their
family for a small matter; nay, they are so mindless of their liberty, that
they will sell themselves a second time, after they had recovered it, by the
death of their Master, or some other occasion.

Their submissions to their Superiors discover the lowness of their spirits,
and their slavery. They never come before persons of quality, but they bow down
to the ground, which they touch and smite with their forehead, nay, there are
some will cast themselves at their Lords feet, to give them thanks after they
had been sufficiently beaten by them. No Muscovite, what quality soever he be
of, but makes it his brag, to be the Great Duke's Golop, or Slave: and to
express their humility or adjection, even in the least things, they put their
names into diminutives, and neither speak nor write to him, but instead of
Iwan, or John, they say Iwantske, that is the diminutive; and sign thus,
Petrusketwoy Golop, Petrillo your slave. The Great Duke speaking to them uses
the same expression, treating them in all things like slaves, as far as Whips
and Cudgels can do it, which is but consonant to their own acknowledgement,
That their persons and estates are God's and the Great Duke's.

Those strangers who settle in Muscovy, Strangers are in no better condition
there
or are entertained into the Czaar's service, must resolve to do the same
submissions, and be content with the same treatment. For what kindness soever
he may have for them, it requires so small a matter to deserve the Whip, that
there is hardly any can brag he has not had it. Heretofore there were none
more subject to the Lash, than the Physicians, it being the persuasion of the
Muscovites, that that art was infallible, and that the success of it depended
on their wills, who professed the curing of diseases. Hence was it, that in the
year 160^. John Duke of Holstein, brother to Christian the fourth King of
Denmark, who had married the Great Duke Boris Gudenous daughter, falling sick,
the Czaar sent word to the Physicians, that if they recovered him not, their
lives should answer for the Prince's: so that they seeing the remedies applied
were fruitless, and that it was impossible to save the Prince, kept out of the
way, and durst not come into the Great Duke's presence, till he himself was
troubled with the Gowt, and sent for them. Among the rest, there was one a
German, who having practiced Physic some time in Muscovy, had some thoughts of
returning into Germany to take the degree of Doctor. But the Great Duke
desirous to know the occasion upon which he desired leave to go, understanding
that he went thither to be examined, and so take his Degree, which the Faculty
gives and confirms by its Letters Patents, he told him, that having been often
eased of his pain by his remedies, he was satisfied of his sufficiency; and, as
to Letters, if there were any need of them, he would give him such as should be
as authentic as any he could get from the Universities of Germany, and so he
needed not put himself to the trouble and expense of that journey.

This Physician was one of those who kept out of the way upon the Duke of
Holstein's death, and imagining the Great Duke would send for him in order to
his execution, he put on a tattered Garment, and having his hair negligently
hanging down over his eyes and face, he came in that posture to the Great
Duke's Chamber Door, into which he went, creeping on all four, and coming to
his bedside, told him, that he was not worthy to live, much less be admitted
into his Majesty's presence, since he was so unfortunate as to be out of his
favor. Upon which one of the Knez, who were about the Duke, thinking to make
his Prince some sport, treated him as a Sabak, or Dog, kicked him in the head,
and drew blood of him. The Physician, perceiving the great Duke looked
favorably on him, thought fit to make his advantage of it, and with a certain
confidence said to him, Great Prince, I know I am your Slave, but be pleased to
give me leave to tell you, that I am only yours. I know I have deserved death,
and should think my self happy to receive it from your hands; but it troubles
me to be affronted by this Knez, who is but your Slave as well as my self; and
I think it is not your desire, that any other should have power over me. These
words, and the need the Great Duke stood in of this Physician, procured him a
present of a thousand Crowns; his Fellow-Physicians were pardoned, and the
Bojar had a good cudgelling.

As for slaves, They keep many Slaves.
their number is not regulated, some Lords have above a hundred of them in
their Country-houses and Farms, Those they entertain for their service in the
City; do not diet in their houses, but have board-wages, their allowance so
small, that it is as much as they can do to live upon it. And this is one of
the chiefest causes of the many disorders and mischiefs done at Moscou, there
passing hardly a night but violences and murders are committed. Great Lords
and rich Merchants have a Guard in their Courts, who watch all night, and are
obliged to express their vigilance, by the noise they make upon boards with a
stick, much after the manner of playing upon the Timbrels, which done, they
give as many knocks as the Clock has struck hours. But these Guards watching
many times more for the advantage of house-breakers, than that of their
Masters, there is none used now, and no servant is taken into a house, but upon
good City-security for his truth.

This great number of slaves makes it unsafe to walk the streets of Moscou, in
the night time un-arm'd and without Company. We had the experience of it in
some of our servants, upon several occasions. Our Master-Cook, who had been
employed at a person's of quality, where the Ambassadors had Dined, was killed
as he came home in the night; which misfortune happened also to the Steward
belonging to the Suedish Ambassador, Spiring. The Lieutenant, who had commanded
our German and Scotch Musketeers, in our Voyage into Persia, was in like manner
killed in the night, having been with some others at the Wedding of a German
Merchants daughter. And as there passed no night almost without murder, so
these disorders increased toward great Festivals, especially on flesh days,
which they call Maslouitzo. On St. Mastin's Eve, we counted fifteen dead bodies
in the Court of Semskoy, a place where they are exposed, that their kindred and
friends may know them, and take order for their burial. If no body owns them,
they are dragged thence like Carrion, and thrown into a Ditch without any
Ceremony.

The insolence of these Villains is so great, that they stuck not to set upon
the Great Duke's principal Physician in the day time. They stopped him in the
street as he was going home, struck him off his horse, and would have cut off
his finger, on which he had a Gold Seal-ring, had he not been relieved by some
sent to his rescue, by a Knez of his acquaintance, who living near thereabouts
had seen him set upon. The misery is, that no Citizen will so much as look out
at his window, much less come out of his house, to relieve those that are
affronted, so much are they afraid to come into the same misfortue they see
others engaged in. Since our being there, some course has been taken herein,
Watches being set, who stop those who go in the night without Torch or
Lanthorn, and carry them to the Strelitse priscas, where they are punished the
next day.

At Hay-making time, the road between Moscou and Tuere is very dangerous to
travel, by reason of the great number of slaves employed in that work, making
their advantage of a Mountain whence they discover those that pass, whom they
rob and kill, without any reparation to be expected from their Masters, who,
not allowing their slaves what to subsist upon, are forced to connive at their
Crimes.

Masters dispose of their slaves, as they do of any other moveable; nay, a
father may sell his son, and alienate him, for his own advantage. But the
Muscovites have this piece of vainglory, that not only they seldom come to
those extremities, but also had rather see their Children starve at home, than
suffer them to go out any where to service. It Is only debt that sometimes
engages them to make over their Children to their Creditors, the Boys at ten,
the Girls, at eight Crowns, a year, the Children being no less obliged to
satisfy the debt, than their fathers, as also to endure that cruel treatment,
which desperate debtors are to expect, or to sell themselves to their Creditors.

The subjection in which they are born, They are good Soldiers.
and the gross feeding they have even from their infancy, at which time they
are taught to be content with any thing, makes them very good Soldiers, and
such as would do very great services under strange Commanders. For though the
Military Discipline of the Romans allowed not the listing of slaves in their
Legions, yet does it not follow, but that the Muscovites, who are all such, may
be advantageously employed in War, this being certain of them, that they are
excellent good in a besieged place, and will maintain it to the utmost
extremity. Of this we have an example at Notebourg, where two men made their
capitulation in the year 1579. The Poles, who had besieged the Castle of
Suikols, set it a fire as they were giving the assault; yet the Muscovites made
good the breach and maintained it, even when the fire reached their Clothes. At
the siege of the Abbey of Padis, in Livonia, they held out till they became so
weakened for want of Provisions, that they were not able to keep Guard, nor to
meet the Suedes at the Gate.

They are not indeed so fortunate in the field, and very seldom gained any
battle against the Poles or Suedes, their Neighbors, who have always almost
had the better of them, so that it proved a harder matter to pursue them, than
to avoid their blows. But certain it is withal, that these misfortunes happen
to them through the want of experience and conduct in their Generals, rather
than of courage in their Soldiers.

For as to the disgrace the Muscovites received at the Siege of Smolensko, The
Siege of Smolensko.
in the year 1633. it is to be ascribed to the Generals perfidiousness, who
paid his Master for his imprudence in putting the command of his Army into the
hands of a Stranger. He was a Polander, named Herman Schein, who to curry
favor with the Duke, had been so low-spirited as to receive re-baptization.
The Army he commanded, consisted of above a hundred thousand men, among whom
were above 6000. Germans, and several Muscovian Regiments exercised according
to the German discipline, and commanded by strange Officers, French, Germans,
and Scots, three hundred pieces of Cannon, and all other things requisite to
carry on the Siege against that place, which the Poles had taken some time
before from the Muscovites. The reduction of it had been so much the easier, ^n
that the City is compassed but with one simple wall, without ditch, or any kind
of fortification. Whence it came, that the Germans, who had made a reasonable
breach in it, proposed to have it carried at the first assault. But the General
opposed it, saying, That he would never suffer, it should be reproached to the
Prince his Master, that he had raised so vast an Army to besiege a place, which
a handful of Germans would have taken in so few days, and then presently to
disband it. The Colonels that were Strangers, on the other side, considering
that the Great Duke's reputation would suffer by that Siege, and the Army it
self be destroyed if it were not employed, resolved to give the assault, and
were in a manner Masters of the breach, when the General commanding the great
Guns to be discharged at them, they were forced to retreat. They complained of
that procedure, so far as to make some discoveries of their distrust of his
fidelity; but he sent them word, that if they kept not within the respect due
to their General, he should find a way to chastise them, and that he would
treat them as Muscovites. So that not daring to make any further attempt, the
Army continued there some time without doing any thing, and gave the King of
Poland time enough to get together a small body of 5000. men, who possessed
themselves of all the avenues, by which the Muscovites received their
provisions, so as that within a few days their Army was more straightly
besieged than the City it self. It had been easy for the Muscovian General to
prevent the Poles from taking up those posts, but he gave them the leisure so
to fortify themselves in them, that it had been impossible for him to force
them in their quarters, even if he had attempted it. The Muscovian Army being
reduced to this extremity, the General, to hinder it from starving, was forced
to capitulate with the Poles; to come in with the whole Army at mercy, and,
with all that Noble Artillery, to leave hostages for the ransom of all the
Officers and Soldiers, which the Great Duke was obliged to pay. The General was
so impudent as to return to Moscou, and show himself at Court, where he had
friends enough to protect him, notwithstanding the charges put in against him
by the Officers and Soldiers: but the people expressed themselves so moved at
his treachery, that to prevent an insurrection, which threatened both City and
State, they were forced to execute him publicly in the marketplace.

Most of the great Ones had a finger in his Treason, but lest he might accuse
any, they persuaded him that he should not be startled at those proceedings,
that it was only by way of pageant, to give the people some satisfaction, and
that, before execution, his pardon would be brought him. Which he the more
easily credited, for that his changing Religion had gained him the affection
and favor of the Patriarch. But he had no sooner laid his head upon the block,
ere a sign was made to the Executioner to strike it off. The same day was
executed also his Son, who had some command under his Father at the Siege of
Smolensko. He was brought into the open place before the Castle, where he was
stripped stark naked, and whipped to death. All the rest of his kindred were
banished into Siberia. This execution happened in June, 1634.

The Muscovites spend not much in housekeeping, Their hous-keeping.
nor the Bojares, as well as those of a lower condition. It is not above thirty
years, that their Lords and chiefest Merchants have built their houses of
stone: for before they were no better lodged than the meaner sort, in very poor
wooden buildings. Their household stuff are suitable to their Lodgings, and
commonly consist only in three or four pots, and as many wooden or earthen
dishes. Some have pewter, but very few, and unless it be some few drinking
cups, and gobelets, there is not any of silver. They know not what scowring
means, in so much that the Great Duke's plate looks little better than the
Tavern-pots, which are made clean but once a year. The better sort hang their
rooms but with mat; and to set them out yet a little better, they have only two
or three Images wretchedly painted. They have few feather-beds, but are content
with mattresses, nay with chaff or straw, and if not that to be had, they lie
upon their clothes, which in Summer they lay upon a bench, or table; in the
Winter, upon their stoves, which are flat, as in Livonia. In this Country it is
that Master and Mistress, Men and Maids, are shuffled all together into the
same room; nay in some places in the Country, I have seen the Poultry, and the
Pigs, had ordinarily the same Lodging with the Masters of the house.

They are not acquainted with our delicate meats and sawces. Their feeding.
Their ordinary food is coarse Meal, Turnips, Coleworth, and Cowcumbers, both
fresh and pickled. Their great delicacy is Salt-fish, which being not well
salted, infects the places near it, so that you may smell their Fish-market at
a great distance. They cannot want Beef and Mutton, there being good pastures
all over Muscovy, and the Forests breed such abundance of Swine, that they must
needs be very cheap: but to avoid expense, as also for that their year has
more fasting days than flesh days, they are so accustomed to Fish and Pulse,
that they care not for flesh. Add to this, that their continual fasts have
taught them so many ways to dress their Fish, Herbs, and Pulse, that a man may
well forbear those dishes of meat which are much esteemed elsewhere. We said,
how that the Great Duke willing to entertain us from his own Table, sent us
above forty dishes, most of Pulse and Herbs. Among other things they make a
sort of Pies, which they call Piroguen, about the bigness and fashion of a
twopenny Loaf. They fill the crust with Fish or minced meat, with Chibols and a
little Pepper, and fry them in a Pan with Butter, and in Lent with Oil. It Is no
ill dish, and may be called the Bisque of those parts.

The spawn of Fish, especially that of Sturgeon, they order thus. They take off
the skin, very neatly, and then salt them. Having been in salt some eight or
ten days, and by that means reduced as it were to a paste, they cut it into
small slices, putting Onions and Pepper to them, and they are eaten with Oil
and Vinegar like a Salad. It eats much better, if, instead of Vinegar, you put
the juice of Citron. Yet to love this kind of Sallade, a man must be accustomed
to it, though they think it excites appetite and fortifies Nature. The
Muscovites call it Ikary, and the Italians Cavaiar. There is much of it eaten
in Italy in the Lent time, instead of Butter. The best is made upon the Wolgda,
and near Astrachan, whence it is transported in Tunns of 7. or 800. weight, by
the way of England and Holland, into Italy. The Great Duke reserves the Trade
of this Commodity to himself, farms it out, and makes a very great yearly
advantage of it. To dispel the vapors rising up to the head, after excessive
drinking, they take cold roasted Veal, mince it, not too small, with some
pickled Cowcumbers, adding thereto a sauce of Pepper, Vinegar, and the juice of
pickled Cowcumbers, and eat it with spoons. It recovers appetite, and tastes
well enough.

Their ordinary drink is a sort of small Beer which they call Quas, or
Hydromel; but they never eat, without a dram of the Strong-water botle before
and after their meal. Persons of quality are furnished with strong Beer, Sack,
and all other sorts of Wine. Their strong Beer is brewed in March, and kept all
Summer in their Snow-houses, where they make a bed of Ice and Snow mixed
together, and then a layer of Barrels: upon them again a bed of Ice, and then
another row of Barrels, covering them with straw and planks, which are instead
of a vault to them; for their Cellars are not covered.

The Muscovites care not much for Rhenish nor French Wines, Hydromel how made.
thinking them not strong enough; but they love Hydromel, which they order with
Cherries, Straw-berries, Mulberries, or Rasp-berries. That they make with
Rasp-berries is the most pleasant of any. To make it well, they put the
Rasp-berries a-soaking in fair water for two or three nights, till the water
has got their taste and color. Into this water they put some of the purest
Honey, allowing to every pound of Honey three or four of water, as they would
have the Hydromel strong or small. They put into it a Toast dipped in the
dreggs of Beer, which is taken out as soon as the Hydromel begins to work,
lest, continued longer, it should give it an ill taste. If they desire it
should be long a-working, they put it into some warm place; but if it be for
present drinking, they put it in a cool place, where it soon gives over
working, and then is taken off the Lees to be spent. To better the taste of it,
they put in a little bag of Cinnamon, and grains of Paradise, with some few
Cloves. Some instead of fair water, steep the Rasp-berries 24 hours in common
Aquavitae, which gives the Hydromel an excellent taste.

Common Hydromel is made of the Honey-combs, which they beat in warm-water,
stirring it much, and after it has rested seven or eight hours, they cleanse
it through a Sieve, boil it, scum it, and without any more ado expose it to
sale.

Persons of Quality discover themselves by their retinue and expense, The
expenses of Persons of quality.
which yet is not so great as might be imagined. For though they have sometimes
50. 60. or more Slaves about them, their stables well furnished, and make great
feasts well supplied with Meat, and all sorts of Beer, Wine, Hydromel, and
Strong-water, yet all comes from their Country-houses and Dairies, so as that
they buy but very little. Their entertainments are so many baits to draw in
Presents, which they expect of those that are not of their own quality, in so
much that they deerly buy the honor which the Knez and Bojares do them upon
such occasions. Strange Merchants know well enough what that honor is to cost
them, and desire it not, but to gain the favor of the Great ones, whose
countenance they stand in need of. The Weywodes are sure to make two or three
of these entertainments yearly in their Governments.

The greatest honor a Muscovite thinks he can do his friend, is to let him see
his Wife, The highest act of Muscovian civility.
to be presented with a Cup of Strong-water by her, and to permit he should
kiss her. Count Leo Alexander de Slakou gave me to understand so much at my
being in Muscovy in the year 1643. Having dined with him, he made me withdraw
into another Chamber, where he told me, that he could not make a greater
expression of the respects he had for me, nor a greater acknowledgment of the
obligation he had to his Highness, than to show me his Wife. She presently came
in, very richly clad in her wedding-cloaths, and followed by a Gentlewoman with
a bottle of Strong water and a Silver Cup. The Lady bid her fill out, and
having put it to her mouth, presented it to me, and obliged me to drink it off;
which I d^d thrice together. That done, the Count would have me kiss her, which
I the more wondered at, in regard that kind of civility is not yet known in
Holstein. Wherefore I would have contented my self to have kissed only her
hand; but he so kindly engaged me to kiss her lips, that there was no avoiding
of it. She presented me a Handkercher, embroidered at the extremities with
Gold, Silver and Silk, with a deep fringe, such as are presented to the Bride
on her Wedding day. Afterward I found a note fastened to it, wherein was the
name of Stresnof, Uncle by the Fathers side to the Great Duchess.

The Knez and Bojares have not only pensions and considerable allowances, but
also great real estates. Merchants and Tradesmen live by Commerce and their
Trades. Those who may go out of the Country, and are permitted to Traffic into
Persia, Poland, Sueden, and Germany, carry thither Sables; and other furs,
flax, hemp, and Russia-leather.

Tradesmen find it not hard to gain a subsistence for their families, by reason
of the plenty of all manner of Provisions. They are very handy, and easily
imitate any thing they see done, though they are not so rich in inventions as
the Germans and other Europaeans; for I have seen some of their carved works as
well done as the best in Germany; so that strangers who are not willing to have
the secret of their professions discovered, must take heed of Muscovites, John
Valk, whom we mentioned before, would never cast any thing in their presence.
Now they cast pieces of Artillery themselves, and Valk's Disciple made a Bell,
while we were there, which weighed 7700 poudes, which amount to 3080 hundred
weight. But it had not been long used ere it cracked, and now it is broken to
pieces, and another to be made of a far greater weight than the former.

No Muscovite, They sleep after Dinner.
what condition or quality soever he be of, but sleeps after Dinner; whence it
is that about noon most shops are shut up, and the Merchants or their
Apprentices sleeping at the door: so that about that time, there is no more
speaking with Persons of Quality or Merchants, than there is at midnight.

This was one sign whereby they discovered the imposture of the counterfeit
Demetrius. We shall find in the ensuing story of him, that the Impostor slept
not after Dinner, and that the Muscovites inferred thence that he was a
stranger; as also by his aversion to Baths, which are so common in Muscovy,
that there is neither Town nor Village, but has very many of them, both
public and private. This is all they have gentile among them, as a thing they
conceive necessary upon several occasions, especially at Marriages. after the
first Coition.

At Astrachan, Their stoves and bathing places.
I had the curiosity to go unknown into one of them, which by a division of
boards was contrived into two rooms. But, besides that it was easy to look out
of one into the other, by reason of the distance there was between the boards,
both men and women went in and out at the same door, those of either Sex who
would express a greater modesty hiding what they would not have seen with a
handful of leaves, which being dried in Summer, they, for this purpose put
a-soking into warm water: but some were stark naked, and the women were not shy
to come in that posture and speak with their husbands, even while other men
stood by.

It Is almost a Miracle to see how their bodies, accustomed to, and hardened by
cold, can endure so intense a heat, and how that, when they are not able to
endure it any longer, they come out of the stoves, naked as the back of a man's
hand, both men and women, and go into the cold water, or cause it to be poured
upon them, and, in Winter, how they wallow in the Snow. Some of our young men
would often walk before these public stoves, to see the several postures of
the women that came out, and diverted themselves in the water, and were so far
from being ashamed, that they would talk wantonly with them, and were not
troubled when any of our people came into the water to them. And this we saw
not only in Muscovy, but also in Livonia, where the Inhabitants, especially the
Finlanders, who are settled there, going out of these stoves, in the coldest of
Winter, run into the Snow, and rub their bodies with it, as if it were Soap,
then return into the stoves to take the advantage of a more moderate heat: and
all this so as that this change of contrary qualities does not any way
prejudice their health. The reason then of it must be Custom, in as much as
being thus used from their Childhood, and that habit being as it were converted
into a second nature, they are indifferently enured to both heat and cold.

At Narva we had Muscovian boys of about 8, 9, or 10. years of age, whom we
employed about the Kitchen. These would stand half an hour together barefoot
upon the Ice, like so many Geese, in the depth of Winter, and never complain of
cold, The stoves belonging to the Germans, who live in Muscovy and Livonia, a^e
very sumptuous, and it is no less pleasant bathing in them. The floor is
strewn with Pine leaves beaten to powder, all sorts of Herbs and Flowers,
which raise a very sweet smell, as also the Ly which they make very
odoriferous. Along the Walls are seats, or benches, upon which a man lies to
sweat and be rubbed, some higher than others, that one may take such a degree
of heat as he pleases, and they are all covered with clean sheets, and pillows
filled with Hay. Every one has a Servant-maid, who having only her smock on,
rubs, washes, and wipes him, and what else is requisite. As she comes in, she
presents you on a Trencher, with some Radish sli^'d, with a little Salt, and if
you are known in the house, the Mistress her self or her Daughter will present
you with a certain composition, consisting of Wine and Beer, in which will be
some bread crum'd, Citron sliced, Sugar and Nutmeg. When this civility is
omitted, it argues the Master of the house has no great respect for his Guest.
After bathing a man is put into a bed, then rises to eat something, and having
eaten goes to bed again to sleep.

The Muscovites are of a healthy and strong constitution, long lived, and
seldom sick; which when they are, their ordinary remedies, even in burning
Fevers, is only Garlic and Strongwaters. Persons of quality make (...) of
Physicians, though but within these few years, and are persuaded that remedies
may do them good.

Fornication is very common among them, and yet they permit not public stews,
which diverse other Christian Princes not only permit, but anthorise, and have
an advantage arising out of them for their protection. Marriage is thought
honorable among them, and Polygamy forbidden. A Widdower or Widow may Marry
twice or thrice, but must not offer at a fourth Marriage, which if they should,
the Priest that should bless them would be cast off.

They observe in their Marriages the degrees of Consanguinity, and do not
willingly marry such as are near to them either by Kindred or Alliance. Nor do
they permit two Brothers to marry two Sisters; and they observe also a
spiritual Alliance, not suffering that Godfathers and Godmothers to the same
person should intermarry. The celebration of Marriage among them is thus.

Young Men and Maids are not suffered to see one another, The Ceremonies of
their marriages.
much less to have any discourse of marriage, or to make any promise one to
another, by word or writing. But when those who have Children marriageable,
especially daughters, have found out a match they like, they speak to the young
man's Parents, and declare the desire they have to make an Alliance with them.
If they approve of what is proposed, and the young man desire to see the maid,
yet is it absolutely denied. If she be hansom, they will be content the mother
or some other woman of the kindred, should see her, and if she be no way
defective; that is, neither blind nor lame, the friends on both sides treat
about the marriage, and conclude all things, the intended young couple not so
much as being allowed to see one another. For they bring up their daughters in
very private Chambers (especially persons of quality) where they keep them
locked up, so as that the Bridegroom does not see his Bride till she is brought
into his Chamber. And thus it comes to pass, that he who thinks he has married
a handsome Maid, has some crooked piece put upon him; nay, instead of the Man's
Daughter he was to have, some kinswoman or servantmaid is thrust upon him; of
which I have several examples. So that it is not to be wondered at, that
matrimonial discontents are so frequent among them.

When their Great Lords, Knez, and Bojares dispose of their Children in
marriage, there is appointed on the Bride-groom's side a Woman, whom they call
Suacha, and another on the Brides, who jointly take order for the Nuptials.
That on the Brides part, goes upon the Wedding Day to the Bridegroom's
Lodgings, and there makes ready the Nuptial bed. She is attended by above a
hundred men servants, who are all clad in Ho^grelines, or long Coats, and carry
on their heads, the things necessary for the Bed and Chamber, where the new
Married couple are to lie. The Bed is made upon forty sheaves of Rye, which the
young man causes to be ranked in order, The nuptial bed.
and compassed about with several Barrels full of Wheat, Barley, and Oats*

All things being ready, the young man goes from his own house late in the
evening, accompanied by all his Kindred, having before him, on hors-back, the
Priest, by whom he is to be married. At his Bride's door, he meets with all her
friends, who receive him and his retinue, and press them to sit down at a
Table. Three dishes of meat are served up, but no body eats of them, and there
is left at the upper end of the Table a place for the Bridegroom: but while he
is talking with the Bride's friends, a young Lad sits down in it, and will not
be gotten thence till the Bridegroom has made him so many Presents, that he is
content to give him the place. The Bridegroom having taken his place, the Bride
is brought in most richly Clad, having a Veil over her face. She is seated by
the Bridegroom, but to prevent their seeing one another, they are separated by
a piece of Crimson Taffata, which is held up by two young Lads while they are
set. Thus done, the Bride's Suacha comes to her, Paints her, ties up her hair
in two knots, puts the Crown on her head, and dresses her in all things like a
married woman. The Crown is of leaves of Gold, or Silver Gilt, beaten very
thin, lined with some silk stuff, and toward the Ears, it has five or six
rows of great Pearls, which fall down on her breast. The Robe, or upper
Garment, the sleeves whereof are an Ell and a half wide, is embroidered with
Gold and Pearls at the extremities, especially at the neck, which is three
fingers broad, and so heightened with Embroidery, that it looks more like a Dogs
Collar than any thing else, and this kind of Robe amounts to above a thousand
Crowns. The heels of their shoes, as well of those that are betroath'd, as of
most of the other women and maids, are above half a foot high, so that being as
it were a-tip-toe, they have much ado to stand. The other Suacha Paints the
Bridegroom, and in the mean time, the women get up on benches and sings several
foolish songs. After this come in two young men richly Clad, carrying between
them upon a Beer a very large Cheese, and some Loaves, there hanging from the
Beer several Martins skins. The like is brought in on the Bride's part, and the
Priest, having blessed them, sends them to Church. At last there is set on the
Table a great Silver-basin, filled with little pieces of Satin and Taffata,
about such a bigness as were fit to make little purses of, little square pieces
of Silver, Hops, Barley, and Oats; all mixed together. The Suacha having covered
the Brides face again, takes certain handfuls out of the Basin, and casts them
among the company, who in the mean time sing a song, and take up what they find
upon the ground.

In the Church, The Ceremonies in the Church.
where the Benediction is to be given, they cover some part of the floor with
Crimson Taffata, upon which the young Couple stand, having over them another
piece of the same stuff. Before they are married, the Priest makes them go to
the offering, which consists in Fish, Fried Meats, and Pastry. That done, the
married receive the Benediction, which is given by holding Images over their
heads, and the Priest taking the man by the right hand, and the woman by the
left at the same time, asks them three times, whether it is with their consent
that they are married, and whether they will love one another as they ought to
do. Having both answered, yes, all the Company join hands, and the Priest sings
the 128. Psalm, he one verse, and the Company the next, dancing at the mean
time, much after the same manner as they do in these parts, who sing and dance
at the same time. The Psalm ended, he puts a Garland of Rue upon their heads,
or about their shoulders, if it be a Widow or Widdower, saying, Increase and
Multiply, and then consummates the marriage, pronouncing these words, Whom God
has joined together let no man separate. While the Priest pronounces those
words, those who are invited to the Wedding do all light wax candles, and one
of them gives the Priest, a wooden Cup, or rather a Glass, full of Claret Wine
which he takes off, and when the Married Couple have pledged him by drinking it
off, each of them three times, the Bridegroom throws down the Cup or Glass, and
he and the Bride treading it under their feet, break it to pieces, with these
words, May they thus fall at our feet, and be trod to pieces, who shall
endeavor to sow division or discontent between us. Then the Women cast at the
young Couple some Flax-seed and Hemp Seed, and wish them all prosperity. They
also pull the Bride by the Robe, as if they would force her away from her
husband, but she keeps so close to him, that all their endeavors prove
fruitless. The Marriage-Ceremonies being thus over, the Bride is put into her
Sledge, which is encompassed with six Torches, or Wax-candles, and the
Bridegroom gets on horseback to return to his own house, where the Wedding is
kept.

As soon as they are come thither, the Bridegroom, his kindred and friends sit
down at a Table well furnished with Meat, but the Women carry the Bride to her
Ch^mber, take off her clothes, and lay her a-bed. That done, they make the
Bridegroom rise from the Table, and six or eight young men, carrying each a
Torch in his hand, conduct him to the Chamber. As they come in, they put the
Torches into the barrels full of Wheat and Barley, and quit the room. They are
each of them presented with two Martins skins. The Bride perceiving the
Bridegroom coming, gets out of bed, gets on a morning Gown lined with Martins
skins, meets him, and receives him very submissively, doing him reverence with
a low inclination of the head; and this is the first time that he sees the
Bride's face. They sit down together at a Table, and, among other Meat, there
is brought them a roasted fowl, which the Bridegroom pulls asunder, casting
away over his shoulders that part which comes off first, whether it be wing or
leg, and eating the other. Having eaten, the young Couple go to bed, and all
withdraw, save only one of the old servants of the house, who walks before the
Chamber Door, while the kindred and friends are busied about all manner of
charms, which they think may be advantageous to the New-married Couple.

This servant coming ever and anon to the door, asks whether the business be
done. As soon as the Bridegroom answers that it is, the Trumpets and Timbrels
which only expect the word, are played upon, and make an excellent noise, till
such time as the stoves are made ready, where the New-married-couple bath
themselves, but apart. They are washed with water, Hydromel and Wine, and the
Bride sends to the Bridegroom a shirt, embroidered with Gold and Pearls at the
collar and extremities, and a rich habit. The two next days are spent in
entertainments, dancing, and other divertisements, the Women making their
advantage of the opportunity, while their husbands are drunk, to the loss of
their honors.

Citizens, and persons of meaner condition are married with less Ceremony. The
night before the Wedding the young Man sends to his intended Bride some
clothes, a furred Coif, a pair of Buskins, a Cabinet with certain Jewels, a Bag
for night clothes, a Comb and a Looking-glass. The next day, the Priest is sent
for, who comes with a little Silver Cross, and is brought in by two young Lads
carrying Wax-candles lighted. As he enters the house, he gives the benediction
with his Cross, first, to the two Lads, then to those that are invited. Then
the young Couple are set at Table, the two Lads holding a piece of Taffata
between them; but when the Suacha dresses the Brides head, a Looking-glass is
brought, and the young Couple joining their cheeks, look and smile one upon the
other. The two Suacha's in the mean time cast hops upon them; which done, they
are led to Church, where the Ceremonies are the same as for persons of quality.

As soon as the Wedding is over, How the Women live.
the Women must resolve to live a retired life, and not go out of the house but
very seldom, receiving the visits of their kindred and friends oftener than
they give any. The Daughters of great Persons, and rich Merchants, as they are
not much brought up to housekeeping, so they trouble themselves but little
with it, when they are married. Their chief employment is sowing, or
embroidering handkerchers of white Taffata, or cloth, or making little purses,
or some such toies. The clothes they wear within doors are made of some common
stuff of little value; but when they go to Church, or that their Husbands would
honor a friend with their presence, they are magnificently clad, and forget
not to paint their faces, necks, and arms.

The Wives of the Knez, Bojares, and great Lords, in the Summer time, make use
of Chariots covered with red cloth, which kind of covering they use in Winter
for their Sledges, having at their feet a she S^ave, and about them a great
number of Servants and Lacquies, sometimes to the number of ^0. or 40. The
horse, which draws them, has many Fox tails about the main and tail, which
disguise him after a strange manner; and yet the Muscovits think it so
ornamental, that not only Great Lords and Ladies make use of it, but many times
the Great Duke himself, with this difference, that instead of Fox tails, they
some times use Martins skins.

The Women living thus idly, Their divertisement.
making few or no visits, and not meddling with any thing of housewivery, are
forced to divert themselves with their Maids. They lay a long plank over a
block, and getting up on the ends of it, they are tossed up and down, and
sometimes by a violent motion they are forced up very high in the Air. They
have also ropes to swing in; nay in some little Towns and Villages I have seen
public Swinging-places, so contrived as that three or four might have their
divertisement at the same time. They are not ashamed to do this in the open
streets, giving two or three pence to little Boys who keep Swingers ready for
that purpose. Their husbands are very glad to give them this kind of sport, and
sometimes help them in their swinging.

It is not to be much wondered that they are so hardly treated by their
husbands, Why the Muscovites beat their wives
for they have lewd tongues, are given to Wine, and will not let slip the
opportunity to pleasure a friend. So that having all these three excellent
qualities, they cannot take much unkindly the cudgelings, which they from time
to time receive from their husbands: but they take comfort from the example of
their friends and neighbors, who, behaving themselves after the same manner,
are accordingly no better treated. Yet can I not believe, what Barclay says in
his Icon Ammorum, That the Muscovian Women are not persuaded their husbands
love them, if they are not beaten by them; at least I can say this, I never met
with any who were glad when they were beaten. They have the same passions and
inclinations as other Women have. They are sensible of good and bad usage, and
it is not likely they should take the effects of anger and displeasure for
expressions of kindness and friendship.

It is possible some foolish Woman might tell her husband so in jest, or that
one distracted might desire to be beaten, such as she of whom Petrejus, in his
Chronicle of Muscovy, speaks of, who having lived many years in good
correspondence with her husband (who was an Italian, as he says, though the
Baron of Haberstein affirms he was a German, and by profession, a Blacksmith,
named Jordan) told him one day, that she could not believe he loved her, since
he had not yet beaten her. The husband willing to assure her of his real
affection gave her a good cudgelling, and perceiving she took a certain
pleasure in it, made use of that exercise so often, till at last she died. But
were it granted that this is but a story, as it seems to be no other, yet ought
we not to judge of all the Muscovian women by this particular example.

They think, Adultery.
that Adultry is not committed but when one man marries another man's wife: what
ever else may be done amounts but to fornication, and when a married man is
taken in it, his punishment is whipping, and some days imprisonment, or happily
he is sentenced to live some time on bread and water. Then he is set at
liberty, and may resent the complaints made by his wife against him upon that
occasion. A husband who can convince his wife of a miscarriage of this nature,
may have her shaved, and put into a Monastery. Those who are weary of their
wives, often make use of this pretense, accuse their wives of Adultery, and
suborn false witnesses, upon whose depositions they are condemned, without
being heard. Religious Women are sent to her lodgings, who put her into their
habit, shave her, and carry her away by force into the Monastery, whence she
never comes out, having once suffered the Razour to come upon her head.

The most ordinary cause of divorce; at least the most plausible pretense, is
devotion. They say, they love God better than their wives, when an humor takes
them to go into a Monastery: which they do without their consent, or making any
provision for the children they have had between them. And yet this kind of
retiring out of the World is so much approved among them, (though St. Paul says
that such are worse than Heathens and Infidels) that if the woman marry again,
they make no difficulty to conferr Priesthood on this new Proselite, though
before he had been but a Tailor, or Shoemaker. Barrenness is also another cause
of divorce in Muscovy: for he who has no children by his wife may put her into
a Monastery, and marry again within six weeks.

The Great Dukes themselves make use of this freedom, when they have only
Daughters. It Is true, the Great Duke Basili did not put his Wife Salome into a
Monastery, and marry Helene, daughter to Michael Linski, a Polander, but upon
his having no Children one and twenty years after marriage; but it is also
true; that, some few days after, she was brought to bed of a Son, and yet she
was forced to continue there, because she had been shaved.

We saw an example of it in a Polander, who, having embraced the Greek
Religion, purposely to marry a Muscovian beauty, was forced to take a journey
into Poland, where he stayed above a year. The young Lady, in her husband's
absence, made a shift to be otherwise supplied; so effectually that she
augmented her family by a child; but, fearing her husband's displeasure, she
retired into a Monastery and was shaved. The husband did all he could to get
her out again, promising to pardon her offense, and never to reproach her with
it. The woman was willing to come out, but would not be permitted, it being,
according to their Theology, a sin against the Holy Ghost, not to be forgiven
either in this World or the next. This artifice Boris Federouits Gudenou made
use of, who, having acquired much repute in the management of the public
affairs, during the minority of Foedor Iuanouits, and perceiving the Muscovites
were not fully resolved to make him Great Duke, to make them the more earnest
to do it, pretended he would turn Monk, and went into a Monastery, where his
Sister was a Nun. As soon as the Muscovites heard of it, they came in
multitudes to the Monastery, cast themselves upon the ground, tore their hair,
as being in a desperate condition, entreated him not to be shaven, and that he
would be pleased to take the place of their deceased Prince. He, at first,
would not hearken to them, but at last pretended himself overcome by their
entreaties, and his Sister's intercession, by which means he came to be
courted, to what he had not happily got otherwise, with all the subtlety he could
have used.

The Muscovites are extremely venereous, Their superstition.
yet will not have to do with a Woman, but they must first take off the little
Cross which is hanged about her neck when she is Christened: nor would they do
it in a place where there are any Images of their Saints, till they had covered
them. They go not to Church the day they have dealt with a Woman, till they
have washed themselves, and changed their shirts. Those that are more devout go
not into it at all, but say their prayers at the door. Priests are permitted to
come into the Church the same day, provided they have washed themselves above
and below the navil, but dare not approach the Altar. The women are accounted
more impure than the men, and therefore they ordinarily stay at the Churchdoor
all service time. He who lies with his wife in Lent may not Communicate that
year; and if a Priest commit that offense, he is suspended for a year: but if
one that pretends to Priesthood be so unhappy as to fall into it, he can never
recover himself, but must quit his pretension.

Their remedy against this kind of uncleanness is rather bathing than
repentance, which is the reason they use the former upon all occasions.
Demetrius, who personated the son of the Great Duke John Basilouits, who had
been killed long before at Vglits, never bathed himself, upon which the
Muscovites suspected him to be a stranger. For perceiving he would not make use
of a bath made ready for him eight days after his marriage, they conceived a
horror against him, as a Heathen and profane person, sought diverse other
pretenses, set upon him in the Castle, and killed him the 19. day after his
Wedding, as we shall show hereafter.

The politic Government of Muscovy is Monarchical and despotical. The
Government of Muscovy.
The Great Duke is the hereditary Sovereign of it, and so absolute, that no
Knez or Lord in all his Dominions, but thinks it an honor to assume the
quality of his Majesty's Golop, or slave. No Master has more power over his
slaves, than the Great Duke has over his Subjects, what condition or quality
soever they be of. So that Muscovy may be numbered among those States, whereof
Aristotle speaks, when he says there is a kind of Monarchy among the
Barbarians which comes near Tyranny. For since there is no other difference
between a legitimate Government and Tyranny, than that, in the one, the welfare
of the Subjects is of greatest consideration, in the other, the particular
profit and advantage of the Prince, we must allow, that Muscovy inclines much
to Tyranny. We said before, that the greatest Lords think it not below them to
put their names in the diminutive; nor is it long since that for a small
matter, they were whipped, like slaves, but now their lesser miscarriages are
punished with two or three days imprisonment.

They give their Sovereign the quality of Welikoi Knez, The (...) signification
of the word Czaar.
that is Great Lord, as also that of Czaar, and his Czaarick Majesty. Since the
Muscovites came to understand, that we call him Kayser, who is the most eminent
among the Christian Princes of Europe, and that that word comes from his proper
name; who turned the Popular state of Rome into a Monarchy, they would have it
believed, that their word Czaar, has the same signification and etymology.
Whence it is that they would also imitate the Emperors of Germany in their
great seal, The Czaar's Arms.
which had a Spread-Eagle, but the wings not so large as the Imperial Eagle's,
having on the breast, in an Escutcheon, one on hors-back fighting with a
Dragon, representing the Archangel St. Michael, or rather St. George. The three
Crowns, which are above and between the Eagle's heads, signify Muscovy, and
the two Kingdoms of Tartary, Cassan, and Astrachan. The Tyrant John Basilouits
first used these Arms, as willing to be thought descended from the ancient
Roman Emperors. The Great Dukes Interpreters, and the Germans, who live at
Moscou, call him in their language Kaysar, that is to say, Caesar or Emperor.
But it is certain, the word Czaar signifies King, which may be seen in their
Bible, where the Muscovites, speaking of David and his Successors, Kings of
Judah, and Israel, they call them Czaars. The Great Duke is indeed King in
effect, since other Princes stick not to treat him with the word Majesty; the
title of Great Duke being much below what that great Prince deserves. Nor
accordingly does he take the quality of Great Duke, when he assumes that of of
Welikoi Knez, but that of Grand Seigneur, as well as the Emperor of the Turks,
with whom he may be paralleled, not only in respect of the extent of his
Empire, but also by reason of the absolute power he has over his Subjects.

No people in the World have a greater veneration for their Prince than the
Muscovites, who from their infancy are taught to speak of the Czaar, as of God
himself, not only in their acts and public assemblies, but also in their
entertainments and ordinary discourse. Thence proceed their submissive forms of
speaking, The honor to see the brightness of the eyes of his Czaarick Majesty;
Only God and the Czaar knows it; All they have belong to God and the Czaar. The
Great Duke John Basilouits reduced them to these submissions.

Now to continue them in this lowness of spirit, The Muscovites know not what
liberty is.
and to keep them from seeing that liberty /which other Nations about them
enjoy, the Muscovites are, upon pain of death, prohibited to go out of the
Country, without the Great Duke's express permission. John Helmes, the Great
Duke's Interpreter, who died some three years since, aged 97. years, had got
leave to send his son into Germany, to study Physic, where he afterward grew
famous: but the young Gentleman having spent 10. or 12. years up and down
Germany and England, pleased with the sweetness of the climate and liberty,
would never return into Muscovy. Whence it came, that, when Peter Miklaf, a
Merchant of Novogorod, whom the Great Duke sent into Germany, 3 years since, in
the quality of Poslanick, desired his Majesty would permit him to leave his son
in Germany, neither the Czaar, nor Patriarch, would by any means consent
thereto. But indeed, this despotical Government seems to be most suitable to
their humor and disposition, which is insensible of the advantages of Liberty,
as being unacquainted with it, and so not fit to enjoy a happiness, which they
never heard of.

Yet are we not to attribute to the present time what may be read in the Baron
of H^b^rstein, Paulus Iovius and Guagnin, concerning the violent and tyrannical
Government of the Great Duke: for they writ during the reign of John
Basilouits, whose Scepter was of Iron, and his Government more cruel and
violent than that of any Prince mentioned in History. But the Great Duke that
now is, is a very mild Prince, one that, according to his Father's example,
instead of impoverishing his Subjects, relieves them, and allows sums of money
out of his Exchequer, to set up those whom a bad year, or some other misfortune
has ruined. Nay, he has the goodness to provide for such as are banished into
Siberia for their Crimes, allowing to persons of quality, money; finding
employment for those that are capable of it; and disposing Soldiers into some
place where they have Pensions or ordinary pay during life. So that what is
most insupportable to them, when they are out of favor, is, that they have not
the honor to see the bright eyes of his Czaarick Majesty. For, were it no for
that, this is become so mild a punishment, that many have, in their exile, got
that wealth, which they could not have hoped before.

When we said the state of Muscovy was Monarchical; The Great Dukes absolute
power.
we presuppose that the Prince is a Monarch, and has, alone, all the
prerogatives of Sovereignty. He is not subject to the Laws; he only makes them,
and all the Muscovites obey him, with so great submission, that they are so far
from opposing his will, that they say, the Justice and word of their Prince is
sacred and inviolable.

He only creates Magistrates, and deposes them, ejects them, and orders them to
be punished, with such absolute power, that we may say of the Great Duke, what
the Prophet Daniel says, of the King of Babylon, That, he put to death whom he
would, and saved whom he would. He appoints Governors and Lieutenants for the
Provinces, for the disposal of the ancient Demesne, and Administration of
Justice, who have, joined with them, a Deak, or Secretary: and these take
Cognizance of all matters, give final and absolute judgment in all causes, and
cause their sentences to be put in execution, without any appeal.

And in this the Great Duke follows the advice of the best Politicians, Changes
the Governors of Provinces every three years.
who are so far from allowing a survivancy in Governments, that they would have
a Sovereign, (that it might be in his power to punish the miscarriages
committed by great ones in their Governments, and prevent their making
intrigues to settle themselves in the Provinces) to change the Governors from
three years to three years.

He alone has the power to make War and Peace with other Princes. For though
he takes the advice of his Knez and Bojares, yet does he not always follow it,
but makes them know, that notwithstanding the freedom he gives them to advise
him, he reserves to himself the power of doing what he thinks fit.

He only confers Honors, and rewards the services that are done him with the
qualities of Knez, Bojares, Dukes or Princes; and whereas the Muscovites have
heard, that it is a mark of Sovereignty in Germany, to make Doctors, the Great
Duke meddles with that also, and grants Letters Patents to Physicians and
Surgeons, that are Strangers.

All the Great Duke's Money, Tee Money of Muscovy
who only has the power to make any, is of Silver, of an oval form, and
little. The greatest piece is worth but a penny, and is called a Copec, or
Denaing. For though, in trading, the Muscovites use the words, Altin, Grif, and
Rouble, whereof the first is worth three; the second, ten; the third, a hundred
Copecs, yet is there no Coins of that kind, the words being used only for the
convenience of Commerce, to avoid the multiplication of Copecs. The Poluske is
worth half, the Mustofske, the fourth part of a Copec. This small money, which
is also of Silver, is so troublesome in the telling and handling, that the
Muscovites put handfuls of it into their mouths, for fear of losing it, but so
as it no way hinders their speech. All their Money is marked at the same
corner, having on one side the Arms of Mascovy, of which we have spoken upon
occasion of their Great Seal, which Arms were heretofore peculiar only to the
City of Novogorod, and on the other the Great Duke's name then reigning, and
that of the City where it was coined. There are but four Cities in all Muscovy
where money is coined, Moscou, Novogorod, Tuere, and Plesco^: The Great Duke
farming out the Mint to the Merchants of those places. Rixdollers are current
in Muscovy; but in regard two Dollers outweigh a hundred Copecs, by two drams,
the Muscovites know how to make their advantage of it, and so carry them to the
Mint, as they do also Spanish Reals.

The Rixdollers they call Ia^^mske, from the modern Latin word Ioachimicus,
which name has been given that money, as well by reason of the effigies of St.
Ioachim, heretofore stamped upon it, as of the City of Iaachimstad, in Bohemia,
where it was first coined; in the year 1519. The Great Duke coins no Gold,
unless it be, that to perpetuate the memory of some gread advantage gained
against his enemies, he has some Medals cast, to be afterward presented to
Officers that are Strangers, or to be scattered among the Soldiers of the
victorious Army.

He only levies Taxes and impositions, and regulates them according to his
pleasure, so as that he takes five in the hundred upon all Merchandises, upon
the Frontiers of his Dominions, both coming and going out.

It is his prerogative to send Ambassadors, Muscovian Ambassadors.
to the Emperor, the Kings of Poland, Denmark, Sueden, and other Princes his
Neighbors. These Ministers are either Welikoi Posol, Grand Courriers, or
Poslanicks, Envoys. Heretofore, especially in the time of John Basilouits, they
treated Strangers, even the public Ministers of Princes, with much disrespect;
but now it is otherwise. Ambassadors are entertained with great civility; and
their charges defrayed from the day of their entrance into the Great Duke's
Dominions, to that of their departure thence; they are treated at great feasts,
and have very rich Presents bestowed on them. Whence it comes, that other
Europaean Princes make no difficulty to send their Ambassadors thither, nay
some have their ordinary Residents there, as the Kings of England and Sueden.
All the Presents made by the Great Duke consist in Furrs, and he never sends
any solemn Embassy, but it carries such as are very considerable for the Prince
to whom it is sent. Those which the Great Duke Foedor Iuanouits sent, in the
year 1595. to the Emperor Rodolph II. were very remarkable, A remarkable
Present.
which amounted to above a Million of Livers, or 100000. sterling. viz.
onethousand and three Zimmers (which we have said elsewhere, makes twenty pair,
and in worth about 100. Crowns in Muscovy) of Sables, five hundred and nineteen
Zimmers of ordinary Martins, sixscore black-Fox-skins, three hundred thirty
seven thousand ordinary Fox-skins, three thousand Beavers, a thousand
Wolf-skins, and sixty four Elk's-skins. The Poslanicks make no Present from the
Great Duke, but upon their own account they do, as baits to draw in others, and
if they are not given them, they will have the boldness to ask for them. They
defray foreign Ambassadors, not only as to provisions, but also provide for the
carriage of them, and what ever they bring; and there are upon the Road
appointed stages for the accommodation of their traveling, where the Peasants
are obliged to be ready with a certain number of Horses, and to come upon the
first order sent them. Nor is this done with any grievance to those Peasants;
for besides a salary of 60 Crowns per an. duly paid them, they have land enough
allowed them for their subsistence. They are freed from Taxes, and all other
Charges, and have the allowance of some Altins every journey they make. By this
means we traveled from Novogorod to Moscou, above 120. German leagues, in six
or seven days, and in the Winter in four or five. It Is true, the Houses where
the Ambassadors are lodged, are so poorly furnished, that unless a man will be
content to ly on the ground or upon a bench, he must bring a Bed with him: but
the Muscovites themselves are no better accomodated. Heretofore they shut up
the Ambassadors and their retinue in their lodgings, kept them in as Prisoners,
and set Sentinels at the door to hinder them from coming out; or if they
permitted some of their people to go abroad into the City, they were
accompanied by Strelits, who observed all their actions: but now they are kept
in only till the first Audience, and in the mean they are visited and
entertained by two Pristafs, whose office it is, to see them supplied with all
things necessary. These take occasion to ask the Ambassadors, what the design
of their Embassy is, as also to inform themselves whether they have any
Presents for the Great Duke, and in what they consist, not forgetting to ask
whether they have also any for them. As soon as the Ambassadors have delivered
in their Presents, the Great Duke causes them to be valued by persons that know
their worth. Heretofore, the Ambassadors were entertained, after their first
public Audience, in the Great Duke's Chamber, at his own Table; but some years
since this custom was abolished, and they send, to their Lodgings, the Meat
designed for their treatment. All Ambassadors who bring Presents thither,
receive others for themselves and their retinue; nay they give Presents to
Gentlemen who come thither as Envoys, and to all those that bring but so much
as a Letter from a foreign Prince. To make a fuller discovery of the Political
Government of Muscovy, it will not be much from our purpose, by a short
digression, to give an account of what has passed there within this three
hundred years.

The Great Duke John Basilouits, Son of Basili, came to the Crown very young,
in the year 1540. An Epit^my of the History of Muscovy. Juan Basilouits.
No History of his time, but speak of his Wars, and the un-heard of cruelties
exercised by him on all sorts of persons, through his whole reign. They are so
horrid, that never any other Tyrant did the like; so that Paulus Iovius, a
Bishop, might have forborne giving him that noble quality, of a Good and Devout
Christian; since that it may, without any injury to him, be said, he deserves
not to be numbered even among Men. It Is true, he would go often to Church, say
the Service himself, sing, and be present at Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, and
execute the Functions of Monks and Priests: but he abused both God and Men, and
had not sentiments of humanity, so far was he from having any of piety. He had
seven lawful wives, and by the first, two sons, Iuan and Foedor, that is, John
and Theodore. Being once very angry with the elder, he struck him over the head
with a staff hoop'd with iron at the end, so as that within five days after he
died of it. He had by the last, Demetrius, and died the 28 of March 1584.
feeling at his death some part of those afflictions, which an infinite number
of innocent persons had suffered through his means.

Foedor Iuanouits, now eldest by his Brother's death, was crowned the last of
July, the same year. He was 22 years of age when he succeeded his Father, but
had so little understanding, that, being not fit for affairs, the
administration thereof, with the Regency of the who^e Kingdom was conferred on
Boris Gudenou, High-Steward of Muscovy, and Brother in law to the Great Duke,
Solomon Henning, in his Chronicle of Livonia, says, that this Foedor was so
simple, that he could find himself no greater divertisement than tolling of the
Bells before Service.

On the contrary, Boris Gudenou knew so well how to answer the good opinion
conceived of him, and to insinuate himself into the affection of the people,
that some stuck not to say, that if God should be pleased to dispose otherwise
of the two hereditary Princes, it was not to be doubred, but they would call in
him, who gave so many demonstrations of an excellent conduct. During the
regency, Boris, perceiving that Demetrius was the more likely to stand in his
way, resolved to remove him out of it. This young Prince was but nine years
old, brought up in the City of Vglits, whither a Gentleman belonging to Boris
went, and killed him with his own hands. But instead of receiving the great
reward he expected for his pains, Boris caused him and all the Accomplices to be
killed as soon as they were returned to Moscou. By this execution of the
Murderers, he, for some time, kept undiscovered the true Author of the
murder: but, to prevent the people from conceiving him any way engaged in it,
by giving them a greater cause of affliction, he caused several houses to be
set a-fire, and so consumed a great part of the City; while, on the other side,
he ordered the Castle of Vglits to be demolished, and banished the Inhabitants,
as if they had countenanced the murder, and sheltred the murderers. The
weakness of Foedor Iuanouits, sensible, though of nothing else, yet of his own
weakness, left the management of all affairs, to Boris, who was in effect what
the other had only the name and appearance of, yet did he not think it fit to
be over-forward, but let some years pass on, after which, Foedor fell suddenly
sick, in the year 1597. and died without children, having reigned twelve years.

Boris was presently looked upon. Boris Gudenou.
He, to divert the popular jealousy, was so crafty, as, in appearance, to
refuse the Royal Dignity, and, as we have said before, to fly into a Monastery,
while his Election to the Dukedom was, according to his secret instructions,
pressed by some friends, by whose opportunity he seemed to be overcome, and to
accept the Crown.

In the reign of Boris happened a very remarkable thing, through the imposture
of a Muscovian Monk, named Griska Vtropoja, born at Gereslau, of a Noble house,
but not very rich, one that had been thrust into a Monastery for his debauches,
and lewd life. He was a very handsome person, and had an excellent Wit, which
qualities an old Monk of the same Monastery made his advantage of, to put this
Impostor into the World, and advance him to the Throne. The better to carry on
his design, he made him leave the Monastery, and go into Lithuania, where he
was entertained by a Great Lord, named Adam Wesnewetski, into whose favor he
in a short insinuated himself, by his ingenuity, and the constancy of his
services. One day his Master being angry with him, called him Bledinsin, or Son
of a Whore, and struck him. Griska making his advantage of that disgrace, fell
a weeping, and told his Master, that if he knew who he was, he would not call
him Son of a Whore, nor treat him in that manner. The curiosity of the Polish
Lord was so great, as to press Greska to tell him who he was. The Impostor made
answer, that he was lawful Son to the Great Duke John Basilouits, that Boris
Gudenou would have murdered him, but the misfortune fell upon a Priest's Son
very like him, whom his friends had substituted in his place, while he was
conveyed away. He thereupon shows a golden Cross beset with precious stones,
which he said was hung about his neck at his Baptism. Adding that the fear of
falling into the hands of Boris Gudenou had kept him from discovering himself
till then. Upon which he casts himself at his Lords feet, and entreats him to
take him into his protection, enlivening his relation with so many
circumstances, and his actions with so much show of sincerity, that his Master,
persuaded he spoke nothing but truth, immediately furnished him with Clothes,
Horses, and attendance befitting the greatness of a Prince of that quality. The
noise of it spreads over all the Country, finds credit every where, and the
presumption grows so much the stronger, by reason the Great Duke Boris Gudenou
proffers a great sum of money, to any that should bring in that counterfeit
Demetrius alive or dead. His Master, not thinking him safe at his house, sends
him into Poland, where he is received by the Weywode of Sandomira, who promises
him a sufficient assistance to restore him to his Throne, upon condition he
would tolerate the Roman Catholic Religion in Muscovy, as soon as he had
settled himself in the Government thereof. Demetrius not only accepted of that
condition, but, being secretly instructed, changed his Religion, and promised
to marry the Weywode's Daughter, as soon as he should be established. The hope
of so advantageous an alliance, and the zeal the Weywode had for his Religion,
engaged him to employ his credit and friends, by whose means he got together a
considerable Army, entered Muscovy, and declared a War against the Great Duke.
He took in several Cities, debauched and corrupted most of the Officers
employed by Boris against him, and grew so prosperous, that the grief Boris
conceived thereat struck him so to the heart, that he died of it, Apr. 13.
1605. The Knez and Bojar^s, who were at Moscou, immediately caused his Son
Foedor Borissouits to be crowned, Foedor Borissouits.
though very young: but reflecting on the continual success of Demetriu's Arms,
their minds changed, and deriving, from his victories, an ill presage against
the new Great Duke, they concluded, that he must be the true Demetrius, the
lawful Son of John Basilouits, and that they did ill to take up arms against
their natural Sovereign. It was no hard matter to insinuate this into the
people, who presently cried, Live Demetrius, true Heir of the Kingdom, and may
his Enemies perish. Whereupon they ran to the Castle, seized upon the young
Great Duke, imprisoned him, ransacked, misused, and forced away all the kindred
and friends of Boris Gudenou, and at the same time sent to entreat Demetrius to
come as soon as he pleased, and take possession of the Kingdom of his
Ancestors. They also begged his pardon for what they had done through
ignorance, upon the instigation of Boris, assured him of their affection and
obedience, and as a pledge of their fidelity, they profer'd to put into his
hands the deceased Duke's Son, his Mother, and all his Family, to be disposed
of as he should think it. Upon these overtures Demetrius sent a Deak, or
Secretary named Iuan Bogdanou, with order to strangle the Mother and Son, and
to give out that they were poisoned. Which was accordingly executed the 10. of
June 1605. in the second month of the reign of Foedor Borissouits.

The 16. of the same month, A counterfeit Demetrius.
Demetrius came to Moscou, with his Army, which strangely increased as he came
along. The whole City went out to meet him, and made him Presents. He was
Crowned the 21. of July, with extrtordinary Ceremonies. And that there might be
no question made of the lawfulness of his birth, he sent for the Mother of the
true Demetrius, whom Boris Gudenou had shut up in a Monastery, at a great
distance from Moscou. He went to meet her with a Noble retinue of Courtiers,
lodged her in the Castle, where he caused her to be treated with all
magnificence, visiting her every day, and doing her all the honor a Mother
could expect from a Son. The good Lady knew well enough, that Demetrius, her
Son, had been killed, but she cunningly dissembled it, as well out of the
resentment she had against the memory of Boris Gudenou, and the fear she was in
to be ill-treated by this counterfeit Demetrius, as for that she was not a
little pleased to see her self so much honored, and enjoy the sweetness of a
happy life, after the miseries and afflictions she had endured in the
Monastery, since her Son's death.

But when the Muscovites found his manner of life different from that of the
Great Dukes his predecessors, A conspiracy against the counterfeit Demetrius,
that he was resolved to marry a Roman Catholic, the Weywode of Sandomiria's
daughter, and ransacked the Treasuries of the Kingdom to furnish her according
to the advancement she expected, they began to mistrust him, and to perceive
they had been mistaken. One of the principal Knez, named Vasili Zuski, was the
first that offered to speak of it to some other Lords, as well Ecclesiastical
as Secular, and to remonstrate to them the danger whereto both the State and
Religion were exposed, by the Alliance which that Counterfeit intended to make
with a strange woman, and of a contrary Religion; adding, that, of necessity,
he was an Impostor, and a lewd person. Upon this it was resolved he should be
dispatched out of the way: but the Conspiracy being discovered, and Zuski
taken, Demetrius got him sentenced to death, but sent him a pardon upon the
point of execution, hoping by that mildness, to gain the affection of the
Muscovites. Accordingly all was quiet till the day of his marriage, which was
the 8. of May, 1606. The Bride being arrived, with a great number of Poles,
Armed, and in a capacity to become Masters of the City, the Muscovites began to
open their eyes. Zuski got to his own house, several Knez and Bojares, proposed
to their consideration the present State of Affairs, the unavoidable ruin of
both State and Religion, and, profer'd, for the preservation thereof, once more
to expose his person and life. They gave him thanks, and promised to assist him
with their Persons and Estates, when there should be an opportunity to put
their design in execution. They had a fair one the last day of the Nuptial
solemnity, which was the ninth after the Wedding, and the 17. of May. The Great
Duke and his Company being got drunk and asleep, the Muscovites caused all the
Bells in the City to be rung, as they are wont in case of fire, to give an
Alarm, whereupon they immediately put themselves into Arms, and set upon the
Castle, where, having defeated the Polish Guards, and forced the Gates, they
entered the Great Dukes Chamber, who thought to avoid present death by leaping
out at a window into the Court, in hope to save himself among the Guards, which
were still there in Arms: but he was taken, and cruelly used. The Castle was
ransacked. Zuski, addressing himself to the pretended Mother of Demetrius,
obliged her to swear by the Cross, whether Demetrius was her Son, or no, to
which having answered, that he was not, and that she never had but one Son, who
had been unfortunately murdered, they shot the Counterfeit Demetrius in the
head with a Pistol. Demetrius killed.
They imprisoned the pretended Great Duchess, with her Father and Brother, as
also the Polish Ambassador. The Ladies and Gentlewomen were abused and
deflour'd, and above 1700. men killed, among whom were many Jewellers,
Merchants, who had abundance of Jewels about them. Demetrius's body was
stripped, and dragged to the place before the Castle, where it lay exposed for
three whole days. After which they buried it, but it was immediately taken up
again, to be burnt, and reduced to ashes.

This conspiracy thus succeeding, the Muscovites chose into the place of
Demetrius, Knez Basilouits Zuski, Zuski made Great Duke. A second counterfeit
Demetrius.
the Ringleader of the Enterprise, who was Crowned June 1. 1606. But he was no
sooner got into the Throne, ere another Impostor disputed the possession of it.
His name was Knez Gregori Schacopski, who at the pillaging of the Castle,
having found the Seals of the Kingdom, fell into a League with two Polauders,
and made a shift to go into Poland. He made use of the same invention as his
Predecessor, and took the name of Demetrius, giving out, where he came, that he
had escaped the Massacre, in the night time, that they had killed another in
his stead, and that he was going into Poland to raise another Army, to punish
the Muscovites for their infidelity and ingratitude.

About the same time started up another Demetrius, A third Impostor.
in the City of Moscou. He was Clerk to one of the Secretaries of State, got
into the field, made use of the same imposture as the two others, and found
abetters, by whose assistance he became Master of many great Cities. This
occasioned many other disorders, which the Polanders countenanced out of their
resentment of the affront they had received from the Muscovites. The events of
the War, occasioned thereby, proved so fatal and unhappy, that the Muscovites
quarreled at Zuski, and looked upon him as the sole cause of all their
misfortunes. They said, his Government was unjust, because unfortunate, and
that there must needs be something fatal in his person, when victory seemed to
shun him, to side with his Enemies. Three Muscovian Lords, Zacchary Lippanow,
Michael Molsaneck, and Iuan Kesefski, were the first that amused the people
with these reports, and, perceiving they were well received among them,
proceeded in their design, deprived Zuski of his Dignity, shut him up in a
Monastery, and had him shaved.

Upon this, the Knez and Bojares, to avoid the jealousy, which the Election
might raise among themselves, resolved to take in a foreign Prince. The
Polanders still countenanced the second Demetrius, so far as that they forced
the former's Widow to acknowledge him for her husband, and expected
satisfaction for the affront they had received at Moscou, at the marriage of
Demetrius, so that the Muscovites willing to satisfy the Polanders, and not
finding any Prince near them so well qualified as Vladislaus, Uladislaus Prince
of Poland chosen Czaar of Muscovy.
eldest son to Sigismond King of Poland, sent to the King, his father, to
desire, that he might accept of the Crown of Muscovy. The King consented; but
the Treaty agreed upon, among other Clauses, had this, that John Basilouits
Zuski should be taken out of the Monastery, and, with some other Lords of his
Kindred, should be put into the hands of the King of Poland, who kept them, a
long time, Prisoners at Smolensko, where Zuski, at last, died, and his body was
buried near the Highway, between Thorn and Warsaw. Stanilaus Solkouski was, in
the mean time, advanced with his Army to the very Gates of Moscou, with order
to revenge the death of Demetrius, and the Polanders, who were Massacred with
him. But news coming of the conclusion of the Treaty, they laid down their
Arms, and Stanislaus had order, in the Prince's name, to receive homage from
the Muscovites, and to stay at Moscou, till the Prince were come thither in
person. The Muscovites were content, and, having taken the Oath of Allegiance,
they reciprocally administered it to him, and permitted him, with a thousand
Poles, to enter the Castle, and to keep a Garrison there. The rest of the Army
stayed without the City, not doing any thing at which the Muscovites might
conceive any jealousy. On the contrary, there was much kindness shown on both
sides, till that the Poles, having crept by degeees into the City, to the
number of above six thousand, took up the Avenues of the Castle for their
quarters, and began to incommodate the Citizens, and to become insupportable,
by reason of their insolences, and the violences they daily committed upon
Women and Maids, The Muscovites discontented against the Polanders.
nay, upon the Muscovian Saints, at which they shot off their Pistols. So that
the Muscovites not able to endure them any longer, and impatient for their
Great Duke, met together on the 24. of January 1611. in the place before the
Castle, where they made a noise, and complained of the outrages which they
daily received from the Polanders, saying, it was impossible for them to
maintain so great a number of Soldiers, that their Trade was destroyed, that
they were exhausted to the least drop of their blood, that the new Great Duke
came not, which made them apprehend, there was something ominous in it; that
they could live no longer at that rate, and that they should be forced to those
remedies, which nature had furnished them with, for their safety, if some other
course were not taken.

The Polish General did all he could to appease them, An insurrection at Moscou.
causing to be severely punished some of his Soldiers who most deserved it; but
the Muscovites thought not that enough. The Polanders, on their side* fearing a
general insurrection, doubled their Guards, possessed themselves of the
Principal streets, and prohibited the Muscovites to assemble, and bear Arms.
This incensed them so, as that they all rose, and met together in several
places of the City, purposely to oblige the Polanders to divide their forces.
The Polanders thought it not enough to stand only upon the defensive, but set
the City on fire in three or four several places, thereby obliging the
Muscovites to run to the relief of their Wives and Children, and making their
advantage of that calamity, they set upon the Muscovites where ever they met
them, and made so horrid a slaughter of them, that it is said, the sword and
the fire destroyed, in those two days, above 200000. persons, and all the
houses in the City, excepting the Castle, the Churches, and some few
stone-buildings. The Great Duke's Treasury was ransacked, as also the Churches
and Monasteries, out of which the Polanders got, and sent into Poland, an
incredible quantity of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, among which, the
Muscovites do, to this day, regret the loss of a certain Vnicorn's horn,
enriched with Diamonds. They say, the Soldiery got such a booty, that some of
them charged their Pistols with great round Pearls. Fifteen days after this
disorder came Zachary Listpenow with a good Army, and besig'd the Polanders in
the Castle, killed many of them in several assaults, and, at last, forced them
to a composition, and to depart the Kingdom.

The Muscovites, Michael Federouits chosen Great Duke.
having weathered out all these calamities, proceeded to the Election of a new
Great Duke, and chose Michael Foederouits, the son of Foedor Nikitis, a
Kinsman, but far removed, of Iuan Basilouits. This man had forsaken his wife,
for God's sake, as they call it, and became a Religious man, whereupon he was
made Patriarch, and, in that dignity, changed the name of Foedor, into that of
Philaretes. The Son, who was of a very good nature, and much inclined to
Devotion, has always expressed a great respect for his Father, taking his
advice in affairs of greatest importance, and giving him the honor of
admittance to all public Audiences and Ceremonies, at which he always gave
him precedence. He died in the year 1633. some few days before our first
Embassy.

The first thing this new Great Duke did, after his establishment, was, to make
a Peace with his Neighbor Princes, and to abolish the memory of his
Predecessors Cruelties, by so mild a Government, that it is granted, Muscovy
has not had, these many ages, a Prince deserving so great commendations from
his Subjects. He died July 12. 1645. in the 49th* year of his age, and the 33.
of his reign. The Great Duchess, his Wife, died eight days after him, and his
son, Knez Alexei Michalouits succeeded him.

The reign of Michael Foederouits was very quiet. But as, in the times of Boris
Gudenou, and John Basilouits Zuski, there were Counterfeit Demetrius's, so, in
Michael's time, there started up an Impostor, who had the boldness, to assume
the name and and quality of Basili Iouanouits Zuski, A counterfeit Zuski* Son
of a Linnen-Draper.
Son to the Great Duke Iuan Basilouits Zuski. His name was Timoska Ankudina,
born in the City of Vologda, in the Province of the same name, and son to a
Linen. Draper, named Demko, or Dementi Ankudina. The Father having observed
somewhat of more than ordinary wit in him, had brought him up to writing and
reading, which having attained, he was looked upon as a very excellent person
among those who have no further acquaintance with Learning. His first preferment
The excellency of his voice, and his skill in singing Hymns at Church,
recommended him to the Archbishop of the place, who took him into his service,
wherein Ankudina behaved himself so well, that the Archbishop having a
kindness for him, married him to a Grandchild of his. This Alliance, which
might have been very advantageous to him, proved the first occasion of his
ruin: for he presently began, in his Letters, to assume the quality of
Son-in-law to the Weywode of Vologda, and Vellicopermia. Having, after the
Archbishops death, squandered away his Wife's fortune, he came, with his
Family, to Moscou, where, upon the recommendation of a friend of the
Archbishop's, he found an employment in the Novazetvert, that is, the Office
where such as keep common Tip-ling-houses are obliged to take the Wine,
Strong-water, and Hydromel, which they sell by retail, and where they give an
account of what they have spent. He was made Receiver there, but became so
unfaithful, that, the first Account he made he could not bring in what was due
to the Prince, by 200. Crowns: and in regard they expect a great exactness upon
such an account in Muscovy, he put his invention upon the rack to make up the
said sum. Cheats his fellow Officer.
To that end, he went to one of his fellow Officers, named Basili Gregorowits
Spilki, who had Christened a Child of his, and done him several kindnesses,
when occasion required, and told him, that one of the chiefest Merchant^ of
Vologda, one to whom he was very much obliged, being come to the City, he had
invited him to Dinner, and would be glad to let him see his Wife; entreating
him to lend him his Wife's Pearls and Rings, that he might present her in a
condition suitable to his employment. The other did it without any difficulty,
nay, without any thing to show from the other, of his having received them,
though they were worth above 1000. Crowns. But Timoska, instead of pawning the
Jewels to make up his accounts, sold them, made use of the money, and
confidently averred that his friend had not lent him any. Spilki clapped him up
in prison, but, having no evidence to convict him, he could not hinder his
being set at liberty, Timoska had some difference with his Wife, who often
reproached him with his perfidiousness, and other vices, especially his Sodomy:
so that fearing, on the one side, to be called to account for what he was in
arrear to the Prince, and, on the other, that his Wife might happly be the
first that should accuse him, bethought him one day to send his son to a friend
of his, Burns his wife, and retreats into Poland.
to shut up his Wi^e in a stove, and to set the house a-fire, in which his Wife
was burnt. Having done thus, he went into Poland, but so secretly, that it was
thought at Moscou, the same fire had consumed him, with the rest of his family.

Timoska went away, about the latter end of the year 1643. but hearing, in
1645. that the Greak Duke was to send an Ambassador to the King of Poland, and
that his being at the Court of Warsaw was known in Muscovy, Goes to Chmielniski.
he went in the year 1646 to Chmielniski, General of the Cosaques, and begged
his protection, against the persecutions which he suffered, upon no other
account than this, that the Great Duke knew him to be a near kinsman to the
Prince Iuan Basilouits Zuski. He had wit enough to carry on the Imposture, and
had got such an influence over Chmielniski, that he began to grow considerable,
when a Muscovian Poslanik, named Jacob Koslou, who had been sent to this
Cosaque General, knew him, and advised him to return to Moscou, and endeavor,
to make up the sum which was due from him to the Great Duke, which was not so
great, but, that having paid it, the intercession of his friends might easily
get his pardon: for it was not yet known, that he pretended to be son to the
Great Duke John Basilouits Zuski. But this course he thought not safe, and,
fearing he might be secured, he went, in the year 1648. Turns Turk
to Constantinople, where he abjured the Christian Religion, and was
circumcised. He stayed not long there, but, fearing to be punished for some
Crimes he had committed there also, he went into Italy, and so to Rome, Becomes
a Roman Catholic. Goes into Sueden.
where he became a Roman Catholic. Thence he went in the year 1650. to Vienna,
and thence into Transylvania, to Prince Ragotskie, who gave him Letters of
recommendation to Queen Christina, of Sueden. This Princes received him kindly,
and giving credit to what he related, allowed him an honorable subsistence.
The Muscovian Merchants, who were then at Stockholm, soon acquainted the Great
Duke with this man's Imposture, who stuck not to give out every where, that he
was son to John Basilouits Zuski. The Great Duke immediately sent thither the
aforesaid Koslou, who had seen him with Chmielniski, to desire the Queen to
deliver up that man to him: but Timoska, who knew that enquiry would be made
for him, was already got away. His man, whose name was Kostka, or Constantine,
whom some business had detained after his Master at Stockholm, was taken, and
sent, well chained, to Muscovy, where they found Timoska's Mother and Kindred,
whereof some were put to the Rack and executed. Timoska was taken at Revel, in
Livonia, by order from the Queen of Sueden; but he made a shift to get out of
prison, and went, by the way of Holland, To Brussels.
to Brussels, where he saw the Archduke Leopold. Thence he went to Wittenberg,
and to Leipsig, where he made profession of the Lutheran Religion, and Writ,
himself, his Confession of Faith in Latin. Embraces the Lutheran religion
Thence he went to Noustadt, in the Duchy of Holstein, where Peter Miklaf, who
had brought Letters from the Great Duke to the Duke of Holstein, got him
secured. He was carried thence to Gottorp, where he was well guarded, till the
Great Duke had sent express order for the bringing of his person to Muscovy.
The Letters which the Czaar Writ upon that occasion are such as may be well
inserted in this place, that we may thereby discover somewhat of the elegance
of the Muscovian manner of writing.

In the name of Almighty God, The Great Duke's Letters to the Duke of Holstein
who does all in all, and protects all Nations in good consolations, from Him,
who, by the Grace, Providence, Power, Virtue, Operation, and good pleasure of
God, to be magnified in the blessed Trinity, and glorious in all Eternity, has
been chosen, and holds the Scepter of the true Christian Faith, to govern and
preserve, with Gods assistance, in peace and quiet, without troubles, the Great
Empire of the Russians, with all the Provinces thereunto annexed, by Conquest
or otherwise. We the Grand Seigneur, Czaar, and Great Duke, Alexei
Michaelouits, Conservator of all the Russes, etc. To the most mighty Frederick,
Hereditary Prince of Norway, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormarie and
Ditmarse, Count of Oldenbourg, and Delmenhost, Health. In the year 1644. or,
according to the Calculation of Muscovy, in the year 7152. the mentioned
Timoska Ankudina, and Kostka Konichou, having robbed our Treasure, to avoid the
death they had deserved, departed the Countries under our Jurisdiction, to go
to Constantinople, where they professed the Turkish Religion. There they did so
great mischief in a short time, that they were forced to fly, and to retreat
into Poland and Lithuania, where they endeavored to sow divisions between the
neighboring Princes. To that end they went to Theodat Chmielniski, General of
the Cosaques, whom the King John Casimir of Poland, our Brother, commanded to
put those Robbers into the hands of M. Germolitzowi, Gentleman of his Chamber,
who had order to send them to Muscovy, under the conduct of M. Peter
Protesiowi, a Gentleman of our retinue, as the said Chmielniski had made known
to our Czaarick Majesty. But these Robbers and Traitors got to Rome, where they
embraced the Latin Religion. Afterward they passed through several other
Provinces of Europe, where they changed their names, so as Timoska, sometimes,
assumed that of Zuski, and sometimes that of Sinensis, while Kostka went under
the name of his Servant, till such time as both having been known at Stockholm,
by some of our Merchants of Novogorod, and other places, and thereupon secured,
one at Ruel, the other at Narva, the Governors of those two places made some
difficulty to deliver them up to us, without express order from the Great Queen
of Sueden. But when we had desired the said Great Queen of Sueden, to put those
Traitors into the hands of the Gentleman whom we had sent expressly for that
purpose, it happened that at his coming to Revel, with the Orders of the said
Great Queen, the Governor had already suffered one of them to make his escape,
so that he could bring along with him but only the said Kostka. We have
understood since, that the other has been taken and imprisoned in the Country
of Holstein, wherefore we have thought fit to send to your Highness our
Pos^anick, Basili Spilki, accompanied by some of our Subjects, with Letters
from our Czaarick Majesty, to entreat you, that you will be pleased to deliver
up unto them, and to send to us those Traitors.

The Letters were dated the last of October, 1652. after which the Great Duke
sent another of the 5 of January, 1653. to the same effect, save that, at the
end of the Letter, were added the lines following. Since that time, there came
to us, in the month of December last, Peter Micklaf, of Novogorod, who has
informed us, how that, in pursuance of your Orders, the said Traitor had been
secured in your Ducal City of Neustat, and that upon the Remonstrance made to
you by the said Micklaf, you had translated him to Gottorp, to be there kept
under a good and sure guard. Wherefore we send back again unto you the said
Micklaf, with Letters from our Czaarick Majesty, to entreat you, to deliver up
the said Traitor to him and Basili Spilki, that he may have no further
opportunity to escape, and raise new troubles in the World. In acknowledgement
whereof our Czaarick Majesty shall serve your Highness, in such occasions as
shall present themselves. This Robber and Traitor to our Czaarick Majesty,
named Timoska, is of very mean Birth, the son of a Linnen-Draper that dealt
only in coarse clothes, named Demki Ankudina, of the Suburbs of Vologda, His
Mother is called Salmaniska, and his Son, who is yet living, Tereska. Timoska
was an under Officer in the Nova Zetvert, and he has robbed our Treasury, has
killed his Wife, and, with his own house, has burnt several other houses that
were near his, whereby many of our Subjects have been ruined. Wherefore knowing
that he could not avoid death otherwise than by flight, he got away in the
manner we have mentioned. Given at our Czaarick residence of Moscou, the third
of January, in the year of the Worlds Creation, 7161. and of the birth of our
Savior, 1653. After this, he also writ a third Letter, of the 17 of October
the same year, upon which the Prisoner was delivered up to those, whom the
Great Duke had appointed to receive him.

One of these Deputies was the same Spilki whom Timoska had cheated of his
Wife's collar and Pearls. To be Gossips is a great alliance in Muscovy, besides
they had been fellow-Officers in the same Employment, wherefore Spilki desired,
his Highness would give him leave to see the Prisoner, and to speak to him in
the presence of some Officers of the Court. But Timoska behaved himself as if
he knew him not, and would not speak the Muscovian, but the Polish language,
purposely to gravel the other, who could not speak it well. Spilki asked him,
whether his name were not Timoska Ankudina, and whether he had not robbed the
Great Duke's Treasury, and committed several other enormous crimes? Timoska
made him answer, that it might be Timoska Aukudina had robbed the Great Duke's
Treasury, or converted his money to his own use, but that he was not concerned
in it. That his name was Johannes Sinensis, and in the Polish language Zuiski,
cunningly avoiding to hint at what he had said before, to wit, that he was Son
to the Great Duke, John Basilouits Zuski. But when Spilki asked him, whether he
remembered not his life past; the other derided him, gave him injurious
language, and added, that he could not acknowledge him in the quality of a
Poslanick, since he was but a poor Shopkeeper, and seller of Pins, alluding to
his name, Spilki, which signifies, a Pin-maker. Timoska would needs, one day,
entreat his Highness of Holstein to appoint his Chancellor, and some others of
his Council, to receive from his own mouth the state of his affairs. They asked
him what house and family he was of, and whether he were of kin to the Great
Duke, why the Great Duke persecuted him, and wherein he could any way prejudice
him? He answered, that it was known; his name was Johannes Sinensis, and in the
Polish language, Zuski; that, at his Baptism, he had been named Timotheus; that
he was the Son of Basili Domitian Suiski; and that he had been so surnamed,
from a City in Muscovy called Suia: That he was originally a Muscovite, but
born and brought up in Poland, in the Province of Novogarka Severskhio, and
that he was hereditary Lord of Hukragina Severska, upon the Frontiers of
Muscovy: That the Great Duke was not his Kinsman, in as much as the Great
Duke's Father had been but a Gentleman, whereas his was a Prince born, and that
was the reason why the Great Duke persecuted him. That the Cham of Tartary, who
was then engaged in a War against the King of Poland, would have employed him
in a War against the Great Duke, but he had a greater affection for the Country
of his Predecessors, than to trouble its quiet: That it was in his power to
send above a 100000 men into Muscovy, but that God, of his goodness, had
diverted his thoughts from doing any such thing. He had written somewhat to
that purpose to the Patriarch. For the Poslanick, who came from Sueden, having
entered into a Familiarity with him, and advised him to write to the Patriarch,
as the most likely person to procure his pardon, he resolved to do it, and
delivered his Letter to the Poslanick, in which he writ to the Patriarch, that
he was indeed a Muscovite, and, at his Baptism, had been named Timothy, whereof
the word Timoska is the diminutive. That he had had a desire to enter Muscovy
with an Army of 300000 men, but that he had been diverted from that pernicious
design by the Guardian Angel of Muscovy. That thereupon he came to himself, and
was resolved to return into his Country, whereas, had he been minded to
continue his wicked life, it had been easy for him to get out of the prison at
Neustat, but that it was his intention to return into Muscovy voluntarily, with
those whom the Great Duke had appointed to conduct him. The Poslanick, who
doubted not, but that, upon this Letter, he would have made such a confession,
as night have convinced him, opened, and read it in his presence. But he had to
do with a man, whom so small a matter would not make to betray himself. He
would persuade them that the Poslanick was a cheat, and that the Letter was
counterfeited, that he had never writ it, and to make good what he said, he
writ another Letter of a Style and Character so far different from that of the
former, that the Poslanick, mad to see himself so abused, flung it in his face.
Timoska took it up, and tore it to pieces.

But the distraction of his conscience was but too apparent in the
inconsistency of his depositions, Timoska varies in his depositions.
and the declarations he had made, both by word of mouth and writing. For, one
while, he said, he was Son to the Great Duke, Basili Iuanouits Zuski; and
another, he said his Fathers name was Basile Domitian, though it was known,
that, in that time, there were but three Lords of the House of Zuski, and not
any of them was of that name. Sometimes he would be thought a Polander, and
would confidently maintain that he could make it as clear as the Sun at Noon,
that he was no Muscovite, and that there was not any thing in his person,
language, or manner of life which might persuade the World that he was. Indeed
his beard was quite after another fashion than the Muscovitet ordinarily wear
theirs. He had the Latin, Italian, German and Turkish Languages, so well, as to
be understood in any of them, and he had such an art in counterfeiting all
sorts of hands, that it was hard to convince him by that which he writ in his
first employment. Nay he would have had us suspect as counterfeited, the
Letters sent by the Great Duke to our Prince, because he had not signed them,
and might have surpised us with that allegation, had we not learnt in Muscovy,
that the Great Duke never signs expeditions, but leaves that to be done by the
Secretaries of State.

Timoska perceiving these evasions would not serve his turn, Would procure his
own death.
^ell into despair, and would have killed himself. For, being upon his way to
Travemunde, to be shipped away, not far from Neustat^, he cast himself down
headlong from the Wagon, and shuffled himself under the Wheels, hoping they
would pass over his Body; but the ground being soft and sandy, his fall did him
no hurt, and the Wagon was immediately staid; so that they had the time to
return him to his place, where they fastened him beyond all fear of showing
such another trick. He seemed to be in a very good humor all the way, yet
sought all the means he could imagine, to compass his own death; but he was so
narrowly watched, that at last being out of all hope to effect it, the joy he
had expressed before was much abated. Coming to Novogorod, he fell into so deep
a melancholy, that he was become absolutely disconsolate. Which yet hindered not
but that amidst the greatest tortures he expressed an admirable constancy, at
least if I may so call the resolute obstinacy, in which he persisted, as to his
first depositions; whether it were his design thereby to confirm, in strangers,
the opinion he would have imprinted in them, or that he considered with
himself, that his confession would not prevent his death, nor alleviate his
misfortune. Is tortured
As soon as he came to Moscou, he was put to the torture, in the presence of
diverse persons of quality; but he impudently told them, that, of all the
Bojares, he would not vouchsafe to speak to any, but Knez Nikita Iuanouits
Romanow; and him only, as knowing him by fame, by reason of his goodness and
courage he should be glad to have some discourse withal. While two Bojares
were gone to find out Nikita, Timoska desired somewhat to drink. They presented
to him some Quas, in a wooden dish, but he would have Hydromel, and that it
should be brought him in a silver Cup; but after they had so far complied with
his humor, he only put it to his lips, and would not drink. Seeing Nikita, and
the other two Bojares come in, he gave them a civil salute: but still affirmed,
that he was Son to Basili Iuanouits Zuski, though it were proved against him,
that he was the Son of Dementi Aukudina, a Linen Draper of Vologda, and that
the Great Duke Basili had had no children, but only two Brothers, Knez Demetri
Iuanouits, and Iuan Iuanouits Zuski, who both died without issue male. For of
these three Brothers, who were sent Prisoners into Poland, at the election of
Vladislaus, in the year 1610. with the rest of the Great Dukes kindred, the two
elder died there, and the third was released, and sent back into Muscovy, where
he died some few years before the execution of Timoska. It Is true, there was
another Lord of the same Family, but he had left only one Son, named Michael
Basilouits Zuski Scapin, who died without issue, when the Suedes took the City
of Novogorod, in the year 1616.

While he endured the torture, they brought his Mother to him, who exhorted him
to acknowledge his crime. He seemed to be moved at her presence, but persisted
in affirming he knew her not, no more than he did Iuan Pescou, with whom he had
left his Son, when he left Muscovy. This man represented to him how much he was
to blame, for behaving himself so in the condition he was in, and told him,
that he must at last pull off the vizard, he had made use of for so many years,
to cheat the World, and disturb his Country, conjuring him to own his Son, and
rely no longer on elusions and impostures, which would only aggravate his
misery, and bring a greater weight of God's vengeance upon him. He was so moved
hereat, that he would not speak one word afterward, though there were diverse
persons brought before him, who had known him while he was employed at the
Tavern-Office. He was searched and found to be Circumcised. The next day they
put him again to the torture, but he would not speak at all: so that he was
immediately carried to the great Marketplace, where his sentence was
pronounced, And Executed*
and presently put in execution. They cut off, with an Ax, first, his right
arm, below the elbow, then the left leg, below the knee, and afterward the
left arm and right leg, and last of all the head, The members were set up on
stakes, and the trunk left upon the ground: but the Dogs devoured it in the
night, and the next morning the Executioner's Servants dragged the members to
the place where all the City dirt is thrown.

His man, Kostka was pardoned, because he had confessed the truth; but, in
regard he had been unfaithful toward his Prince, he was sentenced to lose
three fingers of his right hand. The Patriarch got that punishment to be
moderated, upon this account, that the Religion of the Muscovites obliging them
to make the sign of the Cross with the right hand, which ought not to be
maimed, he received his punishment in the left, and was sent into Siberia,
where provision was made for his subsistence during life. About this time there
came a Polish Envoy to Moscou They gave him audience the same day that Timoska
was put to death, and brought him through the Marketplace just at the
execution, that he might be an eye witness of it, and give an account, in
Poland, of the Tragedy of that Impostor, who had been there looked upon as son
to the Great Duke, Basili Iuanouits Zuski.

We said before, that the Great Duke Michael Federouits died Iul. 12. 1645. The
very next day, the Knez and Bojares would needs crown his Son, Alexei
Michaelouits, who was not full sixteen years of age. He it is that now reigns,
and makes himself known by the War he made upon Poland, as also by that which
he daily threatens against Sueden. He was born, March 17. 1630. Knez Boris
Iuanouits Morosou, fearing his enemies might take any advantage of the Prince's
tender years, so hastened his Coronation, that they could not send for all
those who are obliged to be present thereat, nor perform it with the requisite
Ceremonies: which are as follows.

They summon to Moscou, The Ceremonies of the Czaar's Coronation,
not only all the Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Knez, and Bojares, but
also the Principal Merchants, of all the Cities in the Kingdom. The day
appointed for the Coronation, the Patriarch, attended by the Metropolitans,
conduct the new Great Duke to the Church within the Castle, where a Scaffold is
erected three steps high, covered with rich Persian Tapistry, on which are set
three Brocado Chairs, at an equal distance one from the other. One is for the
Great Duke, another for the Patriarch, and upon the third are set the Ducal Cap
and Robe. The Cap is embroidered with Pearls and Diamonds, having upon the
Crown a Tassel, on which hangs a little Crown, set as thick as may be with
Diamonds: and the Robe is of a rich Brocado, lined with the best kind of
Sables. They say the Great Duke Demetri Monomach found it, at the taking of
Kaffa, in Tartarie, and that he immediately designed it for the Coronation of
the Princes his Successors.

As soon as the Czaar is come within the Church, the Clergy begin to sing their
Hymn^, which ended, the Patriarch prays to God, to St. Nicholas, and the other
Saints, desiring their presence at that day's Solemnity. The prayer ended, the
Chief Counselor of State, taking the Great Duke by the hand, presents him to
the Patriarch, and says to him; Since the Knez and Bojares acknowledge the
Prince here present to be the next of Kin to the late Great Duke, and lawful
Heir to the Crown, they desire, that, as such, you immediately Crown him.
Whereupon the Patriarch leads the Prince up to the Scaffold, and having seated
him in one of the three Chairs, he puts to his forehead, a little Cross of
Diamonds, and blesses him. Then one of the Metropolitans reads the following
Prayer. O Lord our God, King of Kings, who did choose thy servant David, by
the Prophet Samuel, and who did cause him to be anointed King over thy people
Israel, hearken to our prayers, which, though unworthy, we offer up unto thee.
Look down, from the highest Heavens, upon this thy faithful servant, who is
here seated upon this Chair, and whom thou have exalted to be King over thy
people, whom thou have redeemed by the blood of thy Son. Anoint him with the
Oil of gladness; protect him by thy power; set upon his head a precious Diadem;
grant him a long and happy life; put into his hand a Royal Scepter, and make
him sit upon the Throne of Justice. Make subject to him all barbarous
Languages; Let his heart and his understanding always continue in thy fear. In
all the course of his life, let him be constantly obedient to thy Commandment.
Suffer not any Heresy, or Schism to come near his Person or Government. Teach
him to maintain and observe whatsoever the holy Greek Church commands and
ordains. Judge thy people in Justice, and be merciful to the poor; that, when
they leave this Valley of tears, they may be received into eternal joys. Which
Prayer the Patriarch concludes with these words, For thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory; God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost be with
us, and remain with us.

The Prayer ended, the Patriarch commands two Metropolitans to take the Cap and
Robe, and having caused some of the Bojares to come upon the Scaffold, he
commands them to put them on the Great Duke, whom he blesses a second time, by
touching his forehead with the little Cross of Diamonds. Then he causes to be
given to them the Ducal Cap, to be set upon his head, while he says, In the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and then blesses him the third
time. That done, the Patriarch causes all the Prelates to approach, who give
the Benediction to the Great Duke, but it is only with their hands. That
Ceremony ended, the Great Duke and the Patriarch sit down, but they immediately
rise again, to give order for the singing of the Letany, whereof every verse
ends with Gospodi pomiluy, Lord, have mercy upon us, putting in ever and anon
the great Duke's name. After the Letany they sit down again, and one of the
Metropolitans comes up to the Altar, and says singing, God preserve our Czaar
and Great Duke of all the Russes, whom God has out of his love bestowed on us,
in good health, and grant him a long and a happy life. All that are present, as
well Ecclesiastics as Laics repeat the same words, which make the Church echo
again with the greatness of their joy. Then the Bojares come up to the Great
Duke, smite their foreheads in his presence, and kiss his hand. That done, the
Patriarch comes up alone before the Great Duke, and tells him; That, since,
through the Providence of God, all the Estates of the Kingdom, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, have established and Crowned him Great Duke over
all the Russes, and have entrusted him with a Government and Conduct of so
great importance, he ought to apply all his thoughts to love God, keep his
Commandments, administer Justice, and protect, and maintain the true Greek
Religion. That done, the Patriarch gives him the Benediction, and the whole
Assembly goes out of that Church, into that of St. Michael the Archangel,
which is opposite to the other, where they sing over the same Letanies; which
is done afterward in that also of St. Nicholas, where they conclude the
Ceremonies, and Dine in the Great Hall of the Duke's Palace.

After the Coronation, The Great Dukes favorite.
Alexei Michaelouits Morosou changed the quality of Governor into that of
Favorite and Chief Minister, and had the same power in Affairs, as he had over
the Prince's person during his fathers life. He began his establishment with
the great Employments which he bestowed on the Kindred of the Great
Dutchess-Mother, for whom the Prince had a great Veneration: but under that
pretense he kept them at a distance from Court, which, as also the chiefest
places of public trust, he in the mean time filled with his own Kindred and
Creatures, who wholly depended on his fortune. He permitted not any other to
come near the Prince's person, whom he would often get out of the Capital City,
under pretense of Hunting, or some other divertisement; so to beget in him an
aversion to business, that he might have the management of all things. He
thought the only way to make sure of him, would be to get him a Wife, and to
that end, he brought him acquainted with a Gentleman's Daughter, who was an
extraordinary Beauty, but of mean extraction. 'Twas his design to marry her
Sister, by that means to interesse the Great Duke more nearly in his
preservation. These Gentlewomens Father, was one Ilia Danilouits Miloslauski,
very much looked upon by the Favorite, not only upon the account of his two
fair Daughters, but also in regard of his constant attendance on him. So that
upon the confidence he had of his affection and fidelity, he one day took
occasion to speak to the Great Duke of him, and thence, to celebrate so highly
the beauty of those Gentlewomen, that, it raised in him a desire to see them.
The Great Duke sent for them, under pretense of a Visit to the Princesses his
Sisters, and having seen them, he was so taken with the Beauty of the Elder,
that he immediately sent one to tell Miloslauskie, that he would honor him
with Alliance, and marry one of his Daughters. The Gentleman received the
message with much respect, and returned his humble thanks to the Great Duke for
the favor he was pleased to do him. Soon after, they carried rich Presents to
the intended Bride, and a good sum of money to the Father, who, with others of
the Kindred, could not, without that supply, have appeared at the Marriage of
his Daughter. They were married on Shrove-Sunday, in the year 1647. but without
any noise, lest the consequences of that Solemnity might be frustrated by
Charms. Eight days after, Morosou was married to Miloslauskie's second
Daughter, and so became Brother-in-Law to the Great Duke.

Ilia Danilouits Miloslauskie was no sooner advanced to this new-greatness, but
he would have all the World to take notice of it. He pulled down a Wooden house
that had been given him in the Castle near the Great Duke's Palace, and built a
Sumptuous one of Stone in it is place. He cast off, by degrees, the old Officers
of the house, and brought in his own Kindred and Creatures; who being no less
necessitous than the chief of their family, let slip no opportunity of
advantaging themselves. Among others, he made one Leponti Steppanouits Plesseou
Chief Judge of the City of Moscou, in that Jurisdiction which they call
Semskoi Duor. No Concussion, no Extortion, but this man would undertake. He
thought it not enough to receive Presents, but would reduce both parties to the
utmost extremities. He suborned false Witnesses, whose employment was to bring
in charges against those, who were rich enough to redeem themselves out of his
persecutions, imprisoning, and oppressing them till they purchased their
Liberties with the ruin of their Estates; and of these instruments of his
Tyranny, one was called Peter Tichonuits Trochaniotou, his Brother-in-law. This
Peter was one of those, whom, in Muscovy, they call Ocolnits, out of which
number are chosen the Bojares, and he had the management of the Puskarse
Pricas, that is to say, was Overseer of the Armourers, Canoniers, and all the
Mechanics belonging to the Arsenal, who were very much oppressed by him. For,
instead of paying them monthly, as they are wont to do in Muscovy, where all
that are in the Great Duke's service, are so punctually paid, that if they
come not the first day of the month for their money, it is sent home to them;
he, on the contrary, kept them several months without it, forced them to
compound, and to give acquittances for the whole sum, though they received but
some part. Besides, Trading was obstructed, Monopolies granted, and no
Employment could be had, but by dearly purchasing the Favorite Morosou's good
pleasure. One got a Patent, prohibiting the further use of the ordinary Else,
purposely to oblige the people to buy Iron ones with the Great Duke's mark upon
them: but instead of selling them at 8. or 10 d. a piece, as they were worth,
they could not be had under a Crown; by which means was raised a vast sum of
money, by reason of the necessity there was of having them all over the
Kingdom. Another found out the invention of raising the Poude (that is 40.
pound) of Salt, to thirty pence, which before cost but twenty. But instead of
making advantage of it, they found at the year's end, that the dearness of the
Salt had so hindered the sale of it, that the Great Dukes revenue was not only
very much diminished, but abundance of fish was lost for want of sufficient
salting; so that had it not been their design rather to oppress the people than
to promote the Great Duke's service, they would soon have put down that new
imposition. The Inhabitants of Moscou, who had lived very quietly under the
late Great Duke's reign could not but discover their resentment of these
pressures. They had their assemblies about the Churches, at the hours when
their Devotions brought them thither, and resolved at last to Petition the
Great Duke. And in regard no one person either would or durst undertake the
delivery of a Petition to him, they appointed a day to give it him themselves,
as he should come out of the Castle, to go to his devotions or divertisements.
Their main spleen was against Leponti Steppanouits Plesscou, to desire that his
place might be supplied by some person of honor, of whom they might expect
more Justice. They had their Petition ready, and sought two or three times an
opportunity to present it to the Prince; but the Bojares, who attend him in
those Ceremonies, took it from them, and making only a report of it, as they
had been instructed by Morosou, the Petition was not answered, nor the people
relieved. This happened so often, that the people at last resolved to take some
other course, and to make their complaints by word of mouth, upon the first
opportunity that should offer it self. The 6. of July 1648. they took their
advantage of a Procession, which the Great Duke made to a Monastery in the
City called Stertenskie. The people were got together in the Marketplace
before the Castle, to see him pass by, as they were wont; but at his return,
they broke through those that attended the Great Duke, came up to him, laid
hold of his bridle, stayed him, and entreated him to hear the complaints they
had to make to him, concerning the injustices and violences committed by
Plesseou, desiring there might be put into his place some person of integrity,
who should better supply so important a charge. The Great Duke though a little
startled at their procedure, still kept his countenance, and seemed not a
little troubled at the grievances of his good Subjects, promised, that he would
examine how the matter stood, and that they should receive satisfaction. The
people desired no more, and were going away well satisfied with that answer,
when some Bojares, friends of Plesscou, would needs give the people abusive
language, thrust some of their horses, and struck others with their whips,
whereat being incensed, they so pelted their Lordships with stones, that they
were forced to make all speed they could to the Castle, whither the people
pursued them so vigorously, that all the Guard could do was only to stop them
till the others were gotten into the Great Duke's Chamber. This resistance of
the Strelits, rather inflamed, than abated, the people's fury, who threatened to
force the Prince's Lodgings, and take away all they found there, if Plesseou
were not immediately put into their hands. Morosou came out into a Balcony, and
endeavored to appease the people, exhorting them, in the name of his Czaarick
Majesty, to go all to their homes, and make no further tumult. But they told
him, that they had as much to say to him as to the other. Accordingly, some
went immediately to his Palace, which was forced, ransacked, and demolished in
a moment, having cast out at a window one of his Servants, who would have made
some opposition. Their animosity was such, as that they spared not even the
Images of their Saints, for which they are wont to have a great veneration. Yet
did they show some respect to Morosou's Wife, and thought it enough to take
away her Pearls and Jewels* which they cast into the street, and to frighten
her a little, by telling her, that had they not looked upon her as
Sister-in-law to the Great Duke, they would have cut her to pieces. Among other
things, they broke his rich Coach, which, besides the expense in other things
about it, had all silver even about the Wheels. Some got into the Cellar, and
knocked out the heads of the Strong-water Barrels, which taking fire consumed
all those who had made themselves drunk. This was the Prologue to the
ransacking of several other houses afterward, An Insurrection in Moscou.
as those of Plesseou; and Tichonouits, the Chancellors, and all that had any
relation to, or dependence on the Favorite, which afforded them such a booty,
as that they sold Pearls by handfuls, and so cheap, that for thirty Crowns a
man might have bought a hat-ful; a black-foxe-skin, or a pair of Sables for 2
s. 6 d. and stuffs of Gold, Silver, and Silk, in a manner for nothing.

Nazari Iuanouits Tzistou, Chancellor of Muscovy, had farmed the imposition
upon the Salt, and lay sick in his bed, by reason of an accident that had
happened to him three days before, which was, that, meeting with a mad Ox, his
Horsed started and threw him, so violently, that he was in some danger of his
life. But hearing that Morosou's house had been ransacked, and not doubting but
they would come to his, he hid himself under a heap of Birch, which they at a
certain time make provision of, to serve the Stoves; and to take off all
suspicion, he caused himself to be covered with some Flitches of Becon: so that
he had certainly saved his life, had he not been betrayed by one of his
Servants, who making his advantage of his Masters misfortune, took a good sum
of Money, and went to Nisenovogorod. The enraged multitude took him out by the
heels, and dragged him down stairs into the Court, where they cudgelled him to
death. The body was thrown upon the Dunghill, and the house so pillaged, that
there was not any thing left. While these disorders were committed in the City,
they had the time to barricado themselves in the Castle, against the insolences
of the people, who continued all night between the 6 and 7 of July, in arms, in
such a posture, as showed they only expected daylight to begin again.
Whereupon, Orders were sent to the German Officers and Soldiers, to meet at
several rendevouzes, in the City, and to come in to the Great Dukes relief at
the Castle. They marched with Drums beating, and Colors flying, and the
Muscovites instead of opposing them, gave them way, and told them, that they
had no quarrel against them, and knew them to be persons of honor who approved
not the miscarriages of the Government. Being got into the Castle, they took up
the posts of their Guards, and the Great Duke sent out Knez Nikita Iuanouits
Romanow, whom he knew the people much respected, to endeavor the breaking up
of the Assembly. He came to the people, cap in hand, and told them, that he
conceived they ought to be satisfied with the assurance, which the Great Duke
had made them the day before, that he would remedy the disorders of which they
complained. That his Majesty had commanded him to tell them as much, and to
advise them to go every man to his home, that he might the better perform what
he had promised them. This message was well received, and the people made
answer, that they were not dissatisfied with the Great Duke, but those who,
under his name, abused his authority, and that they would not stir, till they
had delivered up to them, Boris Iuanouits Morosou, Leponti Steppanouits
Plesseou, and Peter Tichonouits Trachanistou, that they might revenge, on their
heads, the mischief they had done the whole Kingdom. Romanow gave them thanks
for the kind answer they had made to his proposition, and told them he would
acquaint the Great Duke with the zeal and affection which they expressed
toward him; that he doubted not, but Order would be taken for the execution of
those three Lords, but that he could safely take his oath, that Morosou, and
Trachanistow had made their escape, and, for the third he should be immediately
put to death. Accordingly, Romanow was no sooner returned to the Great Duke,
but word was sent to the people, that Plesseou was coming to be sacrificed, and
that the other two should come to the same end, as soon as they were found, and
that they should send for the Executioner to do his Office. He was soon found,
being at the Castle-gate with his servants, whence he came about a quarter of
an hour after, leading Plesseon to the Marketplace, to cut off his head. But
the people spared him the trouble, Plesseou put to death.
falling upon him with Cudgels, so outrageously, that they dispatched him in a
moment. They dragged the Body through the dirt, accompanying it with all the
curses imaginable; till at last a Monk, whom the deceased had ordered to be
cudgelled, cut off his head. Morosou had indeed made his escape; but meeting
with Waggoners and some of the people searching after him, he was so fortunate
as to avoid them, and by secret ways to get into the Castle. And that it might
not be thought, the Great Duke had consented to the escape of the others, there
were some sent after Trachanistou, who was taken near the Monastery (...)
Troitza, twelve leagues from Moscou. He was brought, the 8. to Semskoy Duor,
that is, the place where his Master had sat as Judge, which the Great Duke
hearing of, he commanded his head to be cut off. This execution wrought so much
upon the people, that being informed how Morosou had been met in the Country,
and none knew what was become of him, they forbore further pressing the Great
Duke to give them what he had not, and, about 11. in the morning, went every
man to his home. In the afternoon several houses in the quarters of Metrossky
and Twersky, were set afire; whither the people, which had not yet cleared the
street, ran, not so much to quench the fire, as to steal. It made such havoc
in a short time, that it consumed the whole quarter of Zuargorod, reducing to
ashes all the houses within the White-Wall, to the River Neglina, and getting
over the River, into the Great Duke's Taverns, it got into those of his
Strong Water, and grew so violent, that it was feared it would have buried the
Castle in its ashes. No body would endeavor to prevent it, those, who were
obliged thereto, being got so drunk, that, lying along in the streets, the
vapors of the fire, they had in their bodies, together with the smoke of that
which was then in its way to burn down the whole City, choked them as they
lay. About 11. at night, some strangers looking, with no small astonishment, on
the fire in that house where they kept the Strong-water, for the Great Duke's
Provision, perceived at some distance a Monk coming toward them with a great
burden, which by his blowing they conceived must needs be very heavy. Being
come near, he called for some, desiring them they would help him to cast into
the fire, the body of the abominable Plesseou, which he dragged after him, it
being, as he said, the only way to quench it: But the Germans refusing to
meddle with it, he fell a-swearing and cursing, till some Muscovites did him
the good office, and holp him to cast the Carcass into the fire, which
immediately began to abate, and some time after went out ere they left the
place.

Some days after this accident, the Great Duke treated the Strelits with
Strong-water, and Hydromel, and his Father-in-law, Ilia Danilouits Miloslausky,
invited diverse Citizens of several Professions to dine with him, and spent
several days together in entertainments. The Patriarch also enjoined the
Priests and Monks to endeavor the settlement of unquiet spirits, and to press
unto them the respect and obedience to which their consciences oblige them. All
thus quieted, and the Great Duke, having supplied the places of the executed,
with able and approved persons, he took the opportunity of a Procession, to
speak to the people, in the presence of Nikita Ieuanouits Romanou, and told
them, that he was extremely troubled, to hear of the injuries and violences
done by Plesseou and Trachanistou, under his name, but contrary to his
intention; That he had put, into their places, persons of integrity, and such
as being acceptable to the people, would administer Justice equally, and
without corruption; and that they might not fail therein, he would have an eye
over them; That he repealed the Edict about the imposition laid on Salt, and
that he would, with the soonest, suppress all Monopolies; That they should
enjoy all their Privileges, which if occasion were, he would augment.
Whereupon, the people having smitten their forehead, and given his Majesty
thanks, the Great Duke reassumed his discourse and said, That it was true
indeed, he had promised to deliver up to them the person of Boris Iuanouits
Morosou, and acknowledged, that he could not absolutely justify him, but that
he could not also resolve to condemn him; That he hoped, the people would not
deny the first Request he should make to them, which was, that they would
pardon Morosou, only for that time, as to what he might have displeased them
in; That he would be answerable for him, and durst assure them, that Morosou
should so behave himself for the future, as that they should have occasion to
speak well of him; That if they would not have him to be any longer of of his
Council, he would dismiss him; but that he desired them to look on that Lord,
as one who had been a Father to their Prince, and one that having married the
Great Dutchess's Sister, must needs be extremely dear to him, and consequently,
that it would be very hard for him to consent to his death. The tears which
concluded this discourse of the Great Duke's, discovered the affection he had
for that Favorite, and so moved the people, that they all cried out, God grant
His Highness a long and happy life. God's and the Great Duke's will be done.
The Czaar conceived an extraordinary joy hereat, thanked the people, and highly
celebrated the zeal and affection they expressed for his estate and person.
Some few days after, Morosou appeared in public, among those who attended the
Great Duke, upon occasion of a Pilgrimage, which he made to the Monastery of
Troitza. He went uncovered, from the Castle to the City gate, saluting the
people on both sides with great submissions; and from that time, he laid hold
on all occasions to gratify, and assist those, who addressed themselves to
him, in any business they had at Court.

The story we have related confirms the truth of what we have said elsewhere,
that the Muscovites, how submissive and slavish soever they may be, will
endeavor the recovery of their freedom, when the Government becomes
insupportable to them, and casts them into despair. I shall here add another
later example, which will be the less tedious, in that it has some dependence
on the precedent, and relates very much to what we have seen, much about the
same time, in all the other Countries of Europe.

The Great Duke of Muscovy sent in the year 1649. a solemn Embassy to the Queen
of Sueden, the chief person whereof was, the Ocolnitza, Boris Iuanouits Puskin.
He had order, among other things, to accommodate the difference, which seemed
to threaten those two States with an inevitable War, proceeding hence, that the
Subjects of both Crowns, left their own habitations, and got into the other
Kingdom to avoid the payment of their debts. And in regard that for 32 years,
that account had not been cleared, and that there were more Suedes in Muscovy,
than there were Muscovites in Sueden, it was mentioned in the Treaty made by
Puskin at Stockholm, that for the first thirty years, there should be a
liquidation of all accounts, and for the two other, the Great Duke should pay
to the Queen and Crown of Sueden 190000 Roubles, that is 390000 Crowns, part in
money, part in Rye, and that the payment should be made in the Spring of the
year 1650. Accordingly, John de Rodes, being come at that time to Moscou, in
the quality of Commissary for the Queen of Sueden, received, in Copecs, and
Ducats 300000. Crowns, and order was sent to Foedor Amilianou, a Merchant of
Plescou, to provide as much Rye as should amount to 90000. Crowns. This
interess'd man caused all the Rye, wherever it were, to be seized, and
permitted not private persons, to buy so much as a bushel without his
permission, which good leave of his they were forced to buy at a dear rate. The
Inhabitants of Plescou were so impatient under this oppression, that they not
only quarreled at the avarice of the Suedes, but charged Puskin with
prevarication in his Employment, and perfidiousness toward his Prince. They
said that Morosou held correspondence with Strangers, and presuming that this
negotiation was concluded, contrary to the Great Duke's intention, they
endeavored to engage the City of Novogorod in their quarrel, and went so far
on in their work, that some of the chiefest Merchants having declared for them,
the Weywode had much ado to prevent an insurrection of the whole City. Both
these and the others resolved that they would stop the money, when it was to be
transported into Sueden, and that they would no longer endure the Treaty of the
Rye, because it would in likelihood starve the Country. With this intention
they sent three Deputies to Moscou, to wit, a Merchant, a Cosaque, and a
Strelits, with Order to know whether this Treaty was made, and put in execution
with the Great Duke's consent. In the mean time, without expecting the return
of their Deputies, they ransacked Amilianou's house, and tortured his Wife, to
make her confess, where her husband, who had made his escape, had laid up his
money. The Weywode came, in hope to prevent the disorder, but he was forced out
of the City, and the neighboring Nobility invited to come in, and join with
them against Monopolies and Patentees. These three venerable Deputies were no
sooner come to Novogorod, but the Weywode caused them to be put into Irons, and
in that posture, sent them to Moscou, whether came at the same time the Weywode
of Plescou, and the Merchant Amilianou. Intelligence was brought, that those of
Plescou had robbed and abused a Suedish Merchant, whereupon the Great Duke sent
back the Weywode, and with him a Bojar, to endeavor the further prevention of
these disorders. Those of Plescou, who at first would not receive them, at
length opened their Gates, but it was, to put the Weywode in prison, and to
affront the Bojare, who had the imprudence, at so unseasonable a time, to treat
them with so much severity, that the people fell upon him with Cudgels, and
pursued him to a Monastery, where he was so beaten, that he was given over for
a dead man.

However, the Great Duke pursued the execution of the Treaty made with Sueden,
and paid money instead of the Rye, sending along with the Suedish Commissary a
good Convoy of Strelits, who were to bring him to the Frontiers of Sueden. He
gave order at the same time to Iuan Nikitouits Gavensky, to assemble the
Nobility of the neighboring Provinces, and the foot-Regiments of Colonel
Kormichel, and Col. Hamilton, which made up above 4000 men, and to besiege the
City of Plescou. The Inhabitants, as first, pretended to stand out, but their
courage and strength soon failed them, so that they were forced to make an
accommodation, at the cost of the Authors of the Sedition, who were put to
death, or sent into Siberia.

These disorders have occasioned a great change in the Affairs and Government
of Muscovy. For, though Miloslauski and Morosou have much credit, and the
Patriarch himself a very great Authority about the Prince, yet have the other
Knez and Bojares a great hand in public Affairs, and execute their charges
every one according to his Birth and Employment. There are commonly some 30
Bojares about the Court, though in Zuski's time there were numbered 70. In the
year 1654. when the War of Smolensko was resolved on, there were present at the
deliberations of that important affair, twenty nine Bojares, who names were
these.

Boris Iuanouits Morosou, the Czaar' s Fanourite. Boris Nikit a Iuanouits
Romanou, the Czaar' s Great Uncle. Iuan Basilouits Morosou. Knez Iuan
Andreouits Galizin Knez Nikita Iuanouits Odouski. Knez Jacob Kudenieteuits
Tzerkaski. Knez Alexei Nikitouits Trubetskoi. Gleeb Iuanouits Morosou. Wasili
Petrowits Tzemeretou. Knez Boris Alexandrouits Reppenin. Michael Michelouits
Soltikou. Basili Iuanouits Stresnou. Knez Vasili Simonouits Posorouski. Knez
F^dor Simonouits Kurakin. Knez Iurgi Petrouits Buynessou Rostouski. Iuan
Iuanouits Solikou. Knez Iurgi Alexeouits Dolgoruski. Gregory Basilouits Puskin.
Knez Foedor Federouits Volchanski. Laurenti Demetriouits Soltikou. Ilia
Danilouits Miloslauski, the Great Duke's Father-in-Law. Basili Basilouits
Butterlin. Knez Michael Petrouits Pronski. Knez Iuan Nikitouits Gavenski. Knez
Foedor Iurgiouits Chworosting. Basili Borissouits Tzemeretou. Nikita Alexouits
Susin.
The Ocolnits, or Lords, out of whose number, the Bojares are chosen, are^ The
Ocolnitza, Knez Andre Federouits Litwinou Masalskoi. Knez Iuan Federouits
Chilkou. Mikifor Sergeouits Zabackin. Knez Demetri Petrouits Lewou. Knez Basili
Petrouits Lewou. Knez Simon Petrouits Lewou. Knez Iuan Iuanouits Romadanouski.
Knez Steppan Gabrielouits Puskin. Knez Simon Romanouits Bosarskie. Bogdan
Mattheouits Chytrou. Peter Petrouits Gowowin. Iuan Andreouits Miloslauski. Knez
Iuan Iuanouits Labano Rostouski. Knez Demetri Alexeouits Dalgaruski. Simon
Lukianouits Stresnou. Michael Alexeouits Artischo. Precossi Federouits
Sochouin. Knez Boris Iuanouits Troikurou. Alexei Demetriouits Collitziou.
Wasili Alexandriouits Zioglockou. Iuan Basilouits Alferiou.


The persons of greatest quality next the Bojares, and the Ocolnits, are those
whom they call Dumeny Duorainy, and Simbojarski, that is to say sons of Bojars;
and they are six in number; to wit,

Iuan Offonassouits Gabrienou. Fedor Cusmits Iellissariou. Bogdan Fedrowits
Narbickou. Sdan Basilouits Conderou. Basili Federouits Ianou. Ossonassei
Ossipouits Prontzissou,
The Chancellor and Secretaries of State, are, Almas Iuanouits, Chancellor.
Simon Iuanouits Saborouski. Lariouton Demetriouits Prontzissou.


These are the names of the Lords, who, at this day, have the principal
charges, and govern the whole Kingdom of Muscovy, as well in the Council of
State, as for private affairs; as we shall see anon.

The chiefest Dignity of the Kingdom was, The principal Officers of Muscovy,
and their (...).
heretofore, that of Sunderstreuoi Coinische, that is, Lord high Steward of
Muscovy; but this charge was suppressed when Zuski, who had it, was called to
the Crown. The next, which is now the chiefest, is that of Duoretskoy, or,
Great Master, who has the oversight and direction of all the great Duke's
household. After him comes the Orusnitschei, who has the oversight of the Arms
and Horses, which are for the Great Duke's peculiar service, as also of the
Harnesses and other Ornaments, which are used at Entrances, and public
Ceremonies. These three Officers precede all the other Bojares, Ocolnits,
Dumeni-Diaki, and the Secretaries of State, who, in their turns precede the
Postilnizei, or him who makes the Great Duke's bed, the Comnutnoy Klutziom,
that is, the Chamberlain, the Craftzey, or Carver, the Stolniki, or Gentlemen
Sewers, the Strapsi, or Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, and the Duoraini, or
ordinary Gentlemen. The Silzi, or Pages, the Diaki, or Secretaries, and the
Boddiotzei, or the Commissaries or Clerks, who are the last in Dignity and
Function.

All the Knez and Bojares, The Bojares obliged to follow the Court.
who have Estates, are obliged to set out their Lands, and to give their
personal attendance at Moscou, where they are obliged to be every day at Court,
and to smite their foreheads in the Great Duke's presence, who looks on this
attendance of theirs as an argument of their fidelity, and an assurance of his
Estate being in quiet, which might soon be disturbed by the authority, these
Great men might assume in the Provinces, were they permitted to make their
abode there.

Their Houses, Their expense.
or Palaces, are great and magnificent, and they make great ostentation, as
well in their expenses at their houses, as in clothes and retinue when they go
abroad. When they ride, they have at the bow of their Saddle, a little Timbrel,
a foot Diameter, which they ever and anon touch with the handle of their Whip,
to make their way through the throngs, which are frequent in the Markets and
Streets. The Knez, who have no employment at Court, and have not the means to
make any great appearance there, retire into the Country, where their manner
of life is not much different from that of Peasants.

They make very great account of the ancient Nobility; They esteem Nobility.
not only of that of their own Country, but also of others; which they very
particularly inquire into, but above all, are very curious in informing
themselves of the extraction of those that are sent Ambassadors in Muscovy,
They never match but with those of an equal rank with themselves.

The Bojares are not only seen at public Ceremonies and Audiences, but
effectively participate of the management of public affairs, and the decision
of Law-sutes, wherein they assume the quality of Presidents. The Councels for
State Affairs are ordinarily held in the night time, and the Counselors meet
at one in the morning, and are together till nine or ten.

We shall speak of the particular employment of the Bojares, when we have first
given a short account of the Great Dukes revenue, who, having an Estate of a
very vast extent, consisting of a great number of Provinces, must needs be very
rich and very powerful, as well in respect of his Demesne, as the advantages
accrewing from the Traffic made by his Factors, and the Taxes, Duties, and
Impositions paid by his Subjects. In times of peace, the Impositions are not
great, but in the time of War, the Contributions are so excessive, that when
the Great Duke Michael Federouits, was to besiege the City of Smolensko, in
the year 1632. he obliged the subject to pay him the Pettina, or fifth part of
their Estates; but the present Great Duke, at the beginning of the present War,
contented himself with the tenth. The Knez, Bojares, and Gentlemen pay no
Taxes, but are obliged, as are also the Monasteries, to raise and maintain a
certain number of men, horse and foot, proportionably to their Revenue.

The Customs bring in so considerable a sum, that, some years, the Custom-house
of the City of Archangel it self pays in above 600000. Crowns. The
Crucisnouduor, that is to say, the Taverns, where the Great Duke allows the
selling of Wine, Beer, Hydromel, and Aquavi^ae, pay a vast sum, since he
receives from three Taverns of the City of Novogorod above 12009. Crowns, and
that, since this duty came to belong to the Sovereign, they are above a
thousand houses, where the Great Duke alone has all the advantage made by the
sale of Wine and Aquavirae.

Sables also, and other Furs bring in much, because he reserves the Traffic
thereof wholly to himself, as also that of Cavayar, and several other
Commodities. The Revenue of the money which he lets out to his Factors is not
so certain, as well in regard the Merchants profit is not always the same, as
for that the Factors sometimes break. At our being there he had put 4000 Crowns
in the hands of a Merchant named Savelli, who instead of improving it to his
advantage, squandered it away in less than three years, that he lived in
Persia. The Great Duke, ordered the Poslanick, Alexei Sawinouits Romanitsikou,
who went into Persia along with us, to take him, and bring him back into
Muscovy. Coming to Scamachy, we had notice of his being in the City; but the
Poslanick's Interpreter dying, he dissembled his having any order to take him,
and desired him to be his Interpreter, in that Negotiation, with a design,
under that pretense, to bring him to the Frontiers, and so to carry him away.
The other, who stood upon his Guard, served him indeed during the Poslanick's
abode at Ispahan, but, when he saw him ready for his departure into Muscovy, he
got into the Allacapi or Sanctuary, was Circumcised, put himself under the
protection of Mahomet, and continued in Persia.

The Great Duke farms out all his Demesne, His Expenc^.
but the revenue arising thence, goes, for the most part, toward the
subsistence of the Strelits, whereof he is obliged constantly to maintain a
very great number, as well in the City of Moscou, where there are above 16000.
of them, as upon the Frontiers; insomuch that the ordinary Militia makes above
100000. men. In a word, if his receipts are great, his expenses are
proportionable thereto. There hardly passes a year, but he is forced to
purchase a Peace with the Tartars, with great sums of Money and Presents. He
does not carry on his Wars at so easy a rate as they do elsewhere. For, taking
into his service, a great number of Germans and other Foreiners, as well
Officers as Soldiers, he is forced to pay them extraordinarily, and some times
before hand. The Embassies he receives stand him in no less than those he
sends, for he defrays all public persons, and makes them very considerable
Presents. The expense of his Table, and the rest of his Court must needs be
very great, there being above a thousand Persons who have meat provided for
them.

At Dinner and Supper, there is no sounding of Trumpets, as there is elsewhere,
but one of the Officers goes to the Kitchen and Sellar-doors, and cries Godusar
Kuschinung, that is, The Grand Seigneur would be served, and immediately the
meat is carried up. The Great Duke sits at the midst of the Table, alone; if he
invites the Patriarch or any other great Lord to Dine with him, there is
another Table set at the end of his, and they are served with some of the meat
which had been presented to the Great Duke, I say, presented, for as much as
all making up but one Course of about fifty Dishes of meat, the Gentlemen set
them not down upon the Table, but hold them in their hands, till the Carver
has showed them to the Prince, and he made choice of what he is desirous to
eat. If none Dine with him, he sends the Dishes he has not meddled with, to
some Lords in the City, or to his Physicians. The present Great Duke has but
one, who is the same that went along with us into Persia. He is no
superstitious Galenist, but, with very good success makes use of Chemical
remedies: he is grown so famous, that not only the Prince, but the Bojares and
other great Lords about the Court employ him. His salary is 124 Crowns, a
Month, besides a Pension of six hundred Crowns, per an. and he has more Wheat,
Barley, Honey, and several other Provisions than he can spend in his Family. The
Great Duke is never purged, nor bled, but the Physician has a present of a
hundred Crowns, and a piece of Satin or Velvet, or a Zimmer of Sables, which is
worth no less. The Bojares do not give their Physicians money, but a certain
number of Flitches or Gammons of Bacon, Sables, Strong-water, and other
Provisions. They are obliged to go every day to Court, and to smite their
foreheads in the Great Dukes presence, or at least, before those who are
entrusted with the care of his Cabinet of Druggs, and other Apothecary's stuff.

There are many Interpreters for other Languages, especially for the German,
the Polish, the Suedish, the Turkish, and the Persian. He whom the Great Duke
does chiefly make use of in his most important affairs is a Dane, and is so
generally versed in all the Europaean Languages, that coming three years since
to the Court of Vienna, with Iuan Iuanouits Boklakouskoi, and Iuan
Polycarpousin Michailou, the Emperor liked him so well, that, out of his own
inclination, he made him a Nobleman. The Great Duke's Court has this common
with those of other Princes, that Vice takes place of Virtue, and gets nearer
the Throne. Those who have the honor to be nearest his person, are withal
more subtle, more deceitful, and more insolent than the others that have not.
They know very well how to make their advantages of the Princes favor, and
look for the greaest respects and humblest submissions imaginable, from those
who make their addresses to them; which the others render them, as much to
avoid the mischief they might do them, as for the good they expect from them.

The Great Duke's Council is divided into six Classes, or, as they call them,
Courts of Chancery. The first is for strangers Affairs; the second for War; the
third, for Crown Lands and the Prince's Revenue; The fourth receives the
Accounts of Factors, and those who manage the Taverns. The fifth takes
Cognizance of Appeals in Civil Causes; and the sixth, of those, of Criminal
Causes.

We said before, that the Bojares are not only employed in State Affairs, but
also in the decision of private differences, at which they preside, alone, or
with other Judges, according to the nature of those affairs that present
themselves.

They call Pololskie Pricas, the place, where they regulate the affairs of
Ambassadors, as also the Posts of the Kingdom, and what concerns such Merchants
as are strangers. Almas Iuanouits is Secretary of the Court.

In the second Court, or Chamber, which they call Roseradni Pricas, there is a
Register kept of the quality and families of the Bojares and all the Gentlemen
of Muscovy, as also of all exploits of War, and the advantages or losses which
the Great Duke receives thereby. Iuan Ossonassinouits has the Presidency of it.

In the Pomiestnoi Pricas, which is the third Chamber, there is a Register kept
of all the Manors held by homage, and the suits concerning the same are
judged. There are also received the duties belonging to the Great Duke, from
the said Manors; under the direction of Foedor Cusmits Iellisariou.

In the Casanskoy, and Siberskoy Pricas, that is to say, the fourth and fifth
Chamber, the differences of the Provinces of Casan and Si^eria, are judged, and
an account is kept of the Skins and Furrs, which come from those Provinces to
the Great Duke. Bojar Knez Alexei Nikiteuits is President of those two Chambers.

In the Durovoi Pricas, are judged the differences between the Great Duke's
Servants, and what concerns his House; under Bojar Basilouits Butterlin.

The Inasemski Pricas, is for such Military Officers as are strangers, whose
Causes are there tried; and who in times of Peace do there receive their
Orders, from Ilia Danielouits Miloslauski, the Great Duke's Father-in-law, who
is the President thereof.

The Reitarskoi Pricas, judges the Causes of the Muscovian Cavalry, and there,
in time of Peace, they receive their Orders and pay; to wit, sixty Crowns, per
an. for every Horseman, under the presidency of the same Ilia Miloslauski. This
Cavalry consists for the most of Gentlemen, who have very little of Estate, yet
hold Manors by homage and fealty.

In the Boschoi Pricod, all the Receivers of the Great Duke's duties give in
their accounts once a year. The Bojar, Knez Michael Petrouits Pronski, who is
President of this Pricas, sets a tax on foreign Bread and Wine. He has also the
oversight of Weights and Measures all over the Kingdom. It is also his place,
to pay those Strangers that are in the Great Duke's service.

The Sudnoy Wolodimirskoy, and the Sudnoy Moskauskoy Pricas; have for President
the Bojar, Knez Gregory Simonouits Kurakin, who, in the former, judges the Knez
and Bojares; in the other, the Gentlemen and Officers of the Court.

The Bojar, Knez Boris Alexandrouits Reppenin presides in the Rosboinoy Pricas,
and judges Robberies upon the Highway, Murders, and other criminal causes.

Peter Tychonouits Trachanistou, was President in the Puskarskoy Pricas, and
had the oversight of Founders, Furbishers, Canoniers, Armourers, Smiths and
Carpenters, who wrought to the Arsenal; but his place is bestowed on the Bojar,
Knez Iurgi Alexouits Dolgaruskoi, not only to judge of differences between
them, but also to receive their work, and pay them their wages.

The Iamskoy Pricas is for the regulation of Stages and Post-masters, and the
payment of their Salaries; as also to give passes to those that desire them,
and are to have their carriadge upon the Great Duke's account, under the
Presidency of the Ocolnitza, Iuan Andreowits Miloslauski.

The Diaks, Secretaries, Clerks, Captains of the Gates, and Messengers of the
several Prica's have their particular Judge, who is the Ocolnitza, Peter
Petrouits Gollowin, in the Tziolobitnoi Pricas.

The Semskoy Duor, or Selmskoy Pricas, is for the judgment of all other Civil
Causes between the Citizens of Moscou. There, are paid the duties arising from
places and houses that are sold, as also the rates levied for the reparations
of Bridges, Gates, Fortresses, and other public buildings, under the direction
of Ocolnitza, Bogdan Matheowitz Chitrou.

The Golops, that is to say, Slaves, have a particular Court, where they make
their declaration when they are sold, and where they take out a Certificate,
when they redeem themselves, or recover their liberty any other way. This is
called the Choloppi Pricas; the President, Steppan Iuanouits Isleniou.

The place, where an account is kept of all the Stuffs, as Brocado, Velvet,
Satin, Damask, etc. which are for the use of the Court, and whereof Garments
are made for the Great Duke to present to foreign Ambassadors, and other persons
of quality, is called the Bolchikasni Pricas.

Under the Magazine is the Treasury, or Exchequer, where all the money that
remains at the years end, is put into the Kings Coffers, under the oversight of
Ilia Danilouits Miloslauski, who is also President of the Chamber, where are
judged the Causes of the Great Duke's principal Merchants and Factors, which is
called Casamoi Pricas.

The Ocolnitza, Knez Iuan Federouits Chilkou, is the Judge of all
Ecclesiastical persons, as well Secular Priests as Monks, who are obliged to
submit to the temporal Jurisdiction, unless it be in privileged Cases; in the
Monasterski Pricas.

The Great Duke has a very vast structure designed for the Stones, Lime, Wood,
and other Materials which are for his own use, which place is called the
Carmenoi Pricas; and there it is that the Duorainin, Jacob Iuanouits Sagraiskoi
decides the differences between Carpenters, Masons, and other Workmen, and pays
them for their work.

The Revenue of Novogorod and Nisenovogorod is paid in at the Pricas, called
Novorodkoi Zetwert, where the particular receivers of those two Cities give in
their accounts. Sometimes the Causes of the Inhabitants of those two places are
judged in this Pricas. For though ordinarily there be no appealing from the
Weywodes, yet those who mistrust the success of their business, by the
partiality they observe in the Weywode, may remove their Causes to Moscou. The
Chancellor Almas Iuanouits is the President of it.

The Provinces of Gallitz and Volodimer have also their particular Pricas, for
the same purpose; it is called Galliasko-Volodimirski Pricas; the President,
the Ocolnitza, Peter Petrouits Gollowin.

The moneys arising from all the Taverns and Kaba^s of Muscovy is paid in at
the place called Nova Zetwert, where all those who keep public drinking houses
are obliged to take the Wine, Hydromel, and Strong-water they sell by retail,
and to give an account of the sale of it. There they also punish those who sell
any without License, as also those who sell or take Tobacco, if they be
Muscovites, the Germans and others, Strangers, being permitted the Traffic and
use of it. The Ocolnitza Bogdan Matheowits Chitrou presides in this Pricas.

The Bojar, and Master of the Ordinance, Gregori Basilouits Puskin, under whose
jurisdiction are Castrom, Iareslou, and other Cities of those quarters,
receives their accounts, and decides their differences, in the Castromskoi
Pricas; as the Ocolnitza, Knez Demetri Basilouits Lewou does those of Vstoga,
and Colmogorod, in the Vstogskoi Pricas.

The same Gregori Basilouits Puskin keeps the Jewels of the Crown, and has the
oversight of the German Goldsmiths, who make Gold and Silver Plate, and sell
precious Stones, and has his Office for those things in the Solotoya Almasnoy
Pricas. He has also a key to the Great Duke's Magazine of Arms, and
administers Justice to those who are employed about Arms for his particular
use, and pays them, in the Rusiannoy Pricas.

The Physicians, Apothecaries, Surgeons and Operators, and all of that
function are obliged to smite their foreheads in the presence of Ilia
Danilouits Miloslauski, who is their Overseer, and whom they are to acquaint,
if the Great Duke wants any thing that relates to their Professions.

Tamosini Pricas is for the receipt of all duties of entrance into the City of
Moscou, which is made by one of the Goses, accompanied by two or three
Assessors, who give in their account thereof to a Chamber called Bolschoi
Prichod; these Goses are changed every year.

The payment of the tenth penny, toward the War, is made to the Bojar, Knez
Michael Petrouits Pronski, and the Ocolnitza, Iuan Basilouits Alferiou, in the
Sbora dezatti dengi Pricas.

The Affairs that have no peculiar Pricas have a general one, called Siskoi
Pricas, under the superintendency of Knez Iurgi Alexowits Dolgaruskoi.

The Patriarch has his particular Pricas's; to wit; that of Roscrad, where a
Register is kept of all the Church-goods, and where are the Charters and
Archives; that of Sudny, where the Patriarch has his Spiritual Jurisdiction;
and that of Casaunoy, where the Patriarch's Revenue and Treasure is kept. He
has also his Ecclesiastical Judges and Officers, who give him an account of
all their actions.

There is no Pricas, but has its Diak, or Secretary, and many Clerks and
Coppiers, who all write very well, and are skilled in Arithmetic, according to
their way, in which they make use of Plum-stones instead of Counters. Whence it
comes, that there is no Officer but has about him a certain quantity of them
in a little purse. They are forbidden, upon pain of whipping, to take Poschnl,
or Presents; yet they venture to do it; nay their avarice is such, that many
times, they will, of themselves, proffer Copies of dispatches, and private
resolutions, out of a hope to get somewhat for them. But these proffers are to
be mistrusted, for I know by experience, that those people seldom have what
they put others in hope of; or if they have, it is so dangerous to communicate
it, that for the most part they put off forgeries and suppositious pieces. In
the year 1643. the Minister of a Foreign Prince being desirous to have a Copy of
my Dispatches, one of the Clerks of the Counsel sold it him at a very dear
rate. I was shown it afterward; but when at my return to Holstein, the Letters
were translated, there was nothing of what I had seen in the Copy.

They do not keep a Register of their Acts in Books, but they write them in
Rolls of paper pasted together, till they are 25. or 30. else in length; of
which their Offices are full.

At our coming to Moscou, we were made believe, that Presents could procure any
thing at Court. Indeed I have known some Lords, who though they would not take
ought themselves, were not sorry to see any thing sent to their Wives: but I
have also known some, who made it appear, they were absolutely incorruptible,
and that their fidelity to their Prince was Presentproof, to their great
regret, who consider, that where nothing is given, nothing is thence obtained.

Justice is administered in the Pricas's we have spoken of. Their administration
of Justice.
The Bojar, who presides there, has his Secretary, and Assessors, and finally
determines whatever comes before him. Heretofore the Musc^^ites had but few
(...) and few Customs, according to which all Cases were decided. They
concerned only attempt^ ^^ainst the Great Duke's person; Treasons against the
State, Adulteries, Thefts, and Debts b^^ween private persons. The decision of
all other Affairs depended on the breast of the Judge. (...) the year 1647. the
Great Duke assembled together the most Famous Men of the Kingdom, and caused to
be set down in writing, and to be published, several Laws and Ordinances,
whereby the Judges are to regulate themselves. They were printed, in folio,
under the Title of SOBORNA ULOSIENIA, that is to say, Universal and General
Right, for the direction of the Bojares.

Heretofore their proceedings were thus. In those Causes, where the parties
were not agreed as to the matter of fact, and had no evidence of either side,
the Judge asked the Defendant, whether he would take his Oath, that the matter
was as he alleged, or refer it to the Plaintiff's Oath. He who proffered to
take his Oath, was, once a week, for three weeks one after another, brought
before the Judge, who every time, pressed unto him the importance of an Oath,
and the sin he would burden his Conscience withal, if he swore falsely. If,
notwithstanding these remonstrances, he still persisted in his readiness to
take his Oath, though he swore nothing but the truth, yet people looked on him
as an infamous person, would spit in his face, and turn him out of the Church,
into which he was never received afterward, much less was he admitted to the
Communion, unless it were at the point of death. Now, they do not proceed with
so much rigor, but only bring him who is to take his Oath before an Image of
one of their Saints, where he is asked, whether he will take his Oath upon the
salvation of his Soul? If he persist, they give him a little Crucifix to kiss,
and afterward the Saint's Image, which for that purpose, is taken down from
the Wall. If the Oath be good, the party who took it is not to be admitted to
the Communion for three years, and though he be not treated as an infamous
person, yet those of any quality will not easily suffer him in their Company:
but a perjured person, is severely punished; first cruelly whipped, then
banished. Whence it comes, that the Muscovites endeavor all they can to avoid
it, though upon any trivial occasion, especially in their dealings, they stick
not to swear at every word, and have incessantly in their mouths their Po
Chrestum, by Christ, making the sign of the Cross at the same time: but there
is little credit to be given those kinds of Oaths, as proceeding from deceit
and passion. They permit strangers to take their Oaths, according to the rules
of their several Religions.

No invention but they make use of to force people to confess the truth by
Torture. One of the most cruel, in my opinion, is the Strapado, which is often
given in this manner. The Malefactor, having his hands tied behind him, is
wound up into the air, and so hangs, having fastened to his feet, a great beam,
upon which the Executioner ever and anon gets up, to augment the pain, and
further the dislocation of the Members, while the smoke and fire which are made
under his feet, burns and stifles him. Sometimes they cause the Malefactor's
head to be shaven, and, as he is so hanging, they pour cold water, drop by
drop, upon the crown; which is such a torment as no other comes near, not even
that of whipping, (which they many times give those in that condition) though
they at the same time clap a red-hot Iron upon the stripes.

In ordinary quarrels, he who gives the first blow gets the worst. Murder,
committed without any necessity of defense, is punished with death. The guilty
person is kept six weeks in a very close Prison, and fed only with bread and
water; after which he receives the Communion, and has his head cut off.

Thieves are Tortured, that they may discover their Accomplices, and confess
their other Crimes. If it be the first offense, they are whipped from the
Castle-Gate to the great Market place, where the offender has an Ear cut off,
and is put into prison for two years. If he offends the second time, he is
punished in the same manner, and is kept in prison, till he has company, to be
banished into Siberia. Theft is never punished with death in Muscovy; but the
concealers and receivers fare no better, which is the best course could be
taken to bridle the lewd inclinations of that people.

The ordinary punishments, Their ordinary punishments.
are slitting the nostrils, Whipping, and the Baltoki. The last is not always
infamous and public; yet is there not any Master of a Family, but gives it his
Children and Servants. He who is to receive this Chastisement, puts off his
Kaftan, and, having only his shirt on, lays himself down upon the ground, on
his belly, and then two men set themselves cross upon him, one upon his Neck,
the other upon his Feet, having each of them a little Wand or Switch in his
hand, wherewith they beat him upon the Back, much after the manner that
Fell-mongers beat their Furs, to get out the Worms. They ordinarily have their
Nostrils slit who have taken Tobacco, in snuff, contrary to the Great Duke's
prohibition.

Whipping as it is given in Muscovy, is one of the most barbarous punishments
that ever were heard of. Sept. 24. 1634. I saw eight men and one woman Whipped,
for selling of Aquavitae and Tobacco. The Executioner's man took them up one
after another upon his back, being stripped down to the waste, and having their
feet tied together with a Cord, which passing between his Legs that held them
up, was held by another servant of the Executioner's, so fast, that they were
not able to stir. The Executioner stood three paces off, with a Bull's Pizzel,
having fastened to the end of it, three straps or thongs of an Elk's skin, not
tanned, and consequently as sharp as a Rasour, with which he laid on their
backs with all his strength, so as that the blood gushed out at every lash. The
men had each of them 25. or 26. till the Clerk, who had in a Note what number
of lashes they were to receive, cried Polno, that is to say, enough. The Woman
had but 16. yet did she fall into a swound. Being thus disciplined, so as that
their backs were in a manner sliced and slashed all over, yet were they all
tied by the Arms, two and two together, those who had sold Tobacco having a
little horn full of it, and those who had sold Aquavitae, a little bottle about
their Necks, and whipped through the City, and after they had walked them above
half a league about, they were brought back to the place of their first
execution, and dismissed. This is so cruel a punishment, that some die of it,
as we said before of the son of General Herman Schein. Some after they are thus
punished wrap themselves up in the skin of a sheep newly killed.

Heretofore these punishments were not infamous, and those who had passed
through the Executioner's hands, were admitted into the best Companies, as was
also the Executioner himself, whose Profession was accounted so honorable, that
sometimes even Merchants quitted theirs, to serve the Magistrate at Executions,
and would buy the employment, and after certain years sell it again to others.
The advantages of it ly in this, that the Executioner is not only paid by the
Judge, but gets money also out of the Criminal, to be more gently treated,
though indeed, the greatest profit he makes comes from the Aquavitae, which he
sells underhand to the Prisoners. But now this employment is not much courted,
since the Muscovites have begun to learn somewhat of civility from their
Neighbors. Nor is the Executioner permitted to sell his Office, but it must
continue in his family, which failing, the Butchers are obliged to recommend to
the place one of their body.

All we said of the cruelty of their punishments is yet below what they inflict
on such as cannot pay their debts. He who pays not at his time, mentioned in
the Bond, is put into a Sergeants house, having a certain further time to make
satisfaction. If he fail, he is carried to prison, whence he is every day
brought out, to the place before the Chancery, where the common Executioner
beats him upon the shin-bone with a Wand about the bigness of a man's little
finger, for a whole hour together. That done, he is returned to prison, unless
he can put in security to be forthcoming the next day at the same hour, to be
treated in the same manner, till he has made satisfaction. And this is
executed with much rigor upon all sors of persons, what condition or quality
soever they be of, Subjects, or Foreiners, Men, or Women, Priests, or lay
persons. It Is true, some present being made to the Executioner, he suffers the
Debtor to put a thin Iron-plate within his boot, to receive the blows; or it
may be he smites more gently. If the Debtor have not to satisfy, he must be
sold, with his Wife and Children, to the Creditor.

As to the Religion of the Muscovites, The Religion of the Muscovites.
before we enter into the discourse of it, we shall say, that there have been
Lutherane Doctors in Sueden and Livonia, who have made it a problematical
question, whether the Muscovites were Christians or not? They might as well
have made it disputable in their Acts, whether the Muscovites are men; since
there is not so great a difference between their Religion and that of other
Christians, as there is between their Morality and manner of life, and that of
many other men: but as laughter and speech makes them men, so Baptism and their
external profession of the Christian Religion, denominates them Christians. If
a man would take their word for it, they are the only true Christians in the
World, since they only have been baptized, whereas others have been only
sprinkled; which is the reason, they receive no Proselyte, till he be
rebaptized. They ground their Religion on the Books of the Old and New
Testament, and they use Sacraments. Their Translation of the Bible is that,
which they call of the seventy Interpreters, which some few years since they
have got Translated and Printed in their own Language. They permit not that a
man should bring the whole Bible to Church, for fear of profaning it by
several, not over-modest, passages they find in the Old Testament: whence it
comes they bring only the New, and some Verses taken out of the Psalms and
Prophets; but in their houses they are permitted to read the whole Bible. In
the explication of the Bible, they give much authority to St. Cyril Bp. of
Jerusalem, whom they call Quirila Ierusalimski, and who writ a Catechism, under
the Emperor Theodosius. He flourished about the end of the fourth age, and is
not to be confounded with Cyril of Alexandria, whose memory the Greeks
celebrate on the 9. of June, whereas they celebrate the Festival of the other
upon the 18 of March, as may be seen in their Menologies. The other Fathers,
whose authority they follow, are Iuan Domaskin, (John Damascene) Grigori
Bogoslo^a, (St. Gregori Nazianzen) Iuan Solotauska, (St. John Chrysostom) and
Ephrem Syrin, Ephram, Deacon of the Church of Edessa, in Syria. They relate of
him, as also does Gerard Vossius, who has Translated him into Latin, that an
Angel having presented to him a Book writ in Golden Characters, which no body
could open, he immediately derived those illuminations from it, which are at
this day apparent in the books he has published. Besides him, they have also
another particular Doctor, named Nicholas Sudatworits, who has writ certain
spiritual Treatises. The Muscovites have so great a Veneration for this man's
memory, that it is not long since, that Wax-Candles were lighted before his
Picture, for which they had built a particular Chapel, in the great street
which leads to Twere Gate: but both were destroyed by the late fire.

S. Athanasius Creed is their rule of Faith. They believe in God the Father, as
Creator of all the World, in God the Son, as Savior and Redeemer of all
Mankind; and in the Holy Ghost, as Sanctifier of all the Faithful.

It Is true, their Religion is full of abundance of cha^fy Superstitions; in
that they consider the Virgin Mary, the Evangelists, the Apostles, and an
infinite number of other Saints, not only as simple Intercessors, as the most
intelligent affirm, but also as causes, and co-operators of their Salvation.
There is no Muscovite but gives his Saints and their Images, the honor due
only to God, who is so jealous thereof, that he treats that false Worship as
spiritual Whoredom. The ignorance of the meaner sort of people is so gross,
that they place all Religion in the honors and veneration they give their
Images. It is also all the instructions they give their Children, who in order
to devotion, learn only to stand with great respect before those Images to say
their Prayers. Their good works, (which they believe meritorious) are, building
of Monasteries and Churches, and giving Alms; besides which they do nothing
whereby a man might judge of their Faith by their works.

They stand very much upon their being Members of the Greek Church, and their
Histories and Annals say, that Christian Religion was planted in Russia in the
Apostles times. That St. Andrew leaving Greece, embarked upon the River
Boristhenes, and came, by the Sea of Ladoga, to Novogorod, where he preached
the Gospel. That, since that time, Christian Religion had been absolutely
destroyed, by the Tartars and other Pagans, who became Masters of all Muscovy;
and that about the year 989. Wolodimer, Great Duke of Russia, having gained
very great victories over his Neighbors, and reunited several Provinces to
his Crown, became so considerable, that Basilius, and Constantinus
Porphyrogennetes, Emperors of Constantinople, sent a solemn Embassy to
congratulate and complement him. That brought him first acquainted with the
Christian Religion, which he afterward embraced, and was baptized. The Bishops
and Priests sent thither by the Patriarch of Constantinople further instructed
and baptized the people, who have ever since made profession of the Greek
Religion.

Johannes Curopalates, who writ part of the Byzantine History, and lived about
that time, says, that this Conversion was not effected without miracle, and
that the Bishops faith prevailed more upon the spirits of these Barbarians,
than the preaching of the Gospel. For being not able to comprehend the
wonderful things which are said of our Saviors life, they desired a proof of
that promise he makes to the faithful, of giving them by the Father what ever
they should desire in his name. The Bishop undertook it, and told them, that he
had so great an assurance of the Word of God, that they could not desire any
thing, which his prayer should not obtain from God. Whereupon they said, that
since God had preserved Daniel's companions in the fiery Furnace, he might as
well prevent the Bible, which is full of all those mavelous things, from
being consumed by fire. The Bishop was content to stand to this trial, and so
cast the Bible into a great fire, where having lain till the fire was all
spent, the Book was taken out as untouched as when it was cast in. Cedrenus and
Zonaras confirm the truth of this story, and say that Wolodimir was so moved at
this miracle, that he immediately abolished all Idolatry, and banished it his
Territories.

Hence it comes that the Muscovites love the Greeks, and have a kindness for
them, and do them all the good they can, when any occasion offers it self. In
the year 1649. The Patriarch of Jerusalem came to Moscou, and brought the Great
Duke some of the earth of our Savior's Sepulcher, though it is known 'twas cut
out of a Rock, and some holy water from Jordan. He was most magnificently
received, and conducted by the whole Clergy to his audience, which the Great
Duke gave him, together with a Present of above 100000 Ducats: but he was so
unfortunate in his return, as to fall into the hands of some Turks, who took
away all had been given him. There come almost every year to the Czaar's Court,
some of the Greek Priests or Monks, to sell their Relics, which they put off
at very good rates.

The Muscovites do all profess the same Religion, which being as it were
particular to them, may be said to extend as far as the Great Duke's Dominions
do; unless it be, that it is also exercised at Narva, under the Jurisdiction of
the King of Sueden, and that the Tartars have also their Mahumetan and Pagan
Religion, along the Wolga, and beyond Astrachan, upon the Caspian Sea. There
are not any, not even among their Monks and Priests, that can give any reason
of their belief; because they have not the Word of God preached unto them; upon
which account it is, that the Patriarch suffers them not to dispute of
Religion, or inquire into that of foreiners. Some few years since, a Monk of
Nisenovogorod had some conference with a Protestant Minister; but the Patriarch
coming to hear of it, sent for him, and cast him into prison, where he must
have endured a great deal of misery, had he not had the wit to say, that the
Minister had discovered some inclinations to the Muscovian Religion, and would,
in all likelihood, be converted.

Their Characters they have from the Greeks, as well as their Religion; but as
they have altered the later, so also have they changed and augmented the
former, as may be seen by the Table we shall here give of them.

A (...) Aas A (...) Buki b B (...) Wedi w (...) glagol g (...) dobro d E jest
e (...) Schiwet sch (...) Sielo S (...) Zemla Z^^ (...) Ische i (...) Ii ij
(...) kakoi k (...) ludi l M (...) Muslori m Naas n (...) On o (...) Pokoi ^
(...) Er^^i r (...) Slowo S T T (...) Twerdo t y (...) Iik u phert ph Chir ch
(...) ot ot (...) ^i ^^ (...) ^^erf (...) (...) Scha sch (...) Tscha tsch (...)
Ier j (...) Ieri (...) Iet ie (...) ie ieh (...) ito I^ (...) (...) ius ius
(...) Ace ce (...) ksi ks (...) psi ps (...) phi^^ (...) ischil ^^ (...)

Characteres linguae Rutenicae
Numeri
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (...) 8 9 10 11 12 20 30 (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 200 (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)(...)

These Characters they make use of as well in their printed Books, as Writings,
their Language being peculiar to themselves, but coming so near the Sclavonian,
and the Polish, that he who has one will find it no great difficulty to learn
the other. It has nothing common with the Greek, though indeed in their
Liturgy there are some words, borrowed from the Greeks, but they are not used
any where else. We said before, that the Muscovites in their Schools learn only
to read and write in their own Language, and care not for the Learning of any
other: but within these few years, they have, with the Patriarch's consent,
opened a School, where Greek and Latin is taught, under the direction of a
natural Grecian, named Arsenius. It is not yet known, what may be expected from
it, but certain it is that there are among the Muscovites those that want
neither ingenuity nor an inclination to Study, and would learn any thing, did
they but meet with any body to teach them. Almas Iuanouits, the present
Chancellor, or Chief Secretary of State, was so happy in his youth, as to have
traveled into Turkey and Persia, and learned the Languages of those two
Countries so well, that he needs no Interpreter, when he has ought to do with
the Grand Seigneur, or King of Persia's Miinisters. The Danish Interpreter we
spoke of before, has translated into their Language, certain Latin and French
Books, which have taken so well, that it is hoped, the Courtiers will, in time,
apply themselves to the study of those Languages, which can acquaint them with
such excellent things.

All their exercise of Religion consists principally, in Baptism, Reading of
the Word of God in the Church, going to Mass, praying to Saints, making
reverences and inclinations before their Images, Processions, Pilgrimages,
Fasting certain days in the year, Confession and Communion.

They think Baptism so much the more necessary, Their Baptism.
in that they think it the only door through which a man must enter into
Christ, and so into Paradise. They acknowledge themselves conceived and born in
sin, and that God has instituted Baptism for their Regeneration, and to
cleanse them, by water, from their original impurity. Whence it is that they
baptize their Children as soon as they are born. If the child be weak, he is
immediately baptized, yet not in the same room where the Woman lies in: but if
well, he is carried to Church by the Godfather and Godmother. The Priest
receives him at the Church door, signs him with the sign of the Cross in the
forehead, and gives him the Benediction, saying, The Lord preserve thy coming
in and thy going out. The Godfathers deliver the Priest nine Wax-candles, which
he lights and fastens cross the Font, which stands in the midst of the Church.
He incenses the Godfathers, and consecrates the water with many ceremonies.
Then he makes a Procession together with the Godfathers, who have wax-candles
in their hands, about the Font. The Clark goes before carrying the Image of St.
John, and they go about it three times, the Priest in the interim reading out
of a Book, That done, the Priest asks the Godfathers, the name of the Child,
who give it him in writing. He puts the paper upon an Image, which he holds
upon the Child's breast, and having muttered over certain prayers, he asks the
Godfather, whether the Child believes in God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost?
Then they all turn their backs to the Font, to show their aversion and horror
for the three questions which the Priest is to make them afterward; to wit,
whether the Child forsakes the Devil, whether he forsakes his Angels, and
whether he forsakes his Works? The Godfathers answer to every question, yes,
and spet so many times upon the ground. That done, they face about to the Font,
and then the Priest, having asked them whether they promise to bring up the
Child in the true Greek Religion, exorcises him, by putting his hands upon the
Child, saying, Get out of this Child thou unclean Spirit, and make way for the
holy Ghost, and by blowing three times cross, upon the Child, to drive away the
Devil, by whom they believe Children are really possessed before Baptism. I I
have been told, that now, the exorcism is performed at the Church-door, lest
the Devil, when he comes out of the Child, should profane the Church. Then, he
cuts off a little of the Child's hair, and puts it into a Book, and having
asked the Godfathers, whether they bring that Child to be baptized, he takes
him, being stark naked, into his arms, and dips him three times into the water,
pronouncing the ordinary words of the Sacrament, I baptize thee in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. After the Baptism, he puts a
corn of Salt in the Child's mouth, makes the sign of the Cross, in the
forehead, upon the hands, the breast, and the back, with an Oil purposely
consecrated for that use, and, putting a clean Shirt about him, says, Thou art
as clean and as clear from thy Original Sin as this Shirt. The Ceremonies are
concluded with a little Cross of Gold, Silver, or Lead, according to the
ability of the Parents, such as our Bishops wear, which the Priest hangs about
the Child's neck, with so strict an Obligation to wear it all his life time,
that if it be not found about him at his death, they would not bury the
Carcass, but drag it to the common Dunghill. The Priest does also assign the
Child a particular Saint, whose Image he delivers to the Godfathers, and
charges them to oblige the Child, when he is come to years of discretion, to
have a particular devotion for his Patron. Then he embraces, and kisses the
Child, and the Godfathers, and exhorts them to love one another, but above all
things that they take heed of inter-marrying. If it happens there are many
Children to be Christened at the same time, the Font is emptied so often as
there are Children to be baptized, and other water is consecrated; it being
their persuasion, that the former being soiled with the impurity of that
Child's Original Sin who had been baptized before, is not fit to cleanse a
second, much less a third. They will not by any means heat this water by fire
but, when it is very cold, put it into a hot place to make it a little warmer.
Persons of age that are to be baptized, such as Apostate Christians, Turks and
Tartars, receive their Baptism in a Brook or River, where they are plunged over
head and ears, be it as cold as it will, nay sometimes they break the Ice to
get them into the water. Thus, above all others, are treated those whom they
call Chaldeens, or Chaldaeans. These are a sort of rascally fellows, who get
leave of the Patriarch to disguise themselves, by putting on Vizards, and to
run up and down the streets from the 18. of December, till Twelve-tide, with
Fireworks, wherewith they set fire in their hair and beards whom they meet.
Their main spleen is against the Peasants, whom they force, every time they are
met, to pay a Copec ere they get out of their hands: and this they exact with
such insolence, that I have seen them set a load of Hay on fire, and burn the
Peasant's beard and face, because he made some difficulty to give it them. They
are all disguised, and have on their heads great wooden hats, fantastically
painted, daubing their beards with honey, that the sparkles might not fasten in
them. These artificial fires they make of a powder which they call Plaua, made
of a certain herb not known elsewhere. It makes a noble and very delightful
flame, especially in the night. But of these hereafter, when we come to treat
of the Persian Fireworks. These men, as they say, represent those who heated
the Oven, into which Shadrach, Mesak, and Abednego were cast, by the command of
Nebuchadnezzar.

These people are treated as profane persons, and are numbered among Pagans and
Infidels; so that being in a state of inevitable damnation, they must
necessarily be reconciled to God, and enter into the Church by Baptism. To
that end they pitch on Twelf-day, as that on which sometimes happened the
vocation of the Gentiles, and afterward, they are as clean, and become as holy
as the best Christians, who are ordinarily baptized but once, whereas one of
these Chaldaeans may have been baptized ten or twelve times. The insolences
committed by them occasioned the prohibitions made by the late Pattriarch, that
any should put on Vizards or disguise themselves.

Those who are to profess the Muscovian Religion are obliged to go, for six
weeks, into a Monastery, where the Monks instruct them, and teach them their
Prayers, the manner of honoring the Saints, of doing reverence to the Images,
and making the signs of the Cross. Then they are brought to the place where
they are to be baptized, where they are obliged to abjure their former
Religion, to detest it as Heretical, and to spit as often as it is named. After
their Baptism, they are clad in Muscovian habits, being presented with a noble
Vestiment from the Great Duke, who also allows them a Pension suitable to their
quality.

There is a great number of Apostates at Moscou, where many foreign Soldiers,
especially French, were rebaptised, after the War of Smolensko, about 25 years
since, though they were not acquainted with the Language of the Country, nor
had any knowledge of the Muscovian Religion. Which may in some measure be
excusable in common Soldiers, who mind not much what they are to expect in the
other World; but my wonder is, how persons of Quality, such as want neither
Ingenuity nor Judgment, should be induced to Apostatize, and embrace a
contrary Religion, merely for subsistence sake, as the Baron de Raymond, and
Monsieur Groin, French Gentlemen, Colonel Alexander Lesley, and Count Slakof.
This last came in the year 1640. to Holstein, and thence went into Denmark,
where he pretended himself descended from the house of Slick in Bohemia, and
that he had lost his Estate upon the account of Religion; which the King of
Denmark, and the Duke of Holstein believing, gave him Letters of recommendation
to the Great Duke of Muscovy. He was no sooner come to Moscou, but he gave out,
that it was purposely to change his Religion, and to be a servant to his
Czaarick Majesty. The Patriarch, and Muscovian Lords were the more glad to
receive him because he was accounted among them, a person of noble extraction,
and great worth, which yet was further heightened in him by his being versed in
several Languages, especially the Latin and Polish. They received him with
great joy, caused him to be baptized, and the Great Duke gave him, with the
name of Leo Alexander Slick, and the quality of Knez, a Pension of 200. Crowns
a month. He made his Addresses to the Princess Irene Michaelouna, and was so
fond as to think, the Great Duke would have bestowed his own Sister on him; so
that hearing, there were two persons of quality dispatched away to Negotiate
the Princesse's marriage with a foreign Prince, he fell into such a melancholy,
that he came not to himself again, till they had given him a Daughter of one of
the greatest Bojares in the Kingdom. The King of Denmark coming afterward to
hear of this man's carriage, and understanding withal, that, far from being of
the Illustrious house of Slick, he was a subject of Count Gaspar's, of Denhof,
in Poland, and that he had surpised him in his recommendatory Letters, he sent
notice thereof to the Great Duke, who reproached him with his dissimulation and
imposture, but suffered him to enjoy what he had bestowed on him, which he does
still, under the name of Knez Leo Alexandrouits Slakouseskie.

Colonel Lesley fell into that misfortune out of weakness. He had in that
quality served the Great Duke, during the first War of Smolensko, by which he
had gotten a very great sum of money. But those of his profession being not
always the best husbands, he soon spent what grew every day less and less. To
repair the breaches of his fortune, he thought it his best course to return to
Moscou, which he did upon occasion of an Embassy which the Queen of Sueden
sent, some time since, to the Great Duke, whereof Eric Gillenstiern, a Senator
of the Kingdom was the chief. But for as much as there was at that time, no
likelihood of any War in Muscovy, and that the Great Duke was unwilling to
burden himself with Pensions, Lesley sent him word, that he would be content
with some Lands, which he would make what advantage he could of, and thereupon
got a noble Manor upon the Wolga. He was now in such a condition, as that he
might have lived like a Lord all the rest of his days, if his Wife's niggardly
humor had not exasperated the Countrey-women against them. She treated them so
hardly, that being not any longer able to endure it, they complained of her,
alleging that she forced them to eat flesh on fasting days, that she allowed
them not the time to make their inclinations before the Images, much less to go
to Church, and, what was worst of all, that she had taken the Images from the
Walls, and cast them into the fire. There needed no more to make her odious to
the whole Nation. They immediately sent for Lesley and his whole Family, and
the Countrey-women, and the Colonel's Wife were brought face to face; she
confessed indeed, that she had forced them to work hard, but denied all the
rest. All the Servants that were strangers took their Oaths on her behalf, and
yet the others proffering to make good their accusation by enduring the
torture, she could not so far clear herself, but that the Patriarch, taking
cognizance of the business, obliged the Great Duke to take those Lands out of
the Strangers hands, and to put out an act, whereby it should not be lawful for
any to be possessed of such Manors if they were not Muscovites, either by
Birth or Religion. Lesley finding himself reduced to his extremity, and having
not wherewith to maintain his Children and Family, declared, that if the Great
Duke would continue him in the said Manor, he and his Family would change
their Religion. They take him at his word, and he, his Wife and Children are
put into a Monastery, where they are instructed and rebaptized. Ilia
Danilouits Miloslauski and his Wife were pleased to answer for them at their
Baptism, and to be at the charge of their Wedding, it being necessary they
should be married anew. The Great Duke made them great Presents, and, among
other things, bestowed on them, the sum of six thousand Crowns in ready money.
But the Peasants hearing, that, by this change of Religion, they were to be
reduced to their former slavery, petitioned His Majesty that they might have
another Lord, and pitched upon Monsieur Groin, who had revolted at the same
time, and had some pretense to those Lands, as having had a promise made him of
some of that nature. So that Lesley was forced to content himself with a
Pension of 90. Crowns per mensem, which is the ordinary pay of a Colonel in
times of Peace, and another somewhat less for his Son.

I shall here make a short digression for a Lady's sake, The admirable
constancy of an English Gentlewoman.
who has, by an admirable constancy, made it appear, that, if Men are many
times subject to the weakness of Women, it sometimes happens that Women have
those Virtues which may be exemplary to Men. There is this to be said in
commendation of the Muscovites, that they never force any to profess their
Religion, unless that in a Family, the Husband or Wife be of it, in which case
they suffer not the other to continue his former profession. We said, the Baron
de Raymond was one of those that changed their Religion after the first War of
Smolensko. He was married to an English Gentleman's Daughter (who had lived
many years at Moscou, and whose name was William Barnesley, being the
handsomest Woman of any Stranger that was in the Country) and had changed his
Religion rather out of fickleness, and to comply with the Great Duke, than out
of any conscientious motive, was re-baptised, and took the name of Iuan instead
of that of Peter, which had been given him at his first Baptism. According to
the Law of the Country, his Wife was to follow his Example, which to effect,
her Husband used all means imaginable, but found so great a constancy on the
other side, that he was forced to recurr to the Authority of the Great Duke and
Patriarch. These at first went mildly to work, offering her very great
advantages in their Religion: but the young Gentlewoman, though but 15. years
of age, was inflexible, cast her self at the Great Duke's feet, and entreated
him rather to take away her life, than force her to embrace a Belief, which she
was not satisfied of in her Conscience. The Father used the same submissions,
but the Patriarch put him off with kicks, and told him that she was to be
treated as a Child, that she knew not what was for the good of her Soul, and
that she must be baptized whether she would or no. Accordingly she was put into
the hands of certain Religious Women, who violently dragged her to a Brook,
where she was rebaptized, notwithstanding the protestations she made, that
that pretended Baptism, which they then gave her against her own consent, could
not blot out the Character, which her first true Baptism had imprinted in her
Soul. When they plunged her in the water, she drew one of the Religious Women
in along with her, and when they would oblige her to detest her former
Religion, she spit in their faces, and would never abjure. After her Baptism,
they sent her to Stuatka, where her Husband was Weywode, and there she stayed
till her Husband's three years Government was expired, who dying soon after his
return to Moscou, she thought she might reassume her former Habit, as she was
a Stranger, and profess her former Religion, which was the Protestant. But that
would not be permitted, her two Sons were taken from her, and she, with a
little Daughter, was sent to the Monastery of Belossora, some 10. or 12.
leagues from Moscou, where she lived five years among the Nuns, and was never
suffered to speak with any one that could give her the least account of her
Friends, or Children. During all that time, she heard from them but once, by
the means of a Tiler, a German, who, under pretense of calling his Boy, and
showing him the Tiles he wanted, directed the disconsolate Lady to a place
where she should find Letters. The Patriarch dying, she got out of the
Monastery, and his Successor allowed her the liberty of her Conscience at her
own House, as also to give and receive visits: but they would never permit her
to go to Sermons. I often visited her while she was in that condition, and have
heard, that this Virtuous Lady died some two years since, firm and constant in
the profession of her Religion to the last gasp. To which I may add, by the
way, that it is not long since, that her Father William Barnesley died in
England, having attained the age of 126. years, after he had married a second
Wife, at 100.

Those Muscovites, who change their Religion in other Countries, and would
return to their Communion, must be first rebaptized; which is the more
observable, in that the Greek Religion, though she approves not the Baptism of
the Latin Church, yet seems to be satisfied with the former which they might
have received in their Church, so as not to oblige Converts to re-baptization
upon their change of Religion.

Their Festivals and Feasts are regulated and certain, and they observe them
very strictly. Till within these few years, the Muscovites thought they kept
Holy Day well enough, when they had been at Mass in the morning, though they
spent the rest of the day in their ordinary Employments; insomuch that at the
time of our first Embassy, upon Sundays, and Holy Days, shops were open, and
Merchants and Tradesmen were at work; it being, as they said, only for great
Lords to mind their enjoyments upon Holy Days. But the present Patriarch, has
ordered shops to be shut, not only upon Sundays, but also on Wednesdayes and
Fridayes, which are their Fasting days, not permitting the Taverns to sell
Wine or Aquavitae in Service time.

Their great Festivals, besides Sunday, are thirteen, and, according to their
year, which begins the first day of September, stand in this order;

The 8. of September, Prasnick rosostua priziste bogorodice, that is to say,
the Feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Mother of God.

The 14. of September, Vzemirna wosdui senja Chresta; The Exaltation of the
Cross.

The 21. of November, Vedenja priziste bogorodice, the Oblation of the blessed
Mother of God.

The 25. of December, Rosostua Christoua, the Nativity of our Lord.

The 6. of January. Boje jaulenia, or Creschenia, the Epiphany.

The 2. of February, Stratenia Gospoda Boga, Candlemas-day.

The 25. of March, Blagauescenia priziste bogorodice, the Annunciation of our
Lady.

Werbna Woscreschenia, Palm Sunday.

Welikoiden, or Woscreschenia Christoua, Easter Day, or the Resurrection of
Christ.

Wosnescenia Christoua, the Ascension of Christ.

Schiestuie swetaga Ducha, Pentechost, or the sending of the Holy Ghost.

The 6. of August, Preobrosiena gospodo Christoua, the manifestation of the
Glory of Jesus Christ, upon the Mountain.

The 15. of August, Vspenia priziste bogorodice, the Ascension or Assumption of
the Mother of God.

They celebrate the Feast of the Trinity, the morrow after Pentecost, and that
of All Saints, upon the Sunday following.

No day in the year but is the particular Feast of some Saint, sometimes of two
or three, but the people observe them not. Only Ecclesiastics are obliged to
say the Offices of those days. They have their perpetual Almanac, according
to the Old-stile, wherein, without any trouble, they find all the Feasts both
moveable and immovable.

Upon the great Festivals and Sundays, they go thrice to Church; first in the
morning, before day, to Mattens, which they call Sasterim; at noon, to the
Obedny; and in the evening, to Wadschemi, or Vespers. The whole Service
consists in the reading of certain Chapters out of the Bible, Psalms, and St.
Athanasius's Creed: whereto they sometimes add a Homily out of St. Chrysostom,
and certain Prayers, which they sing, much after the same manner as Antiphona's
are sung, saying ever and anon their Gospodi Pomilui, Lord have mercy upon me,
which the people repeats three times, making the sign of the Cross. This done,
the Priest goes up to the Altar, attended by a Clerk, and says the Office,
according to the Liturgy of great St. Basil. He pours Claret Wine and Water
into the Chalice, with some little bits of Bread, consecrates them, and says
certain Prayers, which ended, he takes out the Bread with a spoon, but gives
not of it to any other, unless some sick Child be brought, to whom he gives the
Communion. If the Priest has known his Wife that day, he is not to come near
the Altar, but must get Mass said by another. The people stand all the service
time, and incessantly bow themselves before the Images, pronouncing the Gospodi
Pomilui. They read only the bare Text of the Bible, and certain Homilies, as we
said before, giving this reason for it, that the Holy Spirit having grounded
the Church upon the pure Word of God, without any explication, neither are they
to trouble themselves with any, since that the different interpretations of it,
do partly occasion the Errors and Heresies, whereby the Church is divided.
About five years since, the Protopope of Morum, taking upon him to Preach, and
making use of God's Word, to exhort the people to Piety, the Patriarch deposed
him, together with all the other Priests that would have followed his example,
excommunicated them, and banished them into Siberia.

They have made a certain Book, wherein they treat the Histories of the Gospel
after a strange manner, and adulterate them with so many fabulous, impious, and
impertinent circumstances, that it is not to be much admired that vice and sin
reign among them, when they are furnished with examples thereof in their Books
of Devotion. This minds me of a story, which the Danish Gentleman, I have
elsewhere spoken of, relates in his Travels into Muscovy. Discoursing one day
with his Pristaf, concerning matters of Religion, the Muscovite, whose name was
Foedor, a man well stricken in years, told him, that there was no great harm in
contracting a habit of sinning daily, provided a man had an intention to repent
him of it at the point of death, and brought for his reason the example of Mary
Magdalene. This Mary, said he, was a professed Curtezan, so that it is not to
be doubted but she offended God very often. Yet it happened one day, she met a
man upon the highway, who desired of her that kindness which she had not
denied any other: but, those even of her profession being not always in the
same humor, she would do nothing, till such time as the man desired her to do
it for God's sake: That then she satisfied his desire, and that doing, for
God's sake, what she was unwilling to do out of complaisance, the action became
so meritorious, that she had not only expiated all her other Sins, by that Act
of Charity, but also deserved to be put in red letters in the Books of the
Saints. There is no Evangelical story which they have not thus adulterated, and
dress up in circumstances no less abominable.

They are all bare in the Church, even the Great Duke himself. Only their
Priests have on their Skufia, or Caps, which are given them at their
Consecration. When they make their Inclinations to the Images, they often make
the sign of the Cross, with three fingers of the right hand, touching, first,
the forehead, then the breast, then the right shoulder, and lastly the left.
And that it might not be thought this is done without Mystery, they say, the
three fingers signify the Trinity, putting them to the forehead, they would
signify, that Christ is Ascended into Heaven; to the breast, that a man should
love God with all his heart; and the passing of them from the right shoulder to
the left, puts them in mind of the day of Judgment, when God shall place the
Righteous on his right hand, and the Wicked on the left; those, to be called to
eternal Salvation; these, to be tumbled down into the abysses of Hell. The
Muscovites undertake not any thing, but they first make the sign of the Cross,
as eating, drinking, or any other civil actions.

As for Images, Their Images.
they confess there were not any in Churches, during the first Centuries, and
till the time of Constantine the Great, or if there were, they were not
honored with any worship; but that they are used, only to represent the
stories of the Bible. They say, that they follow herein the opinion of John
Damascene: but it is most likely they have it from the Greek Church, with
which, they suffer not any that are carved or graven, as being forbidden in the
Decalogue, but they have Images painted with oil upon wood, wretchedly
colored, and illproportioned, about a foot in breadth, somewhat more in
length. They will not meddle with them if they are not made by one of their
Religion, though they came from the best Painter's hand in Europe. At Moscou,
there is a particular Marketplace for Images, where nothing else is sold,
though they call that kind of Commerce, bartering or trucking with money, out
of a belief they have, that the names of buying and selling carry not respect
enough in them, for sacred things. Heretofore they obliged strangers to have of
them in their houses, that their Muscovian Servants might be thereby excited to
the exercise of their Devotion: But the present Patriarch permits not, they
should be profaned by the Germans; insomuch, that Charles du Moulin, having
bought a stone house, the Seller scraped the wall, where an Image had been
painted, and carried away what he had scraped off. The Peasants would not
permit us to touch them, not to turn our feet toward them when we lay down.
Nay, some were at the charge of Incense to purify them, after we had left their
Houses.

The walls of their Churches are full of them, and they represent, for the most
part, our Savior, the Virgin Mary, St. Nicholas, Patron of Muscovy, or the
particular Saints they make choice of for the principal object of their
Devotions. Those who commit sins deserving excommunication, are obliged to
cause their Saint to be taken away, who is not to be suffered in their
Churches, no more than their persons. Great Persons, and Rich Merchants adorn
their Images with Pearls and other precious Stones. All Muscovites look upon
them as things so necessary, as that without Images they could not say their
prayers; which whenever they do, they always set Wax-candles before their
Saint, and look very steadfastly upon him, as long as the Devotion lasts.

When a Muscovite comes into a House, or Chamber, he says not a word, till he
has fixed his eyes on the Saint he looks for, which they ordinarily hang in a
corner behind the Table, or if he finds him not, he asks, Jest le Boch, where
is the God? As Soon as he perceives him, he makes him one very low reverence, or
more, and pronounces at every time, Gospodi Pomilui: then he turns to the
Company and salutes them.

The Muscovites respect their Images, as if there were somewhat of Divinity in
them, and they attribute unto them the virtue of Miracles, whereof we had this
example in the year 1643. that an old Image beginning to change color, and to
turn a little reddish, they immediately cried out, a Miracle. The Great Duke
and the Patriarch were frighted thereat, as if that red color presaged some
misfortune to either the Prince or the people; nay, they had sent out Orders
for extraordinary fasts and public prayers to be made all over the Kingdom, if
the Painters who were sent for to have their advise in this affair, had not all
assured them, that there was nothing they should be troubled at, since there
was nothing extraordinary, but that Time, having consumed and eaten out the
paint, had only discovered the first color of the wood, which was red.

Their Monks and Priests have nevertheless the art to make them do Miracles, or
to observe such things in them as oblige the people to extraordinary Devotions,
which must not want their offerings, that the Priest may not want his
advantage. The City of Archangel furnishes us with a good example to this
purpose, of two Priests there, who, having got together a vast sum of money by
their Impostures, must needs fall out at the parting of it, and upbraid one
another of their cheats, so loudly, that the Magistrate coming to hear of it,
they had thirty lashes a-piece, with the Executioner's good will, after the
manner we have before described their whipping. These Juglers put the people
into continual frights, and besot them with so strange a veneration for their
Images, that in their greatest dangers, their recourse is only to them. Jacob
de la Gardie, General of the Suedish Army, having in the year 1610. taken the
City of Novogorod, some part of it was set a-fire, and one of the Inhabitants
seeing his House all of a flame, presented thereto an Image of St. Nicholas,
entreating it to stay the progress of the furious Element, which was ready to
ruin him. But perceiving the fire went on still, he flung his Image into it,
saying to it, that since it would not help him, let it help it self, and quench
the fire if it would. It was then also observed, that the Suedish Soldiers,
not finding any thing in their Houses, carried away the Images of the
Muscovites, and by that means obliged them to follow them, and to redeem their
Saints at a very dear rate.

The first thing they teach their Children, is to make their reverences and
inclinations to the Images. At Ladoga I lodged at a Woman's House, who would not
give his breakfast to a Child she had, who could hardly either stand or speak,
till he had first made nine inclinations before the Saint, and as often, as
well as he could pronounce it, said his Gospodi.

Nor is it to be thought, but that among so great a number of innocent persons,
there are some so well instructed, as to see a glimpse of truth through these
thick Clouds of ignorance. There was at Russian Narva a rich Merchant, who is
still living, one that came often to visit the Ambassadors, and dined with
them. He discoursed very rationally, and would say, that he did not approve the
opinion, which the rest of the Muscovites have of their Saints, nor the worship
of their Images, and he did not expect his Salvation from Colors, which he
might wipe out with his handkercher, and from wood, which it was in his power
to cast into the fire: That he found in the Holy Scripture, which he had
attentively read over, much more solid comforts, and such foundations for his
happiness, as could not be shaken: That their Fasting signified nothing, when,
instead of eating Flesh, they glutted themselves with the best sorts of Fish,
and the most delicious Hydromel, and Aquavitae: That bread and water might
suffice those who were desirous to fast, and that prayer was the best part of
that mortification. The Ambassadors asked him, why, having all these good
sentiments about him, he had not withal the Charity to inspire them into his
Countrymen? He answered, that it was not his calling, and that, if he
endeavored it, he should not prevail, because he was already looked on as a
Heretic among them: That he suffered Images in his House, but, only for the
honor of God, and to honor the memory of the Saints: That he had a Picture of
the King of Sueden's, and kept it, for the Heroic actions done by that Prince,
and that he conceived he might do the like with those of Jesus Christ and the
Saints, who had not only done great actions, but also Miracles. We found by the
sequel of his discourse that he knew all the reasons alleged by the Greeks at
the Council of Constantinople against those whom they called Iconomachi, in the
year 787. against which Council Charlemaign called, in the year 797. that of
Frankford, in which the Doctrine of the Greeks concerning Images was condemned
and anathematized.

Not long since, a Protopope of Casanskey, whose name was Iuan Neronou, began
to inveigh against the honor done to Images, charging those with Idolatry who
worshipped Colors and Wood. He said, that if there were any veneration due to
Images, that they were rather to admire, in man, that of God, and to honor the
Painter, rather than the Images made by him. But the Patriarch soon took an
order with this Priest, degraded him, and shut him up in the Monastery called
Cameno Monastir, upon the River Wolga.

When the wood of their Images comes to rot, they do not cast it away, but
throw it into the River, that the water may carry it away; or they bury it in
some Garden, or Churchyard.

The Saints of Muscovy, as well as those of other places, have their Miracles.
Possevin says, they are all Fables, and that the stories related of them are
ridiculous. They have one of a very late date, named Sudatworets Philip
Metropolite, of the House of Colitziou. He lived in the reign of the Tyrant
John Basilouits, and grew famous for the remonstrances he made to that Prince
of his wicked life. The Tyrant, troubled thereat, sent him into a Monastery far
from Moscou, so as that he might be no longer importuned with his reproaches:
but the other made the Pen do what his tongue could not, and, from time to
time, represented the Judgment of God to the Eyes of the Great Duke, so
pressingly, that the other not able any longer to endure his reprehensions,
sent one of his Servants to strangle him. The Executioner found him ready
enough to die, with this desire only, that, instead of strangling him with a
Cord, he would run him with a Knife into the Heart; which he accordingly did.
The Monks of the Monastery put him into the Catalogue of their Holy Martyrs,
and sent his Body to be buried in the Island of Solofka, in the White Sea, near
Archangel, where they say he has done many Miracles. The present Patriarch
persuaded the Great Duke, that, while he was Metropolitan of Rostou, and
Iarislau, he had heard that many sick persons had been healed there, and that
the Body of the Saint was as whole as the day he was killed, and prevailed with
him to have it translated from Solofka to Moscou. The Miracles which are known
to have been really done at the translation thereof, are these: viz. that Knez
Michael Levontgewits, who was employed to see it done, going thither with a
Diak, and his two Sons, and having embarked himself with some of his retinue in
a great open Boat, he got safely into the Island, but it could never be known
what became of the three others, and all those that were with them. The other
Miracle was, that the Great Duke, the Patriarch, and all the Court going a
league out of Moscou, to meet the Saint, the Metropolitan of Rostou and
Iaroslau, named Warlam, being a corpulent fat Man, and about 70. years of age,
wearied with so small a Journey, fell down stock-dead, As soon as he came to
the shrine. Which at least, is as certain as what the Muscovites say of the
great number of the blind, dumb, deaf, lame, persons troubled with agues, and
paraliticks, whom that body has healed, since it was placed in the great
Church of the Castle. At first, no week passed, but it did five or six
Miracles: but now it does not any at all, and they say it is by reason of the
incredulity of the people, that that Virtue has left the Saints Body; which
they say is still entire: but it is forbidden, upon pain of death, for any man
to lift up the cloth which covers it.

In the Monastery of Troitza, 12. leagues from Moscou, they have another Saint
named Sergius. He was a very tall man, a thing the Muscovites have a great
veneration for, and had sometime been a Soldier; but the crimes and disorders
he had committed in his youth, touched his Conscience so to the quick, that he
forsook the World, and turned Hermit. He quitted that solitary kind of life,
and got into the Monastery of Troitza, where he was soon chosen Igumine, or
Abbot, and did there, with his Disciple Nikon, so many Miracles, that, dying in
the year 1563. they were both Canonized. They say, their heads are there yet to
be seen entire, and that when the Polanders besig'd that Monastery, the head of
Sergius only, forced them back in the midst of their assault, and made them
turn their arms against themselves. Of which yet there is nothing to be found
in the History of that time, which speaks but of one siege of Troitza, under
John Sapiha, a Polish General, who was indeed forced to raise it, not upon the
vigorous resistance of the Monks, or by the assistance of Sergius, but by the
Suedish Army, which came in to the relief of the Muscovites.

Since this Saint was buried there, that Monastery has been called Zergeofski
Troitza, though it be properly dedicated to the Trinity. It is so rich, that it
maintains above 300. Monks, and its revenue increases daily, through the Great
Duke's liberality, and the alms of those who go thither to perform their Vows,
they had made in their travels or sickness; and settle Annuities for Service to
be said after their death. The Great Duke, who goes thither twice a year,
lights off his Horse when he is come within half a league of the Monastery, and
so walks it. Having ended his Devotions, he spends some days there in Hunting,
during which, the Abbot maintains him and his retinue, both with Man's meat and
Horse meat.

Some years since, the Muscovites found an Image of the Virgin Mary, at Casan,
and sent a copy of it to Moscou, where there is a Church built for the
reception of it in the Marketplace, near that street where the Cutlers have
their shops. The Church is called Precista Casanska, the holy mother of Casan,
and many Pilgrimages are made to it. They go also in Pilgrimage to the
Monastery of Chutina, a league and a half from Novogorod, to the Sepulcher of
their Saint Warlam, who was born at Novogorod, and buried at Chutina, whence
they call his Festival, Prasnick Warlama Chutinskoga.

As to their Churches, Their Churches.
we said, there were above two thousand Churches and Chapels in the City and
Suburbs of Moscou. Those which are of stone are round and vaulted, because
God's Houses ought to represent Heaven which is his Throne. They have neither
Seats nor Benches, by reason none sit down, but all say their prayers either
standing or kneeling. The late Great Duke, who was much given to Devotion, lay
all along upon the ground, when he said his prayers. They have no Organs or
other musical instruments in their Churches, not using any, out of this
persuasion, that things inanimate cannot glorify God; That they were allowed in
the Paedagogy of the Law, but that, under the new Testament, they were no more
to be used than any other of the Jewish Ceremonies. The Patriarch that now is
has shown his enmity to Music, yet greater, in prohibiting the use of all
those musical instruments, which the Muscovites were wont to make use of at
their merry meetings. Some four or five years since, he caused all private
houses to be searched, for Instruments, and having laden five Wagons with
them, he sent them over the River of Moscou, where they were all burnt. Only
the Germans kept theirs, nor could the Patriarch, with all his Authority,
oblige the Bojar, Boris Nikita Iuanouits Romanou. to put away his Musicians.
There is no Stone-Church, but has, in the midst of four Turrets, a Tower
formed at the top much like the Knobs we set on Bedsteads, having upon it a
triple Cross, by which they say they represent our Savior, as Head of the
Church, saying, that the Cross being the Badge of Christianity, it is necessary
the Church of Christ should be known by it. They hold, they are profaned by
Strangers, that is to say, such as are not of their Communion; upon which
account it was, that when, at the beginning of our Travels, we entered into
them, they came and thrust us out, and many times they swept after us. If it
chance a Dog gets in, they think it not enough to sweep the Church, but they
also Incense it, and purify it with holy Water. They have also very much
respect for their Churchyards, and suffer not that any should make their water
in them.

Their Bells are not in steeples, but in a certain Engine, or Machine, near the
Church, in the Churchyard, and are for the most part so small, that few of
them are 150. or 200. pound weight. They toll them at the beginning of service,
and at the Elevation of the Chalice, for the Bread being put in immediately
after Consecration, they make but one Elevation. The Rope is not fastened to
the Bell, but to the Clapper, so that one man may toll three or four Bells at
the same time, if the Ropes be fastened to both his Elbows and both his hands,
which, making a certain chiming, the Muscovites are much taken with. But this
kind of chiming of the almost infinite number of Bells, which they many times
toll at the same time in all their Churches, makes a very strange noise, to
their ears, who are not accustomed thereto.

They think this chiming so necessary, that, without it, the divine Service
would be defective. Upon which persuasion it was, that a certain Pristaf, who
conducted the Suedish Ambassadors, hearing that they were desirous to do their
Devotions, it being Michaelmas- day, told them, that he could not imagine what
shift they would make to do it, since he had not, by reason of the greatness of
the Journey, brought any Bells along with him.

There is no Church but has an Image over the door; and at every corner of a
Street, and upon all the Gates of the City, there are Images, before which the
Muscovites make a halt to say their Gospodi. They also address the Gospodi to
the Crosses which are upon the Churches, so that they go through no Street,
but they make a short stay to do their Devotions.

The Ecclesiastical Government consists of a Patriarch, Their Hierarchy.
several Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Protopopes, and
Priests. The Patriarch, among them, has the same authority as the Pope has in
the Latin Church. The Patriarch of Constantinople had heretofore the
nomination of him. In time, he came to have only the confirmation of him; but
now of late; he has lost both. Filaretes Nikitits, the late Great Duke's
Father, was the last that desired confirmation from the Patriarch of
Constantinople. At present, the Patriarch of Muscovy is chosen by the other
Prelates, who meet in the great Church within the Castle, called Sabor, and
name two or three Prelates, of the most eminent for Learning and good Life, and
present them to the great Duke, who, after some conference with the Prelates,
proceeds jointly with them, to the election; unless those that are named be all
of such eminency, that they are at a loss which to make choice of, and so
forced to it by lot which course they took at the Election of this last
Patriarch. He was a Prelate of the Second Order, and has been named, with two
other Metropolitans, upon the reputation of his good life. The lot falling upon
him, all those of the First Order were discontented thereat, so that they put
it to the Lot a second time, in which also it fell again to him: but the
ambition of the other Competitors appearing still in their countenances, the
Great Duke was pleased to comply with them, and to put it to the Lot a third
time, which fell in like manner to the same Person, upon which all acquiesc'd.
His name is Nicon, and he had been before Metropolitan of Rostou and Iaroslou,
and is now about 45 years of age. He lives within the Palace, where he has
built him a house of stone. He keeps a good Table, and is a person of so
pleasant a disposition, that he discovers it in those actions that require the
greatest gravity. For, a handsome Gentlewoman being presented to him, for his
Benediction, after she had been rebaptized, with several others of her
Friends, he told her, that he was in some doubt, whether he should begin with
the kiss, which is given to Proselites after their Baptism, or with the
Benediction.

The Patriarch's authority is so great, that he in manner divides the
Sovereignty with the Great Duke. He is the Supreme Judge of all Ecclesiastical
Causes, and absolutely disposes of what ever concerns Religion, with such
power, that, in things relating to the Political Government, he reforms what he
conceives prejudicial to Christian simplicity and good manners, without giving
the Great Duke any account of it, who, without any contestation, commands the
orders made by the Patriarch to be executed. He has under him, four
Metropolitans, seven Archbishops, and one Bishop. The Metropolitans are those
of.

Novogorodskoi, and Welikoluskoy, who lives at Novogorod. Rostoufskoy, and
Iaroslauskoy, at Rostof. Casanskoi, and Swiatskoi, at Cassan. And that of
Sarskoi, and Pondoskoy, who lives within the Castle at Moscou* The Archbishops
are, those of Wologdskoi, and Weliko Premskoy, who lives at Wologda. Resanskoi,
and Moromskoi, at Resan. Sudalskoi, and Torruskoi, at Susdal. Twerskoi, and
Cassinskoi, at Twere. Sibirskoi, and Tobolskoi, at Toboleska. Astrachanskoi,
and Terskoi, at Astrachan. Pleskouskoi, and Sborskoi, at Plescou.
There is but one Bishop in all Muscovy, to wit, that of Comenskoi, and
Cassieskoi, who lives at Columna. The Patriarch has about him an Archdeacon,
who is as it were his Vicar General, and in the Castle of Sabor, he has a
Proto-Deacon. The other Ecclesiastical Orders are distinguished into
Proto-popes, Popes (or Priests) and Deacons. Those who make clean the Churches,
and toll the Bells, are called Pannamari. In their Monasteries they have
Archimandrites, Kilari's, and Igumeni's, who are their Abbots, Priors, and
Guardians.

The Patriarch, Their Prelates marry not.
Metropolitans, Archbishops and Bishops are not to marry, but make a Vow of
Chastity, for the time they shall continue in that Dignity, which, it seems,
give them not an indelible Character, as it does elsewhere, to those that are
advanced to it. They are forbidden to wear Rings on their fingers. They wear no
Drawers, nor Shirts of Linnen-cloath, but of Flannen, and do not ly upon Beds.

Those that enter into any Religious Order eat no flesh, How the Monks live.
nor fresh-Fish, and drink neither Wine, Aquavitae, nor Hydromel; but are
obliged to content themselves with their Quas, though when they are out of
their Monasteries, they dispense with the rigor of that Law, and eat of any
thing that is given them, making use of their time so well that many times they
are glad to be carried home.

The ordinary Habit of the Patriarch, The Habits of the Ecclesiastics.
as also of the Metropolitans, Archbishops etc. and even of their Monks, is a
kind of black Cassock, over which they have an upper-Garment of the same
color, not much different from those of the other Muscovites. Their Hoods, or
covering of the Head, is at least an ell and a half diameter, having in the
midst a round piece, as big as a Trencher, which hangs on the hinder part of
the head. When they walk into the City, they have in their hands a staff forked
at the end after the form of a Right angle, which serves them for a Crosier,
and they call it Posok.

What a vast number of Priests and ^cclesiasticks there must be about Moscou,
may be judged by that of the Churches, of which not any, that ever so little
exceed their ordinary Chapels, but have three or four, or more Priests
belonging to them. Those who are desirous to embrace that kind of life, address
themselves to the Patriarch, or first Metropolitan they can come to, who
examins them, and if he finds they can make a shift to read and write, and sing
in the Church, he gives them Orders, and an Attestation of their being received
into the Priesthood. At their Consecration, they are habited after the manner
before mentioned, and have the hair cut off on the Crown of their heads, on
which is put a little Cap like a Callotte, which is the only Character of their
Priesthood. For they never take it off, but when they cut their hair, and he,
who fighting with a Priest, should make his Callot fall to the ground, would be
severely punished, and obliged to pay him the Bicestie, or a certain mu^ct
imposed upon him: whereas otherwise a man may bang or cudgel one of that
profession with the same impunity as he may another, but to do it without any
danger, he is only to take off his Callot, before he falls to work with him,
and when he has sufficiently paid him, to be so respectful to him as to put it
on again.

The Protopopes and simple Priests are obliged to marry once, The Priests are
obliged to marry.
but cannot the second or third time, unless they quit the Priesthood, They
allege to this purpose the Text of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3. where the Apostle says,
that a Bishop should be the husband of one wife. Which place they understand
not of Bishops, though the Text expressly mentions them, nor yet in the least
imagine that the Apostle speaks of one wife in opposition to Polygamy; but
infer thence, that there is a necessity that the Priest should marry, that so
he may be the husband of one wife. This point of the marriage of Priests makes
one of the principal differences between the Muscovites, with all the Greek
Church, and the Roman, which allows not the marriage of Priests. For
confirmation of their opinion, they allege, as what makes most for them, the
fourth Canon of the Council, which was held at Gangres, in Paphlagonia, not
long after that of Nice, which Anathemizes those who make any difficulty to
receive the Communion from the hands of a married Priest. But the Muscovian
Priests hold this besides, that they are obliged to be in the state of
marriage, before they take Orders, and that they are to marry a Maid, and not a
Widow, or a Woman of a scandalous life: in which punctilio they are so
circumspect, that if a Priest, upon search made the the first night of his
marriage, find that his Wife has been defiled before hand, he must either be
divorced from her or from the Priesthood. The Priest who has given his Wife
her benevolence in the night, is not to approach the Altar the next day: and as
so^^ as a Priest is a VViddower, he is not to Administer the Sacraments any
longer. He may be present at the Offices of Fasterini and Vetzerni, but is not
admitted to that of Obedni, at which the Communion is received, and cannot give
his Benediction to marriages. Those who are not willing to live in that
condition, and are weary of a single life, take up some other profession, turn
Merchants or Tradesmen, and marry again: and to do that, they are only to put
off their Sacerdotal habit, and their Callot. If they are too old to marry,
they retire to a Monastery, and there end their lives.

They have a great number of Monasteries, Their Mo^^steries.
both for Men and Women, as well in Cities, as up and down the Country, and
they all in a manner follow the Rule of Great St. Basil. Indigence, Age,
Infirmities, Domestic discontents, and violence fill their Convents, rather
than Devotion. When any embrace that kind of life of their own accord, if they
are of ability, they are permitted to carry some part of their Estates along
with them into the Monastery, but are obliged to leave the remainder to their
Heirs. Heretofore the more superstitious sort made over all they had, and the
extravagance had so far prevailed on many, that in time, the Monks would have
been Masters of the best part of Muscovy; if a course had not been taken to
prevent it. They have set hours for their service, and they say most of their
prayers by Beads. Their Austerity of life is very great, in as much as they
live only on Salt-fish, Honey, Milk, Cheese, Herbs, and Pulse, especially
Cowcumbers, fresh and pickled, which they mince very small, and eat with a
spoon in some of their Quas. They have this common with all the other
Muscovites, that they can hardly write and read. Not one in ten can say the
Lord's Prayer, much fewer that are acquainted with the Creed and the ten
Commandments. These Monks live not so retired a life, but that they are seen in
great numbers, both in Cities, and all over the Country, where their
employment is the same with that of the Peasants, from whom they are
distinguished only by their habit. It is also true, there are abundance of
Anchorets, who build Chapels upon the Highways, and live in Woods like
Hermits, subsisting only by the Alms given them by Travelers.

They fast Wednesdays and Fridays, T^eir ^asts*
and abstain so strictly from all kind of flesh, nay, even from Eggs and Milk,
that within these few years, some of the more devout would not use any Sugar,
because they know that there are whites of Eggs used in the clarifying of it.

Their year consists of more fasting days than flesh days. For, besides the two
days of every week, and the Eves of great Festivals, they fast in Lent seven
weeks together, though in the first they eat Butter, Milk, and Eggs, and this
week is their Carnaval, during which they commit incredible excesses in
drinking, and withal such insolences, as the Patriarch has not yet found any
way to remedy. The next week, they eat only Honey, Herbs, and Pulse, and drink
only Quas and Water; they bath, and cleanse themselves from the impurities they
had contracted in their excessive debauches. All the rest of the Lent they live
very temperately, and the most devout eat no fish but on Sundays. Their second
Lent begins eight days after Whitsuntide, and lasts till St. Peter's tide. The
third is from the first of August, to the 16th. and the fourth, from the 12th.
of November to Christmas. It Is true, there are some abate of this great
Austerity; but I never knew any Muscovite, who did not strictly observe
abstinence during the Lent. But as they will not by any means be dispensed with
as to that time, no not in their greatest sickness; so can they not, on the
other side, be persuaded to eat fish on Sundays and Holydays out of Lent, as
believing that it is of Apostolical institution that they should eat flesh on
Sundays, and that they are bound to observe the Rule which goes under the name
of St. Clement, in the Tomes of the Councels printed at Venice, which says,
that an Ecclesiastic, who fasts on Saturday or Sunday, is to be degraded, and
if a lay person commit the same fault, he is to be excommunicated. The same
Rule which enjoins them to abstain from flesh in Lent, forbids them also
meddling with their Wives during that time, upon special penalties.

Those who are come to years of discretion are obliged to go to Confession,
before they Communicate. Their Confession.
There are very few but receive the Communion at Easter, and they prepare
themselves for it by extraordinary mortifications, for eight days together,
during which they eat nothing but a hard kind of bread, and drink only Water
and Quas, which is so sour, that it causes gripings in the belly, and brings
them in a manner to deaths door. They make their Confession standing, in the
midst of the Church, and before an Image, on which they have their eyes
fastened, as long as the Confession lasts, making a very particular recital of
all their sins, and at every sin expressing their remorse, and promising
amendment. The Priest, with the absolution, gives them a certain penance to do,
which consists for the most part in pronouncing several times the Gospody
Pomilui, or in making a certain number of Reverences before the Saints,
abstaining from Women for a certain time, standing at the Church door: or, if
the sins be very heinous, he enjoins them to make use of a Holy Water, which
they Consecrate upon Twelfth-day, and is kept by the Priests all the year long
for that purpose, and not to be had of them for nothing. They make account that
that water has the virtue to cleanse them of their sins, and to restore them
into the state of Grace.

They receive the Communion, ordinarily, upon Easter-Eve; at least they think
it must be done upon a fasting-day, Their Communion.
and this they so strictly observe, that if one should Communicate on the
Sunday, yet is he not to eat any flesh that day. They Communicate in both
kinds, and mix water with the Wine. The bread they put into the Wine, taking
out a morsel, together with some of the Wine, with a spoon. The bread is
leavened, and must have been made up and baked by a Priest's Widow: which they
think to be so Essential to the Sacrament, that one of the principal causes of
the Schism between the Greek and Latin Church, is, that the latter makes use
of unleavened bread contrary to the express institution of our Savior, who, to
abolish the Ceremony of the Jews, who made use of unleavened bread, was pleased
to take ordinary bread. This Communion bread is about twice as big, and
somewhat thicker than a Crown piece, and has in the middle the figure of the
Crucifix. After the Priest has Consecrated it, he takes off that figure with
an instrument made much after the fashion of a Launce^, and puts it up into a
wooden box, which hangs above the Altar, that the Rats and Mice may not come at
it. When the Communion is to be Administered to a sick person, they take a
little out of the said box, upon which they pour three drops of Claret Wine,
and put it into the Chalice, mingling sometimes a little water, and so they
give it the sick person with a spoon. But if, through weakness or otherwise, he
be not able to get down the bread, they give him only a little Wine
consecrated. In the ordinary Administration of the Communion, they make use of
a sort of Consecrated bread, of the same form as the other, but not bigger than
a half Crown, from which they also take away the Crucifix, and break it into as
many pieces as there are Communicants, cast them into Claret Wine, and put
thereto a little warm water, because no doubt but the blood and water, which
came out of our Savior's side, was so. They hold Transubstantiation, and, at
the Administering of the Sacrament, the Priest says these words: This is the
true body and the true blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has been given
for thee, and for many more, for the Remission of thy sins, which thou shall
take in remembrance of him. God bless thee. The more devout sort sleep after
they have received the Communion, that so they may not Sin that day. What
remains of the bread after Consecration serves for holy-bread. They call it
Kutja, and the Sunday following, the Priest gives a morsel of it to each of
those who had Communicated the week before. There is no Child so young but they
give him the Communion; but it is only when he is Sick, and then but in one
kind, till he be seven years of age, and then he is Communicated as the rest;
for which they give this reason, that about that age one begins to Sin
mortally. No doubt, they have derived this custom from what was done in the
third age, wherein St. Cyprian says, that they Communicated Children
immediately after baptism, which custom was continued till St. Augustine's
time. But in Process of time the custom was changed, since that, as Nicephorus,
the son of Calistus, who lived in the 14th. age, affirms, that in his time,
they gave those Children, who were learning the first Rudiments of the
Sciences, but only the Consecrated bread which was remaining after the
Communion. In Muscovy, they also give the Communion to distracted persons; but
they only touch their lips with the bread after it has lain a while in the
Wine.

The Priest who has kissed a dead body, or been at the interment of any, can
neither consecrate nor administer the Sacrament that day, for they hold him to
be defiled. Nor is it lawful for him to Comm^nicate a Woman in Childbed, in
the same room where she was delivered: but she is obliged to get her self
carried into some other place, and to be washed. Heretofore, they were wont to
send the Consecrated bread into the Country, to those places which were
destitute of a Priest; nay, they gave of it to such as intended to travel, or
were going to the Wars, who made their Confessions before their departure, and
were to Communicate when they had any convenience to do it, or were in any
danger of death, so to make it, as it were, their last Viaticum. Their custom
of receiving the Consecrated Wine in the Church, and carrying away the bread,
to be taken at home; as also that practiced by Anchoretes, who carried away
both to the places of their retirement, is so ancient, that St. Cyprian, nay,
even Tertullian speaks of it, as a thing very ordinarily done in their times:
but this kind of Communicating is now absolutely abolished in Muscovy, as well
as other places. Those who have taken their Oaths in any Law business, or have
committed murder, or any other heinous sin, are not to receive the Communion,
but at the point of death. All that are sick to that extremity are
Communicated, and at the same time receive extreme Unction, but that once done,
they suffer them not to take any thing else, not ought of nourishment, unless
they apparently perceive that the sick party begins to recover strength, and
gives them a great assurance of the retrival of his former health. Before the
receiving of the Communion, they give those that are sick, some fair water, or
Aquavitae, wherein some Relics had been put. There are those, who, in that
condition, cause themselves to be shaven, put on Monks habit, and become really
such; for, that once done, they are not suffered to take any thing for the
space of eight days; it being their persuasion, that those who take that
habit, which they call Seraphick, are not to be numbered among men, but are
become Angels. And if, after those eight days abstinency, they recover their
former health, they are obliged to perform their vow, and to go into a
Monastery, because the Rasour has passed upon their heads.

Their interrements are accompanied by abundance of Ceremonies, Their manner of
burial.
as indeed are all their public actions. As soon as the sick person is
departed, they send for all his Kindred and Friends, who being come into the
house stand about the body, excite one another to bemoan him, as it were to
heighten the Lamentations of the Women, and ask the deceased, why he would
dye? Whether his affairs were in a good condition? Whether he wanted meat and
drink? Whether his Wife were not handsome and young enough? Whether she had
been unconstant to him? etc. Then they send a present of Beer, Aquavitae and
Hydromel to the Priest, that he may pray for the Soul of the deceased party.
The body is well washed, and after they have put a clean shirt, or a shroud
about him, they put on his feet a pair of new shoes, of a very thin Russia
leather, and so lay him into the Coffin with his Arms cross the breast. Their
Coffins are made of the Trunk of a Tree, and are to be sold every where. It is
covered with a Cloth, or happily with some Coat of the deceased, and carried to
Church. If it be a rich man, and that the season of the year permit it, he is
not buried so soon, but kept above ground eight or ten days, during which, the
Priest comes to incense the Corpse, and cast holy water on it every day.

The Funeral solemnity is after this manner. First there goes a Priest,
carrying the Image of the Saint which had been assigned the deceased at his
baptism for his Patron. Next go four Virgins, of the next of Kin to the
deceased, who are to go as Mourners, and who fill the air with their horrid
cries and lamentations, keeping such exact time, that they both give over, and
then begin all together. Then follows the body, carried by six men upon their
shoulders; and if it be a Monk or Nun, some of their own Profession do them
that Office. The Priests go all about the body, and incense it all the way, to
keep off evil spirits, and withal sing certain Psalms. The Kindred and Friends
follow the body, but without any order, having every one a VVax-Candle in his
hand.

Being come to the Grave, the Coffin is uncovered, and the Image of the
deceased party's Saint is held over him, while the Priest says certain
prayers, in which there come often these words, Lord look upon this Soul in
Righteousness, as also some passages of their Liturgy, during which the Widow
continues her lamentations, and makes the same questions she had done before.
Then the Kindred and Friends take leave of the deceased, kissing either him or
the Coffin; and at last the Priest comes up to him, and puts between his
fingers a piece of paper, which is a kind of Testimonial of his behavior in
this world, signed by the Patriarch, or the Metropolitan of the place, and the
Confessor, who sell those papers dear or cheap, according to their abilities
who buy them. This Testimonial, which is a kind of Pass for his admittance into
the other World, runs thus. We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, the
Patriarch, or Metropolitan, and Priest of the City of N. do make known and
Certify, by these presents, that the Bearer of these our Letters has always
lived among us like a good Christian, professing the Greek Religion; and though
he has committed some sins, yet that he has confessed the same, and that
thereupon he has received absolution, and taken the Communion, for the
Remission of his sins: That he has honored God and his Saints; That he has
said his prayers, and that he has fasted on the hours and days appointed by
the Church, and that he has carried himself so well toward me who am his
Confessor, that I have no reason to complain of him, nor to deny him the
Absolution of his sins. In witness whereof, we have given him the present
Testimonial, to the end, that upon sight thereof, St. Peter may open unto him
the Gate of eternal bliss. As soon as he has this Passport given him, the
Co^^in is shut up, and put into the Grave, with the face of the deceased turned
toward the East. Those who accompanied him thither, do their Devotions to the
Images, and return to the house of the deceased, where they find Dinner ready,
and where, many times, they drown their affliction, with all other sentiments
of mortality, in Hydromel and Aquavitae. Their mourning lasts 40. days, during
which they make three Feasts for the Kindred and Friends of the deceased, to
wit, the 3d. the 9th. and the 20th. day, after the burial. Wherein they
imitate the modern Greeks, though these, instead of the 20th. take the 40th.
day; upon this ground, that about that time, the heart corrupts, as the body
begins to putrify, toward the ninth, and the face is disfigured, the third.

Some build Huts over their Graves, which they cover with Mat, for the
convenience of the Priest, who, morning and evening, for the space of six weeks
together, is to make prayers there for the deceased. For though the Muscovites
do not believe there is any Purgatory, yet they say there are two several
places, to which the Souls retire, after their departure out of the body, where
they expect the day of Judgment: some in a pleasant and delightful place,
having the conversation of Angels; others, in a sad and dark Valley, having the
society of Devils; That the Souls being yet in their way, may be diverted out
of the evil way, by the Prayers of Priests and Monks, nay, that these have so
great an Interest with God, as to obtain a certain ease and alleviation of
their misery, for those Souls which are with the Devils, and to appease him
against the day of Judgment. Such as are of ability, gives Alms daily during
the six weeks; which may indeed be ordinary among the Muscovites, who make no
difficulty to enrich themselves any way, and believe that sin is to be expiated
by Alms. Whence it comes, that no Muscovite almost, but, as he goes to Church,
or about his occasions, buys bread, which he afterward distributes among the
poor, who, though very numerous, yet get so much, that being not able to
consume all themselves, they dry up the rest in an Oven, and make it a kind of
Biscuit, which they call Suchari; and sell it in the Market to Travelers.

The Muscovites tolerate all sorts of Religions, and suffer all Nations to
live among them, as Calvinists, Lutherans, Armenians, Tartars, Turks, and
Persians, excepting none, but Jews and Roman Catholics. There is a great
number of Protestants all over Muscovy, and in the City of Moscou it self,
there are above a thousand, who have the free exercise of their Religion. Those
of the Reformed Religion and the Lutherans, had their Churches heretofore in
the quarter of Czaargorod; but it is about twenty years since that the
Lutherans lost theirs, by the imprudence of their Wives: because those of
Merchants would not give place to the Officers wives, who indeed for the most
part were but servant-maids dressed up a little finer than they had gone
before: The contestation grew so high, that they came from words to blows, in
the very Church, with so much scandal, that the Patriarch, then accidentally
passing by, having understood the occasion of their falling out, commanded the
Church to be demolished, which was immediately done. But they were permitted to
build another in the quarter of Bolsoigorod. They took away their Church from
those of the Reformed Religion, because, not content with the wooden Chapel
which had been given them within the White-wall, they would needs build there
an Edifice of stone, which was in a manner finished, when the Patriarch, who
had not given his consent for the doing of it, caused both to be pulled down.
Now, Foreiners have neither Church nor Houses within the City. For the Germans
finding themselves exposed to the derision of the Muscovites, after the
Patriarch had ordered them to go in a habit distinct from that of the
Inhabitants of the Country, to free themselves out of that persecution,
Petitioned the Czaar to protect them against the outrages and affronts they
daily received. On the other side, the Priests complained, that strangers built
on their foundations, and lessened the revenue of the livings; so that the
Great Duke, to please both sides, assigned them, without the City, near the
Gate called Pokrofki, a place big enough to contain all the Houses of
Foreiners, who immediately demolished those they had in the City, and in a
short time made up that part of the Suburbs, which is called Nova Inasemska
Slaboda, where the Lutherans have two Churches, and those of the Reformation
two more, one for the Dutch, and the other for the English; and where they have
this further satisfaction, that they converse but little with the Muscovites,
and are out of all danger of those frequent fires, which commonly begin in the
houses of those barbarous Christians.

The Lutherans, and those of the Reformed Religion live very quietly together,
and the Muscovites Trade indifferently with either: but they have so great an
aversion for the Roman Catholics, that they would never grant them a
Toleration of their Religion in Muscovy. In the year 1627. the late King of
France proposed, by Louis des Hayes, a Treaty for the regulation of Commerce
with the French, and at the same time for a Church, where they might have Mass
said, but it was denied. And in the first War of Smolensko, they would not
entertain Catholic Soldiers. Nay, in the Treaty they made with us, for our
passage into Persia, it is an express Article, that we should not take any
Roman Catholics into our retinue. So that it is much to be admired, that they
should call to the Crown Vladislaus, Prince of Poland and Sueden; though that
Election came to nothing, for reasons, into which it is beside the subject of
our Relation to enquire, as it is also into those which may be given of the
Animosity of the Muscovites against the Roman Catholics, whereof the grounds
are to be searched for in Ecclesiastical History, which has nothing common
with the Relation of our Travels, the prosecution whereof is the business of
the following book.

THE TRAVELS OF THE AMBASSADORS FROM THE DUKE of HOLSTEIN INTO MUSCOVY,
TARTARY, and PERSIA.
The Fourth Book.
LEaving Moscou, w^ we^^, by Land, as far as the Monastery of Simana, where we
embarked, after we had taken leave of our Friends, who had accompanied us
thither, JUNE,
under the conduct of a Pristaf, named Rodiwon Matfeowits, who had order to
provide for the Ambassadors as far as Astrachan. We had hardly quitted the
shore, ere the Governor of the Prince, Boris Iuanouits Morosou came in sight
with his Trumpets, and entreated us to come ashore, and favor him so far as to
sup with him that night. But the Ambassadors, earnest to be on their Voyage,
excused themselves, and sent him, by way of Present, a silver Bowl. He received
it in a little Boat which came along by the side of ours, and expressed how
kindly he took it, by the flourishes of his Trumpets. But at last, not able to
contain any longer, he came into our Boat, where he staid all night drinking
with the Gentlemen, at his parting from whom the next morning, he could hardly
forbear tears.

Our Muscovian Mariners, whom the Aquavitae they had taken had made more lively
and lusty than ordinary, took such pains in the mean time, being always eight
a-rowing, that the next morning at Sunrising, we were got as far as a pleasant
Country house, called Duoreninou, seated on the left side of the River, 80
Werstes, which make 16 German leagues, from Simana. At night, we got 40
werstes, or 8 German leagues, from Duoreninou, to a Village called Mortschuck;
so that in 24 hours, we made so many German leagues.

The next day, July 2. about noon, near the Village and Monastery of Porsenis,
we met with several great Boats, laden with Honey, Salt, and Salt-fish,
coming, most of them, from Astrachan, bound for Moscou.

At night, Columna.
we were come before the City of Columna. It lies on the right side of the
River Mosca, 180 werstes, or 36 German leagues from Moscou, though by Land
there is but 18. which may be traveled in a short time, especially in the
Winter, upon the snow. The City is of a considerable bigness, and looks very
delightful on the outside, by reason of its Towers and stone-walls, which are
not ordinary in Muscovy. Nay it is indeed of that account, that the Great Duke
has his Weywode there, which is not seen but in the chief Cities of Provinces.
We sent him our Passport, by the Pristaf, and immediately the wooden Bridge
was full of people; and whereas the covering of our Boat was too high to pass
under the Bridge, they in a trice took off one of the Arches, to make us way.
We said in the foregoing Book, that there is but one Bishop in all Muscovy,
and that his Residence is in this City of Columna.

Three werstes above the City, near the Convent of Kolutin Serge Monastir,
founded by one Sergius, a Saint among them, whom we have spoken of elsewhere,
and who is buried at the Monastery of Troitza, the Mosca falls into the River
Occa, which is incomparably much more delightful, and broader than the other.
It comes from-wards the South, and has on both sides it a noble Country, well
peopled, and very fruitful. Both shores are well furnished with Oaks, which is
a kind of rarity in those parts. Being got ashore, we had a Sermon under a
great Tree, which sufficiently shaded the whole Assembly.

Presently after Dinner we embarked, and left, about half a league on the left
hand, a great Island in the midst of the River. Afterward, we passed by
several Villages, namely those of Scelsa and Moroso, which are bigger than any
of the rest, and both upon the River side, on the right hand.

The 4. about noon, Peresla.
we got to the City of Peresla seated upon the River side, upon the right hand,
22. leagues and a half from Columna, at 54. degrees, 42. minutes, elevation.
This has also its particular Weywode.

The 5. we left on our right hand the Town of Rhesan. Rhesan.
It was heretofore a gallant City, and had given its name to the whole
Province, but the Crim-Tartars destroyed it, with the whole Duchy, in the year
1568. The Great Duke, considering the fertility of the Country, which reaches
from the River Occa, as far as the Trench made against the irruption of the
Tartars, got together, such of the Inhabitants as the invasion of the
Barbarians had dispersed, and having caused Materials to be brought to a place
eight leagues from it, he ordered the building of a City there, which, to this
day, is called Peresla Resanski, because there went thither many of the
Inhabitants of Peresla, which stands at an equal distance from Moscou
North-wards, with this South-wards. The Town of Rhesan still keeps the honor
of having the Residence of the Archibishop: but we are to correct their error,
who affirm, that the Province of Rhesan lies Westward from Moscou, since they
themselves confess it is between the Rivers of Don and Occa, which are not
toward the West from Moscou, but toward the East: so that Rhesan must be
placed in the Map, Southward from the City of Moscou.

The same day, we passed in sight of several Monasteries, and Villages; as that
of Seloy, near Rhesan, on the left hand; and 7. werstes thence, Kystrus, as
also, on the other side, and 3. werstes thence, the Monastery of Oblozitza; and
2. werstes thence, Lippono-Issado; at 2. thence, Muratou; at 1. thence,
Kallionino; and 2. thence, Schilko. Near the first Village we found a Carcass
floating on the water, which, in all likelihood, the Cosaques had cast into the
River many days before, in as much as it was so Sunburned, that it was become
black. In the afternoon, we got four leagues.

The 6. we made two, as far as the Monastery of Tericho, on the left hand;
thence two more, to Tinersko Slowoda, on the right hand; and afterward 8.
werstes, to Swintzus; and thence 2. werstes, to Kopanowo, where we found
another dead Carcass: But the Cosaques, and the fugitive Slaves, who retire
into those parts, do there commit so many Villainies, that the Muscovites, to
whom those accidents are ordinary, thought it nothing strange.

July 7. betimes in the morning, we left on the right hand, an Island, called
Dobrinin Ostrow, 30. werstes, or 6. leagues from the last Village; and
afterward Seloy Rubets, at 7. werstes thence; and, at 7. more thence, on the
same side, Kurman. About 6. werstes thence, we had on the left hand, the River
Gusreca, and several other Villages, and on the right hand Molcowa, at 8.
werstes, Gabiloska, at two, and Babino, at three. Thence we made three werstes,
and came at night to Cassinogorod. Cassinogogorod.
This City lies on the right side of the River Occa, in the Principality of
Cassinou in Tartary, and there it was we first met with any Mahometans. Not far
from the City, in an old stone Castle, which had sometime been a Fort, lived a
young Prince of that Country, whose name was Res Ketzi, with his Mother and
Grandfather, who some years before had put himself into the protection of the
Great Duke of Muscovy We were told, that the Great Duke, would have pressed him
to receive Baptism, upon some hopes given him that he should have married his
Daughter, but the young Prince, who was but 12. years of age, sent him word,
that being not come to years, so as to make choice of any Religion, he could
not take a resolution of that importance. The Ambassadors sent two Gentlemen of
their retinue to give him a visit, and presented him with a pound of Tobacco,
and a bottle of Aquavitae. He took it very kindly, and made it his excuse, that
he could not entertain the Ambassadors at his house, left the neighboring
Weywodes should conceive any jealousy at his entertaining of Strangers, without
their permission. He therefore only sent some of his Servants to us, whom our
Interpreter could hardly make a shift to understand, they being all Tartars. He
sent us a present of two sheep, a Barrel of Hydromel, another of Beer, and a
third of Aquavitae, with some pieces of Ice, Cream and fresh Butter, which the
Prince's mother had her self taken the pains to beat.

The night following, and the next day, being the 9. we saw, as we passed
several Villages, Monasteries and Taverns, most of them very pleasantly seated,
amidst the woods; among others, on the right hand Potsink Tartasko, three
werstes from Cassinogorod, and at seven werstes thence, Seloy Pettiowo, Then a
Tavern, or Caback, at eight werstes, and Brooth, at five werstes one from
another, upon the left hand: and then on the right hand, the River of Moksche,
at eight werstes; then on the left hand, another Tavern; at two werstes thence,
Sateowa; at 13 werstes, the Monastery of Adrianou Pustino; at 13 more I^katma.
This last is a great Village, containing about 300 houses, and belongs to the
Bojar, Foedor Iuanouits Sheremetou. And thence we got 20 werstes to the Forest
of Rusbonor.

The 9. we got ten werstes, to the Church of Worskressenia, commonly called
Woskressenskimehl, upon the left hand; and thence five werstes, to a great
Village named Lechi, belonging to Knez Boris Michaelouits Lycou, on the same
side; and thence about ten werstes, to Pretziste Resenskou, on the right hand;
and at last to the City of Moruma, on the left hand.

Before we got to the City, The City of Moruma.
we discovered on the other side of the River a company of Crim Tartars, who
presently got into the woods, whence they discharged their Fowling pieces at
us, which we answered with Muskers, and so forced them to keep off. They were
seen afterward below the City, whence we imagined, they would have set upon us
the night following; whereupon we lay under the Isle of of Zuchtsko Ostrou, and
set a strong Guard; but we heard no more of them.

The City of Moruma, The Tartars of Mordwa.
is the chiefest of the Tartars of Mordwa, and is inhabited by Muscovites and
Tartars, but subject to the Great Duke. We sent our Interpreter to the Market
to buy some provisions necessary, for the continuation of our Voyage.

The 10. we passed by the Town of Prewospalo, belonging to Knez Iuan
Borissowits Circaski, one of the Great Dukes Privy Council, and left, on both
hands, several little Villages, and the River of Morsna Reka, on the right
hand; and at eight werstes thence that of Clesna, which comes from Wladimer.
All along from that place, the shore on the right hand rises by little and
little, to such an extraordinary height, that looking on it from the water, it
seems to be one continued mountain, for above a hundred German leagues along
the River Wolga. Insomuch, that even in that season, as also in the greatest
heat of Summer, those parts are not without Ice and Snow, though all elsewhere,
the Country is plain, fertile and fit for Tillage, reaching above a hundred
leagues toward the South-west, and on the other side, it lies very low,
barren, and moorish.

July 11. having passed by the pleasant Villages of Isbuilets, Troitska,
Slowoda, the Monastery of Dudina, and Nofimki, we got at night before the great
and Noble City of Nise, or Nisenovogorod, where we found the ship, called the
Frederick, which we had ordered to be built, by our Captain Michael Cords,
whereof we spoke in the beginning of our Relation. It was not quite finished,
by reason the Muscovian Carpenters, whom the Captain had employed about her,
had not answered his expectation; yet was it so far on, that the Ambassadors
lodged in it, and so forbore going into the City. It was built of Deal, being
120 foot long, and 40 broad, having three Masts, and so flat-bottom'd, that it
took but seven foot water. It had many Chambers and Closets, for the
convenience of the Ambassadors, the Officers and Gentlemen of their Retinue,
and some Iron and Brass Guns, a great number of Grenades and other Firearms.
And as our design was to make use of it chiefly upon the Wolga, which is full
of Banks and quicksands, it was so built, as that if there were no wind, they
might use Oars; and to that end, it had twelve seats, two Oars to every seat.
We had caused to be made a double Shallop, for the convenience of unlading the
Ship in those places where it might want water, as also to carry the Anchors,
Cables, Sails, and other things necessary for so great a Voyage, and to
discover those Banks and Sands in the Caspian Sea, which might hinder or retard
its passage.

We stayed almost three weeks before the City of Nisenovogorod, for the
finishing of the Ship, which time we spent in visiting our Friends in the City,
where the chiefest Dutch Merchants entertained us at several great Feasts, as
also in reciprocally treating them in our Tent, which we had pitched by the
River side.

Our stay there gave me the convenience to observe the elevation of that place,
Nisenovogorod.
which I found, at the place where the River Occa falls into the Wolga, to be
at 56 degrees, 28 minutes, and that the Needle of the Compass declined there
above nine degrees, toward the West. The Great Duke Basili ordered it to be
built at the conflux or meeting of those two Noble Rivers, and gave it the name
of Nisenovogorod, upon occasion of the Inhabitants of the great City of
Novogorod, whom he caused to be translated thither. This indeed is not so great
as the other, yet has its Towers and Walls of stone. From Moscou to Nise are
accounted 500 werstes, or 100 German leagues by Land; but by water, it is above
150. The Suburbs are much bigger than the City, and are above half a league
about. The Inhabitants are Tartars, Muscovites, and Hollanders, of whom there
are so many as make a Protestant Church of about 100. persons. John Bernarts,
our Factor, was the chiefest man among them, the rest being, for the most part,
Military Officers, Merchants, and Victuallers, or Sutlers. The City is Governed
by a Weywode, who, at our passage that way, was Basili Petrouits, under the
Great Duke-Provisions were so cheap there, that we bought a Pullet for a penny,
a quartern of Eggs for as much, and a Mutton, for 12. 15. or, at most, for 18.
pence.

July 24. The Ambassadors sent Monsieur Mandelslo and my self, accompanied by
our Muscovian Interpreter and the Pristaf, to the Weywode, to thank him for his
civilities toward our people, during the stay they had made in the City, while
the Ship was a building, which was almost a year, and to make him a Present of
a Jewel worth a hundred Crowns. His reception of us discovered how
magnificently he lived, and what a noble house he kept. For as soon as notice
was brought him that we were come near the house, he sent two very handsome
complete persons to meet us at the Gate. They conducted us through a very long
Gallery, and at the entrance into the Palace it self, we met with two comely
old men, richly clad, who brought us to the Weywode's Chamber, who had on a
Garment of Brocadoe, and was accompanied by a great number of persons of
Quality. The Room was hung with Turkey Tapistry, and had in it a great
Cup-board of Plate. He received us with much civility, and having accepted the
Present, and answered our Complement, he desired us to take our part of a
Collation, during which, his Discourse was excellent good, and such as we
thought the more extraordinary, in that the Muscovites, for the most part,
contribute very little to any thing of Conversation. Among other things he
asked us whether we did not fear meeting with the Cosaques, who in all
likelihood would set upon us ere we got off the Wolga, and told us, they were a
barbarous and inhumane people, and more cruel than Lions, showing us at the
same time a Picture, wherein was represented Sampson's engagement with one of
those Creatures. We made him answer, that we looked on that Piece as a good
omen, in as much as if the Cosaques were stout as Lions, we should behave our
selves, on the other-side, like Sampsons. The Weywode replied, that he had that
good opinion of us, nay-believ'd, that the repute our Nation had gained, by the
services it had done his Czaarick Majesty, would frighten the Cosaques, and
hinder them from attempting ought against us.

The River Wolga is four thousand six hundred Geometrical feet wide near Nise,
at the meeting of the two Rivers; and whereas its waters increase in the months
of May and June, by reason of the Sun's having melted the Snow, and thawed the
Rivers which fall into it, the Boatmen who go from Moscou to Astrachan, do
commonly take that time, when there is water enough to pass over the Banks of
Sand, nay indeed the little Islands which are very frequent in that River. This
consideration, and the example of their misfortune, whose Boats we had seen
cast away, and half rotten upon the Sands, made us resolve upon our departure
thence with the soonest, before the waters, which visibly decreased, were
fallen too low, and so we appointed it should be the 30th. of July.

The Wolga, The Wolga.
whereof we gave a short account in the precedent book, is, in my opinion, one
of the noblest and greatest Rivers in the World, its course being of a vast
extent, from its source to the place where it falls into the Caspian Sea, below
Astrachan. Whence it came that I took a delight to observe all the
particularities thereof, from League to League, and from Werste to Werste, with
all possible exactness, and with the assistance of a Dutch Master's-mate, named
Cornelius Nicholas, one of the most able I ever came acquainted with in that
Science, as also of some Muscovian Pilots, I have drawn a very exact Map of it,
which I had made the World a promise of some years since, but now part with it,
so well done, that I hope the Judicious Reader will be satisfied therewith.

Having bought Provisions for our Voyage as far as Astrachan, we left Nise the
day before named, having only a side wind. Mr. Balthazar Moucheron, Commissary,
or Agent from his Highness of Holstein about the Great Duke, the Weywode of
Nise's Secretary, the Pastor of the Lutherans Church there, and our Factor,
John Bernarts, would needs accompany us some Werstes, to see the beginning of
that long Voyage: but we had hardly got two Werstes, ere we were a ground near
the Monastery of Petsora, and forced to cast Anchor, while the men were getting
off the ship, which took them up four hours.

July 31. Having made about a Werste, the Ship touched against a Sand-bank, but
was soon got off, and we had continued our course, if the contrary wind,
together with a Tempest, had not obliged us to cast Anchor. This interval we
spent in our Devotions, to give God thanks for his miraculous deliverance of us
the year before, when we were wracked upon the Baltic Sea. Having entertained
our friends with a Dinner and Music, they took leave of us, and returned that
night to Nise.

August 1. AUG.
The Ambassadors ordered what Guard should be kept all along the Wolga. Those
who are able to bear Arms, both Soldiers and Servants, were divided into three
Companies, under the Command of the 2. Ambassadors, and the Steward of the
Embassy. The Ambassadors had each his Captain Lieutenant, Mr. Crusius, the
Master of the Horse, and Brugman, the Secretary of the Embassy, who went to
Guard every day alternately, set Sentinels at the fore-Castle and the Stern,
and had their Court of Guard at the main Mast. The same day we made use of our
Oars, 1636.
the wind being against us; but we had hardly made 500 Paces, ere the ship
struck again upon the Sand. Most of our Gentlemen went ashore, and had good
fowling; for the High-Country between Nise and Cassan being well furnished with
Wood and Pastures, was also well supplied with fowl.

The 2. The wind being somewhat laid, we weighed Anchor, for the prosecution
of our Voyage: but ere we had gotten a quarter of a League, we met again with
Sand-banks near the Isle of Tletinski, and soon after others, near the Isle of
Subsinski, where we saw a great Boat which had not long before been cast away
thereabouts. These unfortunate accidents, our being nine hours getting off this
last Bank, together with the ignorance of our Pilot, who acknowledged he had
not made that Voyage in eight years before, much abated their courage, who,
considering that in four days they had made but two Leagues, and that there
were 550. to make, ere they came to the Caspian Sea, began to doubt they should
never go through that Voyage.

But the 3d. We advanced a little better, and passed by the Villages of
Stolbiza and Stoba, which lie three leagues from Nise. We saw afterward, on
the right hand, in a bottom between two Mountains, the Village of Welikofrat,
that of Tsimonski, upon a Hill, and the Isle of Diploi at twenty Werstes, or
four leagues from Nise. Near this Village we met with a great Vessel that had
200 men in it. It came from Astrachan, and was laden with salt fish. They
cannot be without such a great number of Mariners, by reason that, instead of
Laveering or Rowing, when the wind is against them, they cast Anchor a quarter
of a League before them, and all those men pull the Cable to which it is
fastened, and so they advance by little and little, with much expense of time
and pains, making but two Leagues a day at most, by reason of the greatness of
those Boats, which are of 800. 900. or 1000. Tuns burden. In the afternoon we
left several Villages on the right hand, as Beswodna, Kasnitza, where I found
the elevation to be 56d. 21 m. Rubotka, Tzetschina, Targinits, and Iurkin,
where we passed between two Islands at 21 foot water. This last Village is ten
Leagues from Nise. At night, the wind being more fair for us, we made use of
our Sayls. The next day, the wind still good, we passed by several little
Villages, leaving on the right hand the Towns of Masa and Cremonski, near which
we lay at Anchor, the fourth all night, because, the River being shallow
thereabouts, we avoided running upon the Sand-banks in the dark.

The 5th. Betimes in the morning, B^silig^rod.
we got before a little Village, called Pannino, whence the Peasants brought us
Pullets and other Provisions to sell, very cheap. Then we passed between two
Isles, one called Spassabelka, and at night we came in sight of the City of
Basiligorod, where we stayed that night, by reason of the Sands. There we
received by a Messenger, who had been sent express from Moscou, Letters from
Germany, dated in May. The City of Basiligorod is not Walled, and its Houses,
even the public edifices being but of Wood, we may say, it is properly but a
Village. It is situated at the foot of a Mountain, upon the right shore of the
River Wolga, at 55 degrees and 51 m. elevation, at the falling in of the little
River Sura, which was heretofore a com^^n Frontier between the Tartars of Casan
and the Muscovites. The Creat Duke Basili buil^^^, to prevent the incursions of
Tartars, and fortified it; but now that the Muscovites have extended their
Territories much farther, they think it unnecessary to keep any Garrison there.

The 6th. We had much ado to pass the Sands, which we met with every foot, so
that it was afternoon ere we came up to the City, which we saluted with a
volley of our great Guns. That honor we did all the Cities upon the same River.

The Tartars we spoke of are called Ceremisses, Ceremi^^ses.
and their Country reaches beyond Casan, on both sides of the River Wolga. They
have no Houses, but only wretched Huts, and live upon Honey, and the wild-fowl
they take in the Woods, and Milk, which their Pastures furnish them with. It Is
a Nation absolutely barbarous, treacherous, and cruel, much given to sorcery
and robbery. Those who live on the right side of the Wolga are called Nagorni,
or Mountaineers, from the word na, which, in the Muscovian Language, signifies,
upon, and Gor, a Mountain: and those on the left Lugoivi or Lugowizene, that is
to say, Meadows, because of the abundance of Hay which those parts afford,
insomuch that the Nagorni are supplied thence. Guagnin says, they are partly
Mahumetans, partly Heathens; but this I am certain of, that about Casan they
are all Heathens; not knowing what either Circumcision or Baptism means. All
the Ceremony they have when they are to give a Child a name, consists in
appointing some day six months after, on which they give it the name of that
person whom they first meet.

Most of them believe there is a God, who is immortal, author of all the good
that happens to men, and that he ought to be adored. But this is all they know
of him; For they do not believe the immortality of the Soul, nor consequently
the Resurrection of the dead: but that men and beasts have the same beginning,
and come to the same end. I met with one of the Ceremisses at a house where I
lodged at Casan. He was aged about 45 years, and wanted not ingenuity, but
understanding that I was discoursing with my Host about some points of
Religion, and that I spoke of the Resurrection of the Dead, he laughed at the
persuasion, and said to me, Those who are dead are really dead, and will never
return again, no more than my Horses and Cows, which are long since rotten. I
asked him whether he knew who Created this World, and made Heaven and Earth?
his answer was, Tzortsneit, The Devil may happily know. They do not believe there
is any Hell, yet are persuaded there are Devils, and evil Spirits, which
afflict and torment people in this life; and therefore they endeavor to
appease them, and to gain their favor by Sacrifices.

Forty Leagues from Casan there is a place called Nemda, amidst the Fenns,
where these Tartars go Pilgrimages and do their Devotions; and they believe
that those who go thither empty-handed, and carry no Present to the Devil,
shall languish and pine away of some long and incurable disease. A particular
point of their faith, is, that the Devil has his principal residence in the
Torrent of Schockschem, ten Werstes from Nunda; and whereas that little
rivulet, which is but four foot deep, is never frozen (occasioned by the
violence of its course between two Mountains) they think it is not without some
mystery, and they have so great a veneration for it, as to be persuaded, they
cannot come near it, without danger of their lives, though the Muscovites cross
it daily without any.

In their Sacrifices to God, they kill a Horse, an Ox, or a Sheep, roasting the
flesh, and take a cut thereof in a Dish, and holding in the other hand another
Dish full of Hydromel, or some other liquor, they cast both into a fire, which
they make before the skin of the Creature that is sacrificed, which skin they
hang upon a Pole laid across between two Trees. They entreat that skin to
present their Prayers to God, or sometimes they make their address immediately
to God, and pray him to augment the number of their Cattle, or grant them some
other conveniences of this life, which are the only object of all their
Devotions. They adore also the Sun and Moon, as Authors of all the Noble
Productions of the Earth; nay they are so fondly superstitious, as to have a
veneration for what ever presents it self to them in the night in their Dreams,
and to adore it the next day, as a Horse, a Cow, Fire, Water, etc. I told the
Tartar I spoke of before, that it was madness, to worship those Creatures,
whose lives are at our disposal; He replied, that it was better to adore things
Animate, than the Gods of Wood and Colors which the Muscovites have hanging on
their Walls. They have neither Churches, nor Priests, nor Books, and the
Language of the Ceremisses is peculiar to them, having in a manner nothing
common with that of the other Tartars, nor yet with the Turkish; though those
who are subject to the Czaar, and so obliged to converse with the Muscovites,
make use also of their Language.

They perform all Religious Ceremonies and Sacrifices near some Torrent, where
they meet together, especially when upon the death of any of their friends, who
has left any Wealth behind him, they make good Cheer with the best Horse he
had, which they put to death with the Master.

Polygamy is so ordinary among them, that there are few but have four or five
Wives, whereof they take two or three into the same house, and make no great
difficulty to marry two or three Sisters at the same time. Their Women and
young Maids are all clad in a coarse white Cloth, wherein they so wrap up
themselves, that there is nothing to be seen but their Faces. Those that are
betroathed have a particular dress for their Heads, which has a point like a
Horn, which seems to come out of the Head, about half an ell in length: At the
end of that Horn, there is a Tassel of silk, of diverse colors, at which hangs
a little Bell. The Men wear a long Coat or Garment of coarse Linen Cloth,
under which they wear Breeches. They all shave their Heads, only those young
Men that are not married, leave on the Head a long tress of Hair, which some
tie up into a knot upon the Head, others suffer to hang down the Back: which
particularity we had the opportunity to take better notice of at our return at
Casan. When they saw us upon the River in a Dress so different from theirs,
they were affrighted, so as that some fled, others had the confidence to stay
on the Rivers side, but not one would venture to come into the Ship. Being come
at night to the River of Welluka, near the Monastery of Iunka, one of these
Tartars had the courage to bring us a Sturgeon to sell, for which, at first, he
asked a Crown, but afterward let it go for xv d.

August 7. we came before the City of Kusmademiansky, 40. werstes from
Basiligorod, seated at the foot of a mountain on the right hand. We saw, in
those parts, whole Forests of Elms, the Bark whereof they sell all over the
Country to make Sledges of. The Trees are many times of such compass, that the
body of them being cut cylinder-wise, they make great Fats, Barrels, and
Coffins thereof, all of one piece, which they sell at the adjacent Towns.

We cast Anchor three werstes thence near the Island of Krius, where we did our
Devotions, and Celebrated the Lords Supper. The Peasants thereabouts, brought
aboard the Ship several provisions to sell. About a league thence a tempest
overtook us, and forced us to cast Anchor and to stay there all night.

The 8. the wind fair, we got, about noon, near the Island of Turich; but in
the afternoon, the same wind forced our Ship, being under all the Sail she
could make, upon a Sand-bank, near the Island of Maslof, with such violence,
that it was thought the Masts would have broken; and this proved such a check
to us, that it cost us four hours toil and trouble to get off. We perceived on
the right hand a great number of Tartars, some a-foot, some on horseback,
coming from Hay-making. We came at night before the City of Sabakzar, 40.
werstes from Kusmademianski, The City of Sabakzar.
and upon the same side of the River. The buildings of this City are of Wood,
as are those of all the rest, but the situation of this is, beyond comparison,
more pleasant than that of any other City of Tartary. The Inhabitants
perceiving our Ship at some distance, knew not at first what to think of her;
whence it came that the Weywode sent some Musketeers in a Boat, as far as the
Island of Makrits, three werstes from the City, to discover what we were. The
Boat thinking it not safe to venture too near us, took a compass, at a great
distance about our Ship, and so returned to the City. But they no sooner
understood our quality by our Passport, and withal the occasion of our
Voyage, but there came above 300. persons to the River side to see us pass by.

The 9. we passed by the Island of Cousin, leaving it on the left hand, 12.
werstes from Sabakzar. Afterward on the same hand a Village, named Sundir, and
thence we came to a little City called Kockschaga, on the left side of the
Wolga, 25. werstes from Sabakzar. The River is so shallow thereabouts, that
there was hardly water enough for our Ship, which put us to much trouble, both
that day and the next.

The 11. the current having forced the Ship upon the shore, where we were
constrained to stay for several hours, M. Mandelslo and my self went a shore,
to divert our selves and see what Fruits we could find in the Woods. Which had
like to have occasioned us a great misfortune, for the wind turning fair, at
our return to the River side, all were gone, the Ship it self not in sight,
though we made all the have we could to overtake it. At last we saw a Boat
coming toward us, which we thought at first might belong to the Cosaques; but
soon after we perceived they were some of our own, sent to bring us aboard. The
conrtary wind had stayed the Ship at a turning of the River, and the tempest
still increasing, we were forced to cast anchor, and to lie there all night.

The 12. we spent in getting beyond the turning by the help of an Anchor which
we ordered to be cast at some distance before us, but with this misfortune,
that having fastened in a Tree that was in the bottom, the Cable broke ere it
could be had up again. The River is very full of those Trees, which it brings
down with it when it overflows; and these accidents happen so frequently, that
the bottom of the River is so laid with Anchors, that the Muscovites say,
there are as many as would purchase a Kingdom.

The 13. before noon, we saw, as we passed, two Cabaques, or Taverns, and a
Village named Wesoska, The City of Suiatski.
on the right hand, and came afterward before the City of Suiatski. It is
seated on the ascent of a hill, on the left hand, having a Castle and some
Churches built of stone: but all the other buildings, as also the Towers and
Rampires of the City, are of wood. We cast Anchor there, by reason of a
Sand-bank which we were to pass by. The people in the mean time came in
multitudes to the River side to see us, and by reason that a little sandy Hill
hindered their having a full sight of us, many came in Boats to the Ship side,
others swam over to the Hill. Having passed by certain white Mountains, whereof
some were of Chalk, others of Sand, we came at night before the City of Casan,
The City of Casan.
20. werstes from Suiatski. We there found the Caravan of Persia and Circassia,
and with it a Coptzi or Persian Merchant, who had been sent Ambassador to
Moscou. A Tartar Prince.
There was in this place also a Tartarian Prince, of Terki, whose name was
Mussal, who had succeeded his Brother in the Principality, and had then been
doing homage to the Czaar, at Moscou, which he had left some days before us.

The City of Casan is seated in a plain, 7. werstes from the Wolga, upon the
River Casanka, which gives it the name, as it does to the whole Province. I
found the elevation there to be 55. degrees, 38. minutes. It is of a
considerable bigness, but all its Houses, as also the Towers and Rampires, are
of wood. Only the Castle and its Fortifications are of stone, being well
mounted with Canon, and having a strong Garrison in it. The River is instead of
a Ditch to it, and makes it a very considerable fortress. The Castle has its
VVeywode, and the City, its Governor, who commands and administers Justice to
the Inhabitants, who are Muscovites and Tartars: But in the Castle they are all
Muscovites, and the Tartars are prohibited entering into it upon pain of death.

The Province of Casan lies on the left side of the River of VVolga, The
Province of Casan.
reaching Northwards as far as Siberia, and Eastward, as far as the Tartars of
Nagaja. It was heretofore subject to the Cham of Tartary, and so populous, that
it could send 60000, men into the Field. The conquest of it cost the Muscovite
much blood, and the story of its reduction is so remarkable, that I think fit
here to make a short digression to give an account thereof.

Basili Iuanouits, Reduced by the Muscovites.
Father to the Tyrant Iuan Basilouits, having obtained a famous Victory over
these Tartars, made Chief over them one named Scheale, a Tartar by birth, but
one so ill shaped as to his Person, that his Subjects, who soon conceived an
aversion for him, joining with the Tartars, of Chrim, who are Mahumetans, as
they also are, made an insurrection, surpised him, and ejected him. This
success gave the Chrim-Tartars, who had got a considerable Army together, the
courage to enter Muscovy, under the conduct of two Brethren, Mendligeri, and
Sapgeri, who forced the Muscovite, with certain Troops which he had made a
shift to get together, and were encamped upon the River Occa, to retreat to
Novogorod.

The consequence of this was the besieging, The Tartars Masters of the City of
Moscou.
taking and plundring of the City of Moscou; nay they reduced the Castle to
that extremity, that the Muscovites were forced to sue for a Peace. The Tartars
were willing to hearken to an accommodation, and having got very considerable
Presents from those who kept the Castle, who maintained it with more courage
than success, they made a Peace, whereof this was one Article, That the Great
Duke and all his Subjects, should ever after be Tributaries to them. Basili was
loath to submit to such dishonorable Terms, but forced to comply with
necessity, he accepted them, and confirmed the agreement by his Letters Patents.

Mendligeri, The Great Duke Tributary to the artar.
to make it appear he was Sovereign Lord of Moscou, caused a Statue of his to
be erected in the heart of the City, and would needs oblige the Great Duke, to
express his subjection, to smite the ground with his head, before that Statue,
as often as he paid Tribute to the Tartars. After this Victory the Brethren
parted; Sapgeri established the Seat of his Government at Casan and Mendligeri,
as being the Elder-Brother, his, at the City of Chrim. But the later desirous
to add to his former conquest that of the City of Resan, resolved to lay siege
to the Castle thereof, and to that end, he sent word to the Weywode, John
Kowar, who commanded it, that it was madness in him to think to maintain the
place, and that he should make no difficulty to deliver it up, The fidelity of
the Weywode of Resan.
since the Great Duke was become his Subject. The Weywode sent him answer, that
it was a thing so extraordinary, that he could not believe it, unless he sent
him such assurances thereof, as should put him out of all doubt. Mendligeri
imagining there could not any thing be more convictive in that case than the
Letters Patents, sent them to him by certain Officers, just as he had received
them from the Great Duke. But the Weywode, not a little glad to have the
Original of those Letters in his hands, sends Mendligeri word, that he would
keep them as safely as he would do the place he was in, which he resolved to
maintain to the last drop of blood. There was in the Castle an Italian Canoneer
named John Jordan, well known in those parts upon the account of his Wife, who
would needs have her Husband express his affection to her by beating her with a
Bull's pizzle. This man did the Weywode very great services, and killed so many
Tartars, that Mendligeri perceiving one day, that a Canon-bullet had taken off
a piece of his Garment, was frighted, and proffered to raise the Siege, upon
condition they would return the Great Duke's Letters. But the Weywode would
hearken to no such thing, and having obliged Mendligeri to retreat, he sent the
Letters to his Prince's Court, where they were received with the general joy of
all the people, who immediately thereupon pulled down, and broke to pieces the
Statue of Mendliger^. Nay the Great Duke himself took such courage from that
Action, that having raised an Army of 25000 men, he proclaimed open War against
Sapgeri, Prince of Casan, sending him word, that he, by surprising and
assaulting him without declaring any War, had proceeded like a Murderer and a
Robber; but that himself, as Sovereign Lord and Conservator of all the Russes,
proceeded therein as a person of Honor should do, and sent him word, that his
Army was upon the march, in order to the besieging of Casan. This Siege caused
the loss of much blood on both sides, but proved unfortunate to the Muscovites,
who were at last forced to raise it. Thus ended the War between the Great Duke
Basili Iuanouits and the Tartars.

His Son, Casan ^esieged by John Basilouits.
John Basilouits, to show the World how much he resented the affront, which the
Muscovites had received before Casan, began his Reign with the Siege of that
place. Having battered it for the space of two months together, fearing that
Mendligeri would come in with his Crim-Tartars to the relief of his Brother,
and exasperated at the refusal which the besieged had made, to accept of very
honorable conditions, he commanded all the Walls to be undermined, and a
general assault to be given. And takes it by storm.
The Mines wrought their effect, and took off great numbers of the Tartars, the
Assault was given, and the place carried by storm, on the 9 of July 1552. The
Tartars perceiving the enemies were gotten into the place, took this resolution
after they had made a vigorous resistance in two several places within the
City, where they fortified themselves, and seeing their chiefest Commanders
killed or wounded, they went out at one of the Gates, made their way through
the Muscovites, and got on the other side of the River Casanska Ever since, the
City and Province of Casan has continued under the Muscovite, who repaired the
breaches, renewed the Fortifications, and reduced the Castle to the condition
it is now in, having four Bastions, of stone, many Towers, and a good Ditch.

He who had the command of this place, when we passed that way, was Brother to
the Weywode of Nise The Ambassadors sent him, as a Present, by their
Chamberlain, M. Vchterits, a very Noble Ruby. M. Mandelslo and I, conceiving
our Ship would have lain there at Anchor all that day and the next, Melons of
extraordinary bigness.
went ashore, as well to take the situation of the City, as to buy certain
provisions. We could meet with nothing but Fruits, among others, particularly
Melons, full as big as our Pompions, and Salt-fish, but such as stunk so that
we were forced to stop our Noses, to shun the infection. As we came out of the
City, we met with diverse Tartars, who told us that our Ship was gone; which
intelligence obliged us to take a VVagon, and afterward, to make use of the
Pristaf's Boat to bring us aboard, which, in the evening we found at Anchor,
two leagues below Casan, where they intended to lie all that night.

The course of the River Wolga from Nisenovogorod to Casan, The Course of Wolga.
is Eastward, and South-East-ward; but from Casan to Astrachan, and the
Caspian Sea, it goes from North to South. The Country is very good, and
fertile, but in a manner desolate, by reason of the Cos^ques, and has but few
Villages.

Aug. 15. We continued our course, with the current of the water, which being
very strong in that place by reason of the narrowness of the River, brought us
that day as far as the Village of Klitsischa, 26. werstes from Casan, lying
amidst several Sand-banks, which we had much ado to pass through. Some part of
that day, as also of the next, we spent in recovering our Anchors, whereof the
Cables were broken; we at last made a shift to get up the great one, and left
the little one behind, as being loath to lose any more time. Thence, we passed
by a Tavern called Kabak Tenkofski, 30. werstes from Casan, where we met with
great Sand-banks; and about half a League beyond it, another Bank, near a
Tavern called Keshofska, which we had much difficulty to pass.

The 17. We passed over a great Bank, which had given the name to the Tavern we
had passed by the day before. Thence we came to a place, where the shore on one
side was very high, and some part of it fallen into the River about a month
before, and by its fall had overwhelmed a Boat full of people, who were going
that way to gather Cherries, whereof there is abundance in those parts. The new
Pilot, whom we had taken up at Casan, told us, that coming from Astrachan, Ice
in August.
he had met several of those Carcasses floating down the River, toward the
Caspian Sea. Hereabouts, near the shore, on the right hand, we met with great
quantities of Ice, which we put into our drinks, to make them drink the cooler.

In the evening we came to a place where the great River of Kama falls into the
Wolga. The River Kama.
It comes from North-East, out of the Province of Permie, and falls into the
Wolga, on our left hand, 60. werstes from Casan. The water of it is blackish,
and it is much about the same breadth as that of Weser in Germany. At the mouth
of it there are two Islands, whereof the greater is called Sokol; and upon the
Continent, over against it, a handsome Village called Pagantzina, and three
werstes thence, another, named Corotai, whence we got seven werstes further, as
far as a Village named Kirieska, where we stayed all night.

The 18. The wind was so fair for us, that we made all the Sail we could, and
got, by noon, to the place where the River Zerdick falls into the Wolga, which
is also on the left hand. It is indeed but a branch of the River Kama, making a
kind of an Island, and having another mouth thirty werstes from the former. We
discovered at the same time on our right hand, upon a little ascent, The City
of Tetus.
the City of Tetus, distant from Casan 120. werstes, having its buildings, as
well public as private, disorderly scattered up and down. From this place to
the Caspian Sea, there is no Village at all.

In the afternoon, near an Island called Proleikarsa, we met with the Weywode
of Terki. This City is seated upon the Caspian Sea near Astrachan, and the
Weywode, upon the expiration of his three years Government, was then returning
to Moscou, to make way for his Successor. He was very well attended, having a
Convoy of eight Boats with Musketeers in them. At first, we knew not who they
were, so that we kept them at a distance, by threatening to fire at them if they
came nearer. They told us there were three thousand Cosaques, who expected us
at the passage, some upon the River, some on the Caspian Sea; that they had
seen not far thence, upon the Riverside, 70. horse, which the Tartars had
drawn off to make a discovery of us, and that they would be sure to set upon
us; thinking with these stories to frighten us. We gave them one great shot,
and kept on our course, having the wind so fair, as that it carried us 70.
werstes that day. The River of Utka.
In the mean time, we left on our left hand the River Vtka, which rises near
the City of Bulgara, 25. werstes from Tetus. We thought fit, the night
following, to make trial what our people could do, in case we should be set
upon, so that the Ambassadors conceived it would not be amiss to have a false
Alarm given, ordering the Sentinels to cry out, and to discharge, and
thereupon the Drums to beat, and the Musket and great Guns to be shot off. Our
men did their parts very well, and kept their stations, expressing much
resolution. We did the like in our return from Persia.

The 19. We came to the Island of Staritzo, which is 15. werstes long. There I
found the Elevation to be 54. d. 31. m. Behind that Island, on the right hand,
we found a great number of round stones, much after the form of Orenges or
Citrons, which, being broken in the midst, represented a Star of diverse
colors, whereof some had the resemblance of polished Gold or Silver, others
where brown or yellow. We took up a good quantity of them, to serve us for
bullets for our Murthering-Pieces. Thence we came to a very pleasant place,
where might have been seen heretofore a City of Tartary, called Vneroskora.
There, had been buried one of their Saints, for which Monument those that live
thereabouts have still a great Devotion. From this place to the City of Tetus
are accounted 65 werstes. We saw on the Riverside, under certain Trees, two
men on hors-back, who immediately got out of the way, which occasioned us to
send one to stand Sentinel in the Scuttle of the main Mast; but they appeared
no more.

The 20. There came several Fishermen of Tetus aboard us, and brought us 55
large breams, which they had taken thereabouts, and sold them us for fifty
pence. They have a particular way of fishing. They fasten to the end of a long
cord, a pretty big stone, which falls to the bottom, and at the other end of
the said cord several great pieces of Wood which swim upon the water. All along
this cord are fastened many little cords, each whereof has a hook baited with
a certain kind of fish which is not of the least, but such as the others
greedily feed upon. The fish they take by this invention is ten or twelve foot
long, the meat of it white, firm, and very delicate. In our return from Persia,
there was one brought to the Boat where I was with the Ambassador Crusius,
which was so big, though there was nothing else eaten, by reason every one
liked it so well, yet was all the company satisfied, and there was as much left
as filled a barrel, wherein it was pickled up.

When the Muscovites travel about their own occasions, they make use of another
invention. They fasten a hook to the end of a Cord, and tie the Cord about a
piece of board of about the breadth of a man's hand, plained very smooth, and
tinned over; and drag it after the Boat, so as that the current of the water
causing it ever and anon to turn up toward the Sun, makes it shine like the
scales of fish: by which means drawing the greater sort of fish after it, they
take more than they can spend while they are on the water. So that the
Muscovites, making no other provision, for their journeys, but of bread twice
baked or dried in the Oven, find it no hard matter to subsist any where; not to
mention, that their continual abstinences, and their Fasts having accustomed
them to be content with little, and to care little for flesh, they make a shift
to live upon any thing they can meet withal; nay, in case of necessity, upon
the liquor which Nature furnishes them with.

At this place we let go the Boat which had carried our Provisions from Nise,
which being empty we had no further use for: but we thought fit to set it a
fire, lest it might have fallen into the hands of the Cosaques, who would have
made use of it against us. About noon, we passed by the Island of Botenska,
which is three werstes in length, and is only divided by a small Chanel, from a
kind of Cape, or Promontory, called Polibno. The contrary wind forced us to
Anchor behind the Island, near the River Beitma, which, as they say, is also a
branch of the great River Kama.

The 21. We left, on the right hand, two very pleasant places, which are
reported to have been heretofore great Cities, destroyed by Tamberlane, whereof
one was called Simberska-gora.

The 22. With some little difficulty, we passed over three Sand Banks, whereof
one is above, the other, below the place whence may be seen the Mountain
Arbeuchin, which was on our right hand. It derives its name from a City,
whereof the ruins are yet to be seen.

There may be seen from the River a great stone about 20 foot in length, and as
many in breadth, lying between two little Hills, having engraven on it the
words following, Budesch time dobro toboe budet; that is to say, If thou raise
me, thou shall be well rewarded. We were told, that not long before, a great
Muscovian Boat being forced by contrary winds to make some stay there, fifty
Passengers went ashore, to raise the stone; but when they had with much ado
turned it, they only found engraven on the other side these words, Tsto isches
netsebo poloschen; that is to say, In vain do thou look for what thou had
not put there. On the right hand, we had the view of a spacious and very
delightful Champain Country, the ground very rich, with a high grass on it; but
it was not inhabited, and there could be seen only the ruins of Cities and
Villages, which had been heretofore destroyed by Tamberlane.

The 23. The contrary wind forced us to Anchor near the River Adrobe, where I
found the Elevation to be 53 degr. 48 minutes. In the afternoon, we thought to
advance a little by laveering, but we hardly got half a league further.

The 24. The contrary wind, still continuing at the same height, forced us
twice against the shore, and very much hindered the prosecution of our Voyage.
For some days following we had the same incovenience, by reason of the
Sand-banks, and the inconstancy of the wind, which rise about nine in the
morning; and about five at night there was not the least breath stirring, by
that means adding to the affliction which otherwise lay heavy enough on us.
For, besides that the indisposition of most of our people made that
undelightful voyage the more tedious to them, continual watching, and the
insupportable trouble we were every foot put to, reduced them to a very sad
condition. Those who had been in action all night, though it was not their
profession to bear Arms, were, in the day time, forced to row. Smoked and
Salt-meats afforded little nourishment, and the discontents arising otherwise
upon the frowardness of one of the Ambassadors, in a manner took away the
little courage we had left to encounter with the great inconveniences of that
long voyage.

The 25. We saw on the right hand, a Mountain out of which the Muscovites get
Salt, which they prepare in certain Huts, built for that purpose at the foot of
the Mountain, then expose it to the Sun, and send it along the Wolga for
Moscou. Opposite to this Mountain is the Island of Kostowata. The River
hereabouts is very broad, by reason of the lowness of the shores on both sides.
The River Ussa.
Not far hence there is another Mountain, at the foot whereof is the River
Vssa, which though it there falls into the Wolga, yet is united again to it,
sixty werstes below Samara. There are on both sides of the River pleasant
Pastures; but not far thence there being thick VVoods with a high Mountain
adjoining, whence Robbers discover at a great distance what Passengers there
are coming, it is very dangerous traveling that way. The Cosaques make their
advantages thereof, and not a year before our passage that way, they took a
great Vessel laden, belonging to one of the richest Merchants of Nise. Near
this River we had sixty foot water, as also near the Mountain Diwisagora, which
word signifies, the Maids Mountain, and the Muscovites say it derives its name
from certain Maids that had sometime been kept there by a Shee-Dwarf. We left
it on the right hand. It is very high and steepy toward the River, whence it
may be seen divided into several Hills, pleasant to the eye by reason of the
diversity of the colors, some being red, some blew, some yellow, etc. and
representing, at a great distance, the ruins of some great and magnificent
structure. Upon every Hill or Bank is a row of Pine-Trees, so regularly
planted, that a man might doubt whether it were not Artificial, were it not
that the Mountain is inaccessible of all sides. At the foot of this Mountain
there rises another, which reaches along the River, for eight Leagues together.
The Valley between those two Mountains, is called Iabla-new-quas, that is to
say, Apple-drink, from the great number of Apple Trees there, which bear Apples
fit only for Cider.

The same day we received Letters from Moscou by an express Messenger, who
brought us also Letters from Nise, by which we understood, that among our
Mariners, there were four Cosaques, who came into our retinue, purposely to
betray us into the hands of their Camerades. This notice, though we were
careful enough to look after our people before, added to our care, and made us
more vigilant.

In the evening, after Sunset, we perceived two great fires at the entrance of
a VVood on the right hand, which putting us into a fear they might be the
Cosaques who lay in wait for us, there were five or six Musketeers sent to
discover what they where: but ours having shot off three Muskets, the other
answered them with the like number, and discovered themselves to be Strelits,
who had been ordered to Guard a Persian Caravan, and were then returning to
their Garrisons. The Ambassador Brugman, impatient to hear what account our men
would bring, and thinking they stayed very long, called after them as loud as
he could, but the contrary wind hindered them from hearing him; and in that
suspense he would have had some of the great Guns discharged at those fires;
but the Ambassador Crusius opposed it, and told him, that their quality
obliging them to stand only upon the defensive part, he would not by any means
consent thereto.

In the night, between the 26. and 27. our Sentinels perceived in a little
Boat, two men, who, thinking to go along by our ship-side, were stayed, and
forced to come aboard us. They said they were fishermen, and that the
Muscovites, whom they called their brethren, suffered them to go along with
their Boats by night as well as by day: but, in regard we were told, the
Cosaques took this course, and were wont to come near Vessels, to cut their
Cables, we examined them apart, and finding their answers different, one saying
there were 500. Cosaques waiting for us, in an Isle near Soratof, the other
denying it, they were kept all night, and the next morning we sent them by our
Pristaf to the Weywode of Samara.

The 27. We saw, on the left hand, in a spacious plain, not far from the River
side, a Hill of Sand like a Down. The Muscovites call it Sariol Kurgan, and
affirm, that a certain Tartarian Emperor, named Momaon, who had a design to
enter Muscovy, together with seven Kings of the same Nation, died in that
place, and that his Soldiers, instead of burying him, filled their Head-pieces
and Bucklers with Sand, and so covered the body that it became a Mountain.

About a League from the said Hill, and on the same side, begins the Mountain
of Soccobei, which reaches along the Riverside, as far as Samara, which is
distant from that place 15. werstes. It is very high, in a manner all Rock,
covered with Trees, unless it be on the top, where it is all bare. The
Muscovites take much notice of this place, because it is very dangerous passing
thereabouts. We came near it about noon, but the contrary wind obliged us to
cast Anchor. The superstition of the Muscovites.
While we stayed there we saw coming from the shore two great red Snakes, which
got by the Cables into the ship. As soon as the Muscovites perceived them, they
entreated us not to kill them, but to give them somewhat to eat, as being a
sort of innocent beasts, sent by St. Nicholas, to bring us a fair wind, and to
comfort us in our affliction.

The 28. The City of Samara.
We weighed betimes in the morning, and came before day near the City of
Samara, which is 350. werstes from Casan. It lies on the left hand, two werstes
from the River side. It is, as to form, almost square, all its buildings of
VVood, unless it be some Churches, and two or three Monasteries. The River of
Samar, where it has the name, by a little Bank, which is called Sin-Samar,
falls into the Wolga, three werstes below the City, but is not absolutely
united thereto till after 30 werstes lower.

We intended to make some stay near the City, in expectation to hear, by our
Pristaf, what our Prisoners had deposed; but the wind came so fair for us, that
we thought better not to let slip the opportunity we then had to make the
greatest days journey of any since the beginning of our Voyage. The Mountain of
the Cosaques.
Accordingly, we got at night, to the Mountain of the Cosaques, which is 115.
werstes from Samara, and so the prognostication of the Muscovian Mariners, by
the Snakes, proved true. From the City of Samara, to the place where the river
Samar falls into the Wolga, there is all along one continued mountain. Near the
same place, but on the other side of the River, the River Ascula falls into it,
so that the falling in of all these waters together, does so swell the Wolga,
that in this place it is near two leagues broad. Afterward, on the right hand
may be seen the mountain called Pestcherski, which is in a manner all one Rock,
having very little upon it, and reaching near 40 werstes along the river side.

About 100 werstes from Samara, in the midst of the river, is the Island of
Batrach, and ten werstes lower that of Lopatin, which is five werstes in
length, and lies opposite to the river Lisran, which there falls into the
Wolga, on the right hand. Afterward, we passed by many little Isles, and came
very late at night to the mountain of the Cosaques. It is all bare and without
wood. The Cosaques who live upon the River Don, and had their retreating places
in this mountain, whence they at a great distance discovered the Boats that
were coming down, and there appointed parties to carry on their Robberies, have
given it the name. But ever since the Weywode of Samara surpised there a great
party of Cosaques, whereof there were five or six hundred killed upon the
place, they have forborne assembling there in so great numbers, and appear only
in small parties. All these mountains do sometimes reach a great way into the
Country, and sometimes they do but in a manner border the river, to which they
serve instead of a bank. We lay at Anchor all night, at the place where this
mountain begins, and the next day, 29. we passed it, and, in our way, the river
Pantzina, which falls into the Wolga, on the right hand, and having sailed that
day 45 werstes, we cast Anchor at night near the Isle of Sagerinsko, where we
staid all night. Some Fishermen, who came aboard, gave us intelligence that
they had seen thereabouts 40 Cosaques, who had made their appearance on the
river side. Here we told our people, that our Beer beginning to grow low, they
must content themselves for the future with water, into which they might put a
little Vinegar, and so make Oxicrat of it.

Aug. 30. we came betimes in the morning to the mouth of the river Zagra, which
falls into the Wolga on the right hand, near the Isle of Zagerinsko, to which
it gives the name. Forty werstes thence, we passed by the Isle of Sosnou, where
news was brought us, that we should meet with the 500 Casaques, of whom one of
the Fishermen of Samara had given us an alarm; whereupon all took Arms, and
the Guns were made ready, but we saw not any body.

Toward noon, we came over against the mountain of Tichy, which comes out so
far on the right hand, that at a great distance, it seems to dam up the river,
which nevertheless is so shallow thereabouts, that some affirmed, the Cosaques
forded it. Not far off there is a Bank of Sand, called Owetzabrot, and several
little Isles; full of copses and bushes, which the Cosaques know how to make
their advantages of, in the carrying on their enterprises. There we met with
two Fishermen, who told us, that some eight days before, the Cosaques had taken
a great Boat from them, and had told them that within a small time, they
expected to come into those parts a great German ship. In the evening, we
called to two other Fishermen, who coming aboard, we asked them what they knew
concerning the Cosaques. The more aged was at first cautious and would say
nothing, but perceiving, the other, who was much younger, had not used the same
reserv'dness, he confirmed what his Camerade had said, and assured us, that he
had seen 40 Cosaques retreating into the Wood, which we discovered from our
Ship, and that they had six Boats, which they had brought ashore, to be made
use of against us. They both entreated us, to make our best advantage, of that
discovery, which would cost them their lives, if the Cosaques came to know as
much, and to carry them away as Prisoners, and set them ashore some werstes
thence. Which we accordingly did, but we doubled our Guards, and kept them
under a Guard all that night, in regard we had no reason to be more confident
of them, than of the Cosaques themselves. The next morning at the Break of day,
we dismissed them. That day we sailed 60 werstes.

The last of August, we had so good a wind that we got 120. werstes between Sun
and Sun. The Isle of Ossino, ten werstes distant from Saratof, was the first
thing we saw that day. The Sand-bank which near that place reaches a great way
into the River, put us to some difficulty to pass it. The Ship struck several
times against it, yet at last passed it without any stop. Twenty werstes thence
there is another Isle called Schismamago, and then that of Koltof, which is 50
werstes from Soratof, where we found sometimes 16. sometimes 20. sometimes 30.
sometimes 40. foot water. Between these two Isles we met with two great Boats,
having each of them 400. Mariners aboard it, one belonged to the Patriarch, and
was laden with Provisions; the other, which was laden with Cav^yar, which is
a past of the Spawn of Eggs of Sturgeon salted, as we have said elsewhere,
belonged to the Great Duke. They gave us several Volleys of small shot, and we
answered their civility with a great Gun. Near the Isle of Koltof, we met with
four other Boats, coming from Astrachan, laden with Salt and Salt-fish, upon
the account of Gregori Mikitof, one of the richest Merchants of Moscou. The
Boat-men told us that they had seen, near Astrachan, in several Boats, about
200. Cosaques, who had suffered them to pass, without saying any thing to them.
Not far from this I^^e may be seen on the right hand, the mountain of Smiowa,
which is above 40. westes in length. The word Smiowa signifies a Serpent, and
they have given the Mountain that name, because it sometimes winds it self a
great way into the Country, sometimes, it only borders the River. The
Muscovites would have it so called from a Serpent, or Dragon, which having done
abundance of mischief thereabouts, was killed by some great Hero, and cut into
three pieces, which were immediately metamorphosed into so many stones, and are
shown to this day, to such as pass that way. From this Mountain, all along the
plain may be seen many Isles, which they call Sarok ostrowe, that is to say,
the Forty Isles.

Sept. 1. betimes in the morning, SEPTEMBER.
we met with three great Boats, between 5. and 600. tun a piece, which yet took
up but 12. foot of water. They towed after them a great many little Boats, in
order to the unloading of the great ones, where the River is not deep enough.
The biggest of them carried Provisions for the Monastery of Troitza, whereof we
have spoken elsewhere. The Salute was the same with what we had made to those
we had met before. About nine in the morning, The City of Soratof.
we passed in sight of the City of Soratof. It is seartd at 52. degrees. 12. min.
elevation, in great plain four werstes from the River, and upon a branch which
the Wolga makes on that side. All the Inhabitants are Muscovian Musketeers,
under the command of a Weywode, sent thither by the Great Duke, for the
preservation of the Country, against the Tartars, called Kalmuches, who are
possessed of a vast Country, reaching from those parts as far as the Caspian
Sea, and to the River Iaika. These Tartars make frequent incursions as far as
the River Wolga, and are not so inconsiderable, but that they many times
proclaim open War against the Great Duke. From Samara to Soratof, are 350.
werstes.

The second, having a fair wind, we passed in sight of the Isles of Kriusna and
Sapunofka, which are at a small distance one from the other, and came to the
Mountain of Achmats Kigori, which ends at an Isle of the same name, 50. werstes
from Saratof. This Mountain affords a very pleasant Prospect, in as much as the
top of it is clad with a perfectly-excellent verdure, the ascent checkered
with a soil or mold of several different colors, and the skirt of it is a very
great bank, so even, that it seems to have been done by hand. Twenty worstes
from the Isle of Achmatsko we saw that of Solotoi, and afterward the Mountain
of Sallottogori, or the Golden Mountain. The Muscovites told us, that name was
given it, for this reason, that heretofore the Tartars had thereabouts
surpised a Muscovian Fleet, so richly laden, that they divided Gold and
Silver by the Bushel. We were no sooner past by this Mountian, but we came in
sight of another, called Millobe, that is to say, Chalk. It reaches along the
River 40. werstes, having the top as even as if it had been done by a Level,
and makes an insensible descent down to the River, at the foot whereof are many
Trees planted checquer-wise. After this, we came to another Mountain on which
we bestowed the name of the Mountain of Pillars, for as much as the rains
having washed away the earth in several places, they looked at a distance, like
so many. Pillars, out of order, of several colors, Blew, Red, Yellow, and
Green. Here we met with another great Boat, the Pilot whereof sent us word,
that he had seen near Astrachan about 70. Cosaques, who has suffered them to
pass without saying ought to them; but withal, that some four days before ten
of those Rogues had trapann'd him out of 500. Crowns, not by setting on the
Boat, where they should have met with resistance, since they could have made
their party good against a much greater number of Enemies; but they had taken
that Boat and the Anchor, which the Muscovites make use of when they go against
the stream of the River (as we have expressed elsewhere) and kept both till the
foresaid sum was sent them. In the evening, as soon as we had cast Anchor, we
saw coming toward us ten Cosaques, who went into a Boat, and crossed to the
other side of the River. The Ambassador Brugman immediately commanded eight
Musketeers, taken, some out of our retinue, some from among the Soldiery, to
follow the Cosaques, to find out what their design was, and to endeavor to
bring them aboard. But the Cosaques had time enough to get ashore, and retreat
into the wood, whither they also carried their Boat; so that it was far night
ere our people returned. Our Steward was much troubled thereat, and represented
to Brugman, how dangerous it was, to command our people at such unseasonable
hours, and that in a place where they could not be relieved; but the other was
so much incensed at these remonstrances, that he gave the Steward very unworthy
language.

Sept. 3. we saw on the left hand the River of Ruslana, and opposite thereto on
the right hand, the mountain of Vrakufs Karul, which is 150 werstes from
Saratof. They say that a Tartarian Prince, named Vrak, who giving Battle to the
Cosaques in that place, was there killed and buried, gave it the name. Thence
we came to the mountain Kamaschinka, and to the river of the same name. It
rises out of the torrent of Iloba, which falls into the Don, which falls into
the Euxine Sea, and divides Asia and Europe. The Cosaques cross this river in
little Boats, and make their incursions as far as upon the Wolga; so that this
is the most dangerous place of any. We saw along the Riverside, upon the right
hand several wooden Crosses, set there to signify the Sepulchers of a great
number of Muscovites, who had been killed there by the Cosaques.

Having passed this place, we perceived the Caravan of Persia and Tartary; it
consisted of sixteen great Boats, and six little ones. As soon as they saw us,
the Mariners gave over rowing, and went only as the stream carried them, to the
end we might overtake them; which obliged us to make all the Sail we could, and
to do what else lay in our power, till we got up to them. We soon expressed our
joy, by the noise of our Trumpets, and saluted the Caraven with four great
Pieces; they answered with all their small shot, which obliged us to give them
another Volley.

The principal persons of this Caravan, who could not have all met till they
came to Samara, were, a Tartarian Prince, named Massal, the Cuptzi, or the King
of Persian's Merchant, whom we spoke of before, a Muscovian Poslanick, named
Alexei Savinowits Romantzikou, sent by the Great Duke to the King of Persia, an
Ambassador from the Crim-Tartars, a Merchant, or Factor from the Chancellor of
Persia, and two Merchants of the Province of Kilan in Persia.

Immediately after these first general expressions of joy, we saw coming
toward us a Muscovian Officer, attended by a considerable number of
Musketeers, who came to give us a Volley, and inquire after our health, from
the Prince of Tartary. As they came up to our Ship, the Strelits discharged
their Muskets, and then only the Officer came aboard, and made his complement.
As soon as he left us the Ambassadors sent to the said Prince, the Sieur
Vchterits, who was accompanied by Thomas de Melleville, and our Muscovian
Interpreter; and commanded the Secretary of the Embassy, who took along with
him the Persian Interpreter, to go at the same time and complement the Cuptzi,
who had in the interim sent one of his retinue to do the like to the
Ambassadors.

The Secretary coming to the Lar-board-side of the Cuptzi's Vessel, would have
got up into it there, but his servants, acquainting him that the Masters Wife
having her lodgings on that side, it would not be so fit for him, so that he
was forced to order the Boat to go about the Ship, and to get in the other
side. The King of Persia's Cuptzi.
As we got in there stood several Servants, very handsome persons, who took us
by the arms to help us up, and conducted us to the Kuptzi's Chamber. We found
him sitting in a Couch, which was raised two foot high, and covered with a
piece of the best kind of Persian Tapestry. He had under him a coarse piece of
Turkey Tapestry, setting crossleg'd, according to the custom of his Country,
resting his back on a Crimson Satin cushion.

He received us with much civility, putting his hands to his breast, and making
a low inclination of the head, which are the ordinary Ceremonies, wherewith
they receive those-Persons, whom they would do the greatest honor. He
entreated us to sit down by him, which out of compliance we did, but not
without much trouble to us, as being not accustomed to continue any long time
in that posture. He very handsomely received our complement, and answered it
with so much of obligation and kindness, that we could not but be much taken
with his civility. He told us among other things, that he was extremely
desirous to see his own Country, and his own House, but the satisfaction it
would be to him to see either of them, would not be comparable to that which he
had conceived at the first sight of our Ship. He added, that as soon as we were
come into Persia, we should find the roughness and barbarism of the Nation,
among whom we then were, changed into an obliging civility, to pleasant
conversation, and into a manner of life absolutely inviting, and that attended
with a freedom, which should be common to us with all the Inhabitants of the
Country. That, he hoped, at his arrival at the Court. it would not be hard for
him, with the assistance of his Friends there, to obtain the charge of
Mehemander, or Conductor, for our Embassy, since he had the happiness of our
acquaintance by the way: That then he would oblige us upon all occasions, and
in the mean time entreated us to dispose of his person, and whatever was in the
Ship, as we pleased. He treated us with a Collation, which was served in, Plate
Vermilion-gilt, and consisted only in Fruits, Grapes, and Pistachoes, dried and
pickled. The only drink we had, was an excellent kind of Muscovian Aquavitae,
wherein he first drunk the health of the two Ambassadors together, and
afterward that of each of them by himself, which happened at the same time
that his own was drunk in our ship, which we knew to be so by the joint Volley
of both the great Guns, and the small shot. Taking our leave of him, he told us
as a great Secret, that he had some news to tell the Ambassadors; which was,
that he had it from a very good hand, that the King of Poland had sent an
Ambassador to Schach Sefi, that he had taken his way by Constantinople and
Bagdet; that he was then upon his return to Astrachan, and that he had order,
in his way, to see the Great Duke; but that the Weywode would not permit him to
pass, till he had first heard from the Court. That this was all he knew of it,
and that the Ambassadors might guess at the rest as also what may have been the
occasion of his Voyage and Negotiation.

The other eminent Persons of the Caravan sent also to complement us, and to
make proffer of their services, entreating us to keep them company, and
assuring us of their assistance if need were. After a general Volley of all the
Caravan, we parted, and kept on our course. At night we had a great Tempest,
with two extraordinary Thunderclaps, and some flashes of Lightning; but the
weather soon became fair again, and we had a great calm.

Sept. 4. being Sunday, just as our Minister was beginning his Sermon, came
aboard us several Tartars, whom Mussal the Tartarian Prince of Circassia sent
to tell us, that, his disposition would not suffer him to give the Ambassadors
a personal visit, but as soon as his health would permit him to take the air,
it should be the first thing he did. The equipage of those who came along with
the Person employed in this Message my very well deserve a little remark from
us. As to his Person, he was somewhat of the tallest, his complexion of an
Olive-colour, his hair long, greasy, and black as Jet, and his beard of the
same color and fashion. He had upon his upper Garment, some black-Sheep-skin,
the woolly side out, a Callot, or close Cap, on his head, and his countenance
such as a Painter might well take for an original, if he were to represent the
Devil. His retinue were in no better order, having about them only Coats, or
Garments of some very coarse Cloth, brown or black. We entertained them with
certain Gobelets of Aquavitae, and sent them sufficiently drunk to their Ship.

About noon we came to the River of Bolloclea, in the midway between
Kamuschinka, and Zariza, 90 werstes distant from either of them. Having sailed
sixteen werstes further, we came to a very high hill of sand, called Strehlne,
near which we stayed all night.

Sept. 5. we had hardly weighed Anchor, but the current forced us upon a
sand-bank, where we found but five foot and a half water. While we were busied
about getting off the Ship, the Caravan got before us, and made toward Zariza,
with a design to take in there some other Musketeers for its convoy to
Astrachan. About noon, we got to a place whence we might have gone in less than
a days time as far as the River Don, called by Ptolomey and other Ancient
Geographers Tanais, which advances in that place as far as within seven leagues
of the Wolga. The first Branch of Wolga.
taking its course toward the East. A little lower, near Achtobska Vtska, the
Wolga divides it self into two branches, whereof one, which takes into the
Country on the left hand, goes a course contrary to that of the great River,
taking toward East-North-East; but about one werste thence, it re-assumes its
former course, and returns toward the South-East* so to fall into the Caspian
Sea. In this place I found the Elevation to be 48 degrees, 51 minutes.

Five werstes from the River, and seven from Zariza, may yet be seen the ruins
of a City, which they say was built by Tamberlane. It was called Zaarefgorod,
that is to say, the Royal City; its Palace and Walls were of Brick, which they
still carry thence to build Walls, Churches and Monasteries at Astrachan; even
at the time of our passage that way; they were loading several great Boats with
Brick, bound for the place aforesaid.

In this place, we saw a Fisherman, who coming close by our Ship-side, took a
Bieluga, or white-fish, which was above eight foot long, and above four foot
broad. It was somewhat like a Sturgeon, but much whiter, and had a wider mouth.
They kill it much after the same manner as Oxen are killed among us, by first
stunning it with a knock with a mallet. They sold it us for fifty pence.

Sept. 6. We overtook the Caravan, at Zariza, where most of the Passengers were
landed, and lodged in Tents, upon the Riverside, expecting the Convoy, which
was to be sent from the adjacent Towns: but the wind being still fair for us,
we kept on our course. The City of Zariza The City of Zariza.
is distant from Soratof 350 werstes, and lies on the right side of the River,
at the bottom of a Hill, fortified with five Bastions, and as many wooden
Towers. It has no other Inhabitants than about 400 Strelits or Musketeers,
who serve against the incursions of the Tartars and Cosaques, and are obliged
to Convoy the Boats which go up, and come down the River. There I found the
elevation to be 49 d. and 42. m.

From the City of Zariza to Astrachan, and the Caspian Sea, there is only wast
grounds and heaths, and so barren a soil, that being not able to bring forth
any kind of Corn, all that Country, even the City of Astrachan it self, is
forced to send for Wheat to Casan, whence there comes such abundance, that it
is cheaper at Astrachan than it is at Moscou.

Below Zariza lies the Isle of Zerpinske. It is twelve werstes in length, and
the Soldiers of the Garrison of Zariza, send their Cattle thither (...). The
Cosaques of those parts, having observed that the Wives and Daughters of those
Soldiers crossed over to the Island without any Guard, went thither one day
after them, surpised, ravished, and sent them back to their husbands, 1366.
without doing them any other mischief. Behind this Isle, there falls into the
Wolga a little River, which rises out of the Don, but it has hardly water
enough for little Boats, which I conceive may be the reason, why Geographers
represent it not in their Maps; there being only Isaac Massa, who has put it
into his, and calls it Kamous. The heats were there* abouts so great in the
month of September, as that of the Dog-dayes is not more insupportable in
Germany; yet the Muscovites affirmed, they were but ordinary.

Sept. 7. The weather changed, and a Tempest following, we could not advance
much. Having sailed ten werstes, we saw, on the right hand, a Gibet erected
upon a high reddish Hill. It was the first we had seen in those parts, and we
were told it was set up by the Weywode of the next City, for the execution of
the Cosaques, he should take within his Government, and that he gave them no
other quarter, but that their Camerades suffered not* the bodies to hang there
above five or six days.

The same day an humor took the Ambassador Brugman, to cause all the Servants
belonging to the Embassy to come before him, to whom he said, that he had
reason to believe, that there were many among them, who expressed little
kindness and respect toward him, and, if occasion served, would do him all the
ill Offices lay in their power, and consequently that his desire was, that the
Musicians, the Guards, and the Lacqueyes, should take their Oaths to be
faithful to him. Answer was made him, that his distrust was ill-grounded; that
they saw not any reason why they should be obliged to a thing so extraordinary,
and that they were so far from having any ill design against him, that, on the
contrary, they were all ready to lay down their lives to do him any service;
but that they entreated him, for his part, to spare them as much as might be,
and to treat them more mildly than he had done: which he promised to do, but it
was one of those promises that are either kept or broken.

The same day we met with a great Boat, the Master whereof sent some Mariners
aboard us, to desire us to pity their sad condition, and to relieve them with a
little bread, in the extremity they were in, having not eaten ought for the
space of four days. They told us it was three weeks since they came from
Astrachan, and that they had been robbed in their way by thirty Cosaques, who
had taken away all their Provisions. We gave them a sack full of pieces of
bread, for which they gave us thanks, with their ordinary Ceremonies, bowing
their heads down to the ground.

Forty Werstes from Zariza, lies the Isle of Nassonofska, and opposite thereto,
on the right hand, a great flat Mountain of the same name. Between the Isle and
the Mountain there is a kind of a Grott, where the Cosaques had, some years
before, killed a great number of Muscovites, who had lay'n there in ambush, to
surprise the others. In the evening, a certain Fisherman brought us a kind of
fish which we had never seen before. The Muscovites called it Tziberika, and it
was above five foot long, with a long and broad snout like the Bill of a wild
Drake, and the body full of black and white spots, like the Dogs of Poland, but
much more regular, unless it were about the belly, where it was all white. It
had an excellent good taste, and was at least as pleasant as that of Salmon. he
sold us also another kind of fish much resembling a Sturgeon, but much less,
and incomparably more delicate, whereof there are abundance in the Wolga.

The 8. The Caravan, which we had left at Zariza, came up to us near a Cape,
called Popowitska Iurga, upon this account that the son of a Muscovian Pope or
Priest, who had sometime headed the Cosaques and Bandits, was wont to make his
retreat, and appoint his rendezvous at that place. They count from Zariza to
that place 70. werstes, and thence to the Mountain of Kamnagar, which lay on
our right hand, 40. werstes. The River thereabouts is full of Isles and
Sand-banks, by which the Caravan was no less incommodated than we were, though
their Vessels were much less than ours. Twenty werstes lower there is a very
high Island, four werstes in length, called Wesowi, near a River of the same
name, which falls into the Wolga on the right hand. Thirty werstes lower, the
wind forced us into a corner, where the River of Wolodinerski Vtsga falls into
the Wolga. But in regard we were loath to let slip the opportunity of making a
great days journey, which the fairness of that wind put us in hope we might
do, we with much difficulty made a shift to get out, and afterward passed by
the Country of Stupin, thirty werstes from the City of Tzornogar, which was the
first we were to come at the next day. Ten werstes lower, the Wolga puts out a
second branch on the left hand, called Achtobenisna Vtsga, The second branch of
the Wolga.
which joins its waters to those of Achtobska, whereof we spoke before. Thence
we sailed five werstes further, where the whole fleet cast Anchor, near the
Isle of Ossina, which is seven werstes from Tzornogar. So that, that day we got
135. werstes, or 27. German Leagues, that is, at the least as far as it is from
Paris to Saumur.

From this Country quite down to Astrachan, on both sides of the River, there
grows abundance of Liquorice, having a stalk as big as ones arm, and about some
four foot high. The seed of it is much like a vitch, and lies in cods upon the
top of the stalk. The Champain part of Media is covered therewith, especially
toward the River Araxes; but the juice of it is much sweeter, and the root
much bigger than that which grows in Europe.

Sept. 9. 1636.
There rose a wind, which soon grew into a Tempest, and brought us about noon
before the little City of Tzornogar, where we stayed. It was but some nine
years before, that the Great Duke had given order for the building of this
City, The City of Tzornogar.
which lies 200. werstes from Zariza, some half a League lower than it is now:
but the great floods having washed away the earth along the shore, in such
great quantities, that the course of the River seemed to be thereby diverted,
and that it would be ill coming ashore there, they translated the City to the
place where it is now. It is seated upon a high shore, on the right side of the
River, and is fortified with eight wooden Towers, and a Rampire with thick
planks, having no other Inhabitants than three or four hundred Soldiers, who
are kept there to secure the Country against the incursions of the Cosaques
and Kalmuckas Tartars. There is at each corner of the City, which is square, a
particular place for the Sentinels to stand, erected upon four great poles,
whence they have a full prospect into a spacious plain as far as they can see,
without the least interposition of any wood, or other eminency.

What obliged the Great Duke to order the building of this City, was, the
mischiefs done thereabouts by the Cosaques, but particularly, the defeat of a
Caravan, of 1500. Muscovites: who were there surpised some ten years before.
It had a very strong Convoy, but the River being extremely swift in that place,
and the Convoy being gone before, the Cosaques, who had suffered the Soldiers
to pass by, came out of their Ambushes, set upon the Caravan, killed seven or
eight hundred men, and took away all before the Convoy could come up, the
violence of the current not suffering it to get up the River time enough to
relieve them. Between that place and the Astrachan, there are no Trees to be
seen on the Riverside.

The 10. We left Tzornogar, but the wind turning against us, we could hardly
get ten werstes that day. About noon, some fishermen brought us a noble Carp,
which weighed at least thirty pounds, with eight other fish, of those they call
Sandates, the fairest we had seen in all our Voyage. We would have paid for
them, but they refused our money, and told us, that they fished there for
certain Merchants of Moscou, who having farmed the fishing of that place from
the Great Duke, would be sure to have them severely punished, if ever it should
come to their knowledge, that they had sold any fish. We soon found their
design was to be paid in Aquavitae, accordingly a quart was ordered to be given
them, wherewith they seemed to be very well satisfied.

Sept. 11. The wind and weather fair, we got 120. werstes, but without any
accident worth noting, save that about noon, we passed by the Mountain of
Polowon, so called, because halfway between Astrachan and Zariza, 250.
werstes, distant from each of them. We passed over the night near the Isle of
Kyssar, where the Ambassador Brugman, who was upon the Guard, hearing that the
Sentinel had discovered a great Boat, which the current of the River brought
somewhat near our Vessel, and that upon calling to them, no body answered,
commanded fifteen Muskets to be shot off, and at the same time, a great Gun to
be fired. All took the Alarm; but hardly was every man got to his station, ere
they might perceive coming to the ship-side a small boat, guided by only one
man, who gave us this account of himself, that his boat was laden with Salt,
and that his seven Camerades, being acquainted with some of the Caravan, had
been so treated by them with Aquavitae, that being all dead asleep, he had been
forced to let the boat go with the stream. Our Pilot knew the man, as being an
Inhabitant of Nise, whereupon we gave him some Gobelets of Aquavitae, and sent
him back to his boat. The next day, he came to acknowledge our kindness to him,
by a present of certain Sturgeons.

The night following, the wind continuing fair, we thought fit to improve the
opportunity, and so set sail by three in the morning. Sept. 12. We soon came,
upon the left hand, to a third branch of the Wolga, The third branch of the
Wolga.
called Buch wostowa, which falls into the two precedent. Thence we came to the
Isle of Coppono, from which the name Coponogar is derived to the County, which
is opposite thereto, on the right side of the River. From this place, there are
150. werstes to Astrachan. The fourth branch of the Wolga.
Twenty werstes lower, the Wolga makes a fourth branch, on the left hand,
called Danilofska Vtsga, which mingles not with any of the other three, but
disembogues it self by a particular Chanel into the Caspian Sea. Fifteen
werstes thence lies, in the midst of the River, the Isle of Katarinski, which
is little, but very pleasant, by reason of the Wood, and other plants that grow
on it. Not far from it, we saw upon a Sand-bank the Carcass of a Boat, which
had been cast away there and was half rotten. Being seen at some distance, a
man might take it for a Fort, built there by the Cosaques, nay there were those
who imagined they had seen some of them, which occasioned a command to be given
that some shot should be made into the Wood; but it was done with so much
Precipitation, that one of the Muskets, breaking in the hands of our Cook, the
splinters took off the Thumb of his left hand, and hurt him in the forehead and
breast. We stayed the next night, near the Isle of Piruski, 80. werstes from
Astrachan, after we had sailed a hundred that day.

Sept. 13. while we were, after morning prayer, reading some Chapters out of
the Bible, and among others the XIII of Numbers, where Moses speaks of the
fertility of the Land of Canaan, and the excellency of its Fruits, especially
of the Grapes, brought thence by the Spies, there came two Boats from
Astrachan, which brought us some Fruits to sell. We were so surpised thereat,
that, for my part, I am in doubt whether that of the Holy Land could be better;
so delicious were the Melons and Peaches, and the Kernels of the Grapes were as
big as Nuts. This day betimes in the morning, we came in sight of another
Branch of the Wolga, called Mituska, A fifth Branch of the Wolga.
which at some distance from the River, is divided into two other Branches;
whereof the one is united to the Danilofski Vtsga, which we spoke of before,
and the other falls again into the main river, at some werstes thence. We were
told, that was the most dangerous place of all the river, by reason those
Robbers had their rendevouz and retreating places thereabouts. For indeed, we
saw, between two Isles, a great number of Cosaques, at whom the Ambassador
Brugman caused a great Gun to be fired. Five werstes lower, and 70 from
Astrachan, we came to the last sand-bank, which is called Kabangameel. Five
werstes thence, to the Promontory of Kabangengar; and five lower, to the Isle
of Itziburki, where we stayed that night, 50 werstes from Astrachan.

We saw in those parts, as also afterward near Astrachan, and upon the Caspian
Sea, a kind of wild Geese, or rather Cormorants, which the Muscovites call
Babbes, which in a manner covered the river side; but of them more at large,
when we come to the description of the City, and of the Country of Nagaia.

The 14. We were stayed by a contrary wind, and a tempest coming from the
South-East, so that we could hardly advance two werstes, ere we were forced to
cast Anchor, and to continue there till the next day* We lay at 80 foot water.
The Tartarian Prince sent us a Present of Beer, Hydromel and Aquavitae, with
notice, that if we liked it, we might have more.

Sept. 15. the wind changing, we set sail by four in the morning, taking our
course Southward, and betimes in the morning, came before the Isle of Busan, 25
werstes from Astrachan; and afterward to a sixth Branch of the River Wolga, A
sixth Branch of the Wolga.
called Baltzick, within 15 werstes of the City. The plain, which reaches from
that place to Astrachan, gave us the sight of the City by 8 in the morning.
Three werstes lower, and 12 from the City, there is a seventh Branch of the
Wolga, The seventh Branch of the Wolga.
called Knilusse, which makes the Island of Dilgoi, within which Astrachan is
seated, and having compassed the Isle, it falls into the Caspian Sea, by many
several channels, or ostiaes. We came to Astrachan about noon, The Ambassadors
come to Astrachan.
and whereas the City lies on the other side of the River, which, in that
place, divides Europe and Asia, we may say, that, as we departed out of that
part of the World, which we may in some manner call our Country, we made our
first step into the other. We made some stay before the City, in the midst of
the River, and saluted it with a Volley both of all our great Guns, and small
shot, whereat the Inhabitants, who were come in great numbers to the
riverside, were the more surpised, by reason they were not accustomed to hear
Thunders of that kind.

It will not be amiss in this place, by a short digression, to give an account
of the situation of Astrachan, A description of the City of strachan.
of the qualities of the Country, and the life of the Inhabitants. The Ancient
Geographers, as Ptolomy, Strabo, and others, who follow them, had no knowledge
of these Tartars, no more than their neighbors, and have not made any mention
of them, but only under a general name of Scythians and Sarmatians, though they
should indeed have been distinguished into so many different Nations, suitable
to the diversity there is in their Names, their Language, and manner of Life;
in all which they have nothing common one with the other. Mathias de Michou, a
Physician, and Canon of Cracovia, who lived at the beginning of the last age,
says that those, who confound the Tartars with those Nations, which the
Ancients called Getae, Scythae, and Sarmatae, are much mistaken, in as much as
the Tartars have not been known, but since the thirteenth Age. For in May 1211.
there appeared a Comet, which, having its tail toward the West, and menacing
the Don and Russia, presaged the invasion which the Tartars made into those
parts the year following. They were certain Indian Lords, who having killed
their King, David, got away, first, toward the Euxine Sea, near the Palus
Meotides, where lived the ancient Getae, whence they afterward advanced
toward the Don, and thence to the river Wolga, where they live to this day.
The same Author distinguishes them into four species; to wit, the Zav^lhenses,
(whom he also calls Czahadai) Precopenses, Cosanenses, and Nohacenses, and
says, they are the Tartars, who live along the river Wolga, (which he calls
Volha) those of Precop, those of Casan, and those of Nagaia, who are those of
whom we are to treat of at present. Alexander Guagnin, of Verona, divides them
into eight Colonies, and gives them other names; but it is our design to
entertain the Reader only with what we have seen, and to discover that part of
Tartaria through which we traveled. We say then, that they call Nagaia, A
description of Nagaia.
that part of Tartary, which lies between the rivers of Wolga, and Iaika, as
far as the Caspian Sea, whereof Astrachan is the principal City. It is reported
that a Tartar-King, named Astra-chan built it, and gave it his own name: So
that the Baron of Herberstein is very much mistaken, when he says, in his
Relation of Muscovy, that it is some days journey distant from the River,
whereas it is seated on the riverside, and in the Isle of Dolgoi, made there
by two branches of the said River.

After several very exact observations, I found the Elevation of the Pole
there, to be 26 degrees, 22. minutes, and the Climat so hot, that in the Months
of September and October, the heats were still as great as they are in Germany
in the height of Summer, especially when the wind blew from-wards the Wolga,
East, or North-East. It Is true, the South Wind was there somewhat colder, and
brought with it the inconveniences, nay indeed the scent, of the neighboring
Sea, wherewith it infected the whole Air. At our return that way, our stay
there happened to be in June, July and August, and yet the heats were not
absolutely insupportable, in regard they were moderated by the coolness, which
the South Wind continually brought along with it. But what is to be most
admired, is, that, in this hot Climat, the Winter, which lasts but two months;
is so exceeding cold, that the River is frozen up, and bears Sledges. Which is
contrary to what other Authors say of it, yet the Reader may take it for most
certain.

The Island of Dolgoi is sandy and barren, The Isle of Dolgoi.
insomuch, that some Gardens, and Lands cultivated by the Inhabitants of
Astrachan, excepted, it produces nothing at all, no more than does the
Continent, on the right hand; but on the left, toward the river Iaika, there
are very good pastures. On this side the Wolga, Westward, lies a long Heath of
above 70. German leagues, reaching as far as the Euxin Sea, and toward the
South, another, of above 80. leagues, along the Caspian Sea: as we found at our
return from Persia, when it was our chance to measure it, by eleven very
tedious days journeys. Yet are not these Deserts so barren, but they produce
more Salt, Salt Pits*
than the marshes in France and Spain do. The Inhabitants of those parts call
them Mozakofski, Kainkowa, and Gwostofski, which are ten, fifteen, and thirty
werstes from Astrachan, and have salt veins, which the Sun bakes and causes to
swim upon the face of the water about a finger thick, much like Rock-Christal,
and in such abundance, that, paying an Impost of a halfpenny upon every Poude,
that is, forty pound weight, a man may have as much as he pleases. It smells
like that of France, and the Muscovites drive a great Trade with it, bringing
it to the side of the Wolga, where they put it up in great heaps, till they
have the convenience of transporting it elsewhere. Petreius, in his History of
Muscovy, says, that within two leagues of Astrachan, there are two mountains,
which he calls Busin, which afford such abundance of Rock-salt, that, if thirty
thousand men were perpetually at work about it, they would not be able to
exhaust the pits. But I could learn nothing of those imaginary Mountains.
Certain indeed it is, that the salt-veins we speak of, are inexhaustible, and
that as soon as you have taken off one crust or face of it, there comes up
another. The same Petreius is also much mistaken, when he says, that Media,
Persia and Armenia, are supplied with Salt from these Mountains, whereas these
Countries have Salt marshes of their own, as also Muscovy has, as we shall see
in the sequel of this Relation.

From Astrachan to the Caspian Sea, are twelve leagues, and thereabouts, the
river does so abound with fish, that we bought twelve large Carps for two
pence, and two hundred young Sturgeons, which are very delicate there, for half
a Crown. It produces also Lobsters, or Seacrevices, which multiply in a manner
to infinity, by reason the Muscovites and Tartars eat not of them. The Isles
which are in the river afford habitations for all manner of Fowl, especially an
infinite number of wild Geese and Ducks, which the Tartars take with Falcons
and Hawks, and are very expert in the ordering of those Birds for that kind of
sport. They are also excellently well skilled in the hunting of the wild Bore;
but in regard their Religion permits them not to eat of it, they sell them for
a small matter to the Muscovites.

As to the Fruits of those parts, The Fruits of Nagaia*
it is certain, that, both in goodness and beauty, they yield not to those of
Persia, especially Apples, Quinces, Nuts, Peaches, and Melons, but above all,
that kind of Melons, or rather Citruls, which the Muscovites call^ Arpus, the
Turks and Tartars, Karpus, because they are extremely cooling, and the
Persians, Hinduanes, because they had the first seeds of them from the Indies.
This Fruit is excellently good, and very pleasant to the taste, as also to the
eye, having the rind of a lively-green color, the meat of a pale Carnation,
and the seed black. The Tartars, who brought them to the City in Carts, sold
them two or three a penny.

It is not many years since that they have had Grapes among them, the
Inhabitants of Astrachan being obliged for these to the Merchants of Persia,
who brought the first sets thither, which an old Monk of a Convent that is in
the Suburbs planted in his Garden. The Great Duke hearing that it had taken
with good success, and having tasted the Grape, sent order to the Monk, in the
year 1613. to improve his stock, which he did, and that with such increase,
that at the time of our being there, there was no house almost, but had its
Arbours and Walks set about with Vines, to the so great advantage of the
Planters, that the Master of the house where I lodged told me, the Vines he had
about his house had yielded him a hundred Crowns the year before. These Grapes,
with some other Fruits, were either sent to the Great Duke, or sold to the
neighboring Weywodes: but some years since, they have planted a Vine there,
which has yielded in one year above 60. Pipes of excellent Wine.

The Monk I spoke of was living at our being there, and was a hundred and five
years of age* He was a German, born in Austria, and had been carried away
prisoner very young by some Turkish Soldiers, who had sold him into Muscovy,
where he had changed his Religion, and became a Monk. He was at that time
Superior of the Monastery, and still remembered some German words, but very few.
He was a very good natured Man, and showed how much he was taken with our
conversation, by the frequent visits he made us: but as soon as he had taken
off two or three Dishes of Aquavitae, he was subject to the ordinary weaknesses
of those of his age, threw away his staff, and fell a dancing, though not with
over much confidence.

Heretofore, Its Inhabitants.
all Nagaia was inhabited by Tartars, who had their particular King, and held a
very fair correspondency with their Neighbors of Casan and Crim, with whom
they also ran the same fortune after their defeat. For the Great Duke, John
Basilouits, having reduced under his Jurisdiction the Tartars of Casan, in the
year 1552. two years after, set upon those of Nigaia, and took the City of
Astrachan by assault, Aug. 1. 1554. He forced thence all the Tartars, and,
having peopled the City with Muscovites, he compassed it with a stone wall, and
added some other Fortifications: but it was the Great Duke Michael Foederouits,
that made it larger than it was, by adding thereto that part, which is called
Strelitzagorod, so called from the Muscovian Musketeers, who are quartered
therein. The City is eight thousand Geometrical feet about; and that side
toward the River, which, in that place, is two thousand, two hundred and
sixteen foot broad, affords a pleasant Prospect, by reason of the great number
of Turrets and Steeples of stone, which look very delightfully at a distance,
but within, it is not answerable thereto, the Houses being all of Wood, and not
well built. Some told us, that there were in the City above 500 great Pieces of
brass, and among others, many Mortar-pieces* The Garrison consisted of nine
Pricasses, or Regiments, in each of which were 500 Musketeers, under the
command of two Weywodes, one Diak, and several Captains, and other Officers,
who have an eye upon the Tartars, whom they have reason to be distrustful of.

This City being seated upon the Frontiers of two of the most considerable
parts of the world, it may well be, that not only the Tartars of Chrim, Precop,
Bugar, and Nagaia, and the Muscovites, but also the Persians and Armenians (who
are Christians) nay the Indians trade thither; and these last have a particular
marketplace there for themselves. All which improves the Commerce of the City,
so that the Customs, which there are very low, amount to above 25000 Crowns a
year.

The Inhabitants of the Country, who are the Tartars of Crim and Nagaia, are
not permitted to live within the City, but are thrust into a place without the
City, which is hedged and palizadoed, or forced to live in Huts, which they set
up and down, in the open Fields, because they are not suffered to build Cities,
nor to fortify their Towns nor Villages with walls. Their Huts are made either
with Bull-rushes or Canes, being about twelve foot diameter, round, and toward
the top, like the Coops wherein Chickens are kept in Europe. In the midst of
that place, which serves them for a Roof, there is a hole, through which goes
out a stick, having at the end a piece of coarse Cloth, which they turn to the
Wind, to facilitate the going out of the Smoke, and which they draw in, when
the Turf, or Cow Dung, which they burn, is reduced to a live-Coal or Ashes.
When the weather is very cold, they put over the Hut a covering of coarse
Cloth, whereby they so keep in the heat, that they pass over whole days
without stirring out, with their Wives and Children, not feeling any
inconvenience. They have no fixed habitation in the Summertime, but stay in
those places where they find the best Pasture for their Cattle. When that
begins to fail, they put their Huts into Carts, and their Wives, Children, and
Goods upon Camels, Oxen, and Horses, and so they ramble up and down the
Country, whence it comes that the Muscovites call them Poloutski, Vagabonds.

At the beginning of Winter they all come near and about Astrachan, and lodge
themselves in several crews or troops, which lie not at so great a distance but
that they can relieve one another against the Malmukes Tartars, otherwise
called the Tartars of Buchar, their common and irreconcilable enemies, who make
their incursions up and down the Country, from Astrachan and the Caspian Sea,
as far as Sorat of. The Tartars who live near the river Iaika are their
tormentors on the other side, disturbing their quiet by continual Alarms, when
the river is frozen. Whence it comes, that the Muscovites, to prevent their
being ruined by the incursions of those people, furnish them with Arms, out of
the Great Duke's Magazine, whether they are obliged to return them, as soon as
the River and the ways are thawed: for they are not permitted to have any,
either defensive or offensive Arms in the Summer.

It Is true, they do not pay the Great Duke any Taxes or impositions, but are
obliged to serve him against his Enemies, which they do the more gladly, and
without any compulsion, out of the hope of booty, as do also those of
Daguestan, whom we shall speak of hereafter.

These Tartars have Princes of their own, as also Commanders in time of War,
and particular Judges of their own Nation: but lest they should do any thing
contrary to their allegiance to the Great Duke, there are always some of their
Myrses, or Princes, kept as Hostages in the Castle of Astrachan.

The Tartars of Nagaia and Chrim, are for the most part of little stature, and
fat, having large faces and little eyes, and being of an Olive-colour. The men
have ordinarily as many wrinkles in their faces as old Women, little beard, and
the head all shaven.

All they have about them is a Casaque, or Garment of a coarse gray Cloth,
upon which those of Nagaia wear for the most part a loose Mantle of black
Sheep-kin, with a Cap of the same stuff, the Wool-side outward. The Women, who
are not unhandsom, are commonly clad in white linen Cloth, and have about
their heads a Coif of the same stuff, folded, and round, like those pots which
some make use of in the Wars, having in the middle a hole, fit to put a plume
of feathers in. Upon this Coif, and on both sides, there hang a great many
Copecs, or Muscovian Pence.

They many times vow their firstborn, or some one of their other Children, to
God, or some Imam, or Saint. And that these Nazarites may be distinguished from
others, if it be a Girl, she wears a Ring with a Ruby, a Turqueze stone, or
Coral in the Nostril; If a Boy, he wears it in his right ear. The Persians have
the same custom; but of that more at large hereafter Children go stark naked,
and are all big-belly'd.

The Tartars live upon what their Cattle, their hunting and fishing supplies
them with. Their Cattle are large and fair, as that of Poland. Their sheep, as
also those of Persia, have great tayls, which are all fat, weighing 20. or 30.
pounds, the ears hanging down as our Spaniels, flat-nosed. Their Horses are
little and misshapen, but strong and hardy. They have some Camels, but they have
most of them two bunches on their backs, which they call Buggur, those which
have but one, and by them called Towe, are very scarce among them.

Their ordinary food is fish dried in the Sun, Their food*
which serves them instead of bread. They have also certain Cakes made of Meal,
Rice, and Millet, fried in Oil or Honey. They eat Camels and Horseflesh, and
drink water and milk. Mares milk they much esteem; with this they treated our
Ambassadors, when we gave them a Visit, taking it out of a nasty Leather-bag,
to present it to us.

They are for the most part Mahumetans, Their Religion.
of the Turkish Sect, hating that of the Persians. Some have made profession of
the Muscovian Religion, and have been baptized. They received us civilly, at
least as far as that Nation is capable of civility. One of their Princes would
have given the Ambassadors the divertisement of Hawking, but the Weywode would
not permit it.

The time we stayed at Astrachan was spent in providing all things necessary
for the prosecution of our Voyage. The Persians of the Caravanne, and the
Tartarian Prince sent often some of their people to complement us; they also
made us Presents, and came in person to Visit us. For, we had hardly cast
Anchor before Astrachan, and made known our arrival by the discharging of the
great Guns, but the Cuptzi, and the other Persian Merchants, who were there but
a little before us, sent us a noble Present of all sorts of fruit, Arpus's,
Melons, Apples, Apricocks, Peaches, and Grapes, with this excuse, that being,
as we were, strangers in the Country, they could make us no better Presents,
but when we were come to Persia, they would be absolutely at our disposal. The
Ambassadors having answered this civility, sent them, as also to the Tartarian
Prince, some of all sorts of distilled waters, and sweet meat^.

The next day after our arrival, A custom of Persia to make Presents to persons
of quality.
we were Visited by many Persian Merchants, who were desirous to see our ship.
Not one among them but brought some Present of fruit according to the custom of
their Country, which permits them not to come empty-handed before persons of
quality. They trea^ed us with much kindness and familiarity, which the more
delightfully surpised us, (...) that we had but then parted from a Nation
famous for its incivility and barbarism. And w^ereas thenc^ forward we were to
converse and negotiate with Persians, we thought it not amiss to allow them the
liberty to do what they pleased in our ship, and were extremely pleased to see
them get all so heartily and so kindly drunk, that some, as they parted, fell
into the water; nay one of their Merchants, an aged man, falling fast asleep
upon the Deck, stayed there all night. This good man was so kind in his Wine,
that taking a glass of French-wine from one of the Ambassadors who had drunk to
him, and perceiving they made him this complement, that, after the excellent
Wines of his own Country, he could not taste those of ours, he made answer,
that, though it were poison, yet coming from the Ambassadors hand, he would
take it off.

The 17. The Cuptzi's Present.
The Persian Cuptzi sent us a Present of two sacks of Rice, the grain whereof
was very white and very ^ig, and a Vessel of preserved Garlic, which was very
pleasant to the taste. How the Persians preserve it shall be said hereafter.
Many of the Cuptzi's Domestics came also to see us, and brought along with
them some Mariners, who were astonished at the bigness of our ship, and said
all, that it would not be fit for the Caspian Sea, whereof the high, and in a
manner contiguous Waves, would overwhelm it, and there was a necessity of
taking down the Masts. They all affirmed, that the Culsum (so they call the
Caspian Sea) had never born so great a ship; which yet they only said in
comparison of their own, which are only little Barks, made like our
bathing-tubs in Europe, 1366,
so to take up but two or three foot water, having neither Hatches nor Pump,
insomuch that they are forced to cast out the Water with shovels. They have but
one great sail, no more than the Muscovites, and know not what it is to sail
with a side-wind; so that when a Tempest overtakes them, they are forced either
to go with the wind or cast Anchor: but commonly they go within Pistol-shot of
the shore.

The Persians having left us, the Ambassadors sent to the Chief Weywode, whose
name was Foedor Vasilouits, a Present, which was a large drinking Cup
Vermilion-gilt, entreating his advice for the continuation of their Voyage, and
to know whether we should prosecute it by Sea or by Land. The Weywode desired a
days time or two to consider of it, and to take the advice of persons skilled
in Sea-affairs: but we stayed not for his answer, and resolved, for several
reasons, to continue our Voyage by Sea.

Sept. 19. The Tartar-Prince having sent us word that he would give us a Visit
aboard our Ship, we sent our shallop to Land, to bring him aboard. he brought
with him another Tartar-Prince, and a retinue of about 40 persons, besides
those who belonged to Alexei Sauonouits, the Great Duke's Poslanick. He was
habited after the Muscovian fashion, his Vestment embroidered with Gold and
Pearls, and his person and deportment was suitable to the greatness of his
birth: for he had a very good countenance, a very clear complexion, and black
hair, being about 28 years of age, of an excellent good humor, and eloquent.
He was received into the ship with the noise of our Trumpets, and the fiering
of three great Pieces, and conducted to the Ambassadors Chamber, through the
Guards and Soldiers in their Arms.

After some two hours discourse, during which he was entertained with Music,
he desired to see the ship. He was showed it all, and at last brought into the
Hall, where he found a Collation ready, but he would not sit down, and took
leave of the Ambassadors, to return to the City. At his departure, he had the
same honor done him as at his entrance.

Sept. 20. The Ambassadors sent to the Lord Naurus, The Cuptzi visits the
Ambassadors.
the King of Persia's Cuptzi, to entreat him to honor them with a Visit in
their ship, which he promised to do. The next day he came, accompanied by
another rich Merchant, named Noureddin Mahomet, and the Pristaf, which the
Weywode had sent to conduct him. His reception was like that of the
Tartar-Prince. After the Collation, at which passed several good discourses,
our Music playing all the time, they entreated us to give theirs leave to come
in, which consisted of Hawboyes and Timbrels. Their Timbrels were made of
earth, and were not much unlike our Butter-pots, making a very strange noise,
though their playing on them was very regular and well carried on. The
Collation had put them into so good an humor, that in their return we could
hear their Music, nay a good while after they were got into the City.

The 22. The Weywodes Presents.
The Weywode sent his Presents to the Ambassadors, which consisted in twenty
Flitches of Bacon, twelve large Fishes that had been hung up in the smoke, a
Barrel of Cavayar, a Tun of Beer, and another of Hydromel. About noon, there
came aboard us two of the Polish Ambassadors Servants, whom the Cuptzi had
spoken of, to complement the Ambassadors in their Master's name, and on the
behalf of the Ambassador, sent from the King of Persia to the King of Poland,
bringing along with them a bottle of Scherab, or Persian Wine. The Polish
Ambassador was a Iacobin Friar, named John de Lucca; and the Persian, an
Armenian Archbishop, named Augustinus Basecius. The persons sent to us were two
Capuchins, one an Italian, the other a Frenchman. They told us they had been
five months at Astrachan, and complained much of the ill treatment they had
received there, in that they were detained as Prisoners, and not permitted to
go any farther.

The same day, the Ambassadors acquainted the Weywode with their desire to
Visit the Tartar-Prince, entreating him, to that end, to accommodate them with
horses for themselves, and some of their retinue; which he very civilly did,
sending the next day, by his Gentleman of the horse, to the Riverside, the
number of horses we desired.

Being come to a Lodging prepared for us without the City, The Ambassadors
visit the Tartar-Prince
and having acquainted the Tartar-Prince with our arrival, we walked toward
his Lodging, where he expected us. The Prince having notice of it, met them in
the Court, where he received the Ambassadors very civilly, and conducted them
to a Chamber richly hung. There were with them the Poslanick, Alexei, and a
Tartar Ambassador of Chrim. The Collation was Magnificent, and of the noblest
fruits in the Country, in great plenty. Our drink was Wine, Beer, Hydromel,
and Aquavitae, of all enough: the Trumpets, which the Weywode had lent him,
sounding in the mean time, and other Music playing. When he drunk the Great
Duke's and his Highness our Master's health, he stood, and presented the Cup
with his own hand, to all the retinue, even to the Pages. Alexei in the mean
time told us Miracles of the birth and noble endowments of Mussal, endeavoring
to persuade us, that he was not to be ranked among the other Myrses, or Princes
of Tartary, but that he was to be considered as a very great Prince, and Nephew
to Knez Iuan Borissouits Circaski, being his brother's son, one of the greatest
Lords of the great Duke's Court. He told us, that, when he did homage, the
Czaar had done him very particular favors, and made him considerable Presents:
that he had a Brother at Court, a great Favorite: that his Sister was to marry
the King of Persia, 1636.
and that he might serve us in both Kingdoms.

^ This Entertainment took us up several hours, The incivility of the
Muscovites.
after which the Ambassadors would have gone to see the Habitations of the
Tartars, without the City; but the Muscovites very barbarously shut the Gates
against them, which obliged us to return to the ship.

The 24. The Poslanick, Alexei, gave the Ambassadors a Visit, upon his own
account. He was kindly received, and after he had been Magnificently treated at
Dinner, we sent him back to his Lodging, attended by twelve persons of our
retinue, who had each of them a Sable skin. This Muscovite, who might be about
50. years of age, was an ingenious man, and had a great inclination to
Learning, contrary to the ordinary humor of those of his Nation. He had learnt
some few Latin words, and was a Lover of the Mathematics, whence it came that
he Courted our Conversation, in order to the advancement of his studies. He was
so sedulous, that in the space of five months, that we were in company
together, both in Persia and by the way, he made such a Progress therein, that
he could express himself well enough to be understood in Latin. It Is true,
'twas not with the Congruity requisite, but what he had was very extraordinary
in a Muscovite. He learnt also the use of the Astrolabe, as well to take the
height of the Sun, and find out the time of the day, as to make use of it in
Geometry. He had one made by our Clock maker; and as soon as he came to any
City or Village, he went out into the Street, to take the Elevation of the
Pole; which the Muscovites, not accustomed to see their Contrymen employed
in those exercises, thought very strange.

The 25. The Cuptzi's Feasts.
The Cuptzi sent to invite the Ambassadors to a feast the next day, and desired
them to send him the name and titles of his Highness, our Master, as also the
names and qualities of the Ambassadors, that he might send them by an express
to the Chan, or Governor of Schamachie in Media, that when we came to the
Frontiers of Persia, we might find all things ready for the prosecution of our
Voyage.

The 26. He sent seven Horses to the Riverside for the Ambassadors and their
retinue, but they made use only of two, and, causing the rest to be led, they
ordered the Gentlemen and Officers to walk a foot, according to the custom in
Germany. He had prepared the Feast in a great house, which, to that end, he had
borrowed of the Weywode, and over against it, he had hired another Lodging,
where he had erected a Theater covered with Persian Tapistry, for the Timbrels
and Hawboyes, who continued their Music from our arrival to our departure.

The house where the Feast was kept, was all covered with Turkish and Persian
Tapistry. The Cuptzi met the Ambassadors in the Court, received them with great
civility, and conducted them through two Chambers hung all about, into a third,
which was hung with Gold and Silver Brocadoe.

In all the Chambers, there were Tables and Seats covered with the best Persian
Tapistry, which the Cuptzi had done purposely for our convenience, knowing we
were not yet accustomed to the mode of Persia, where they sit upon the ground
to eat. The Tables were laden with all sorts of Fruits and Preserves, as
Grapes, Apples, Melons, Peaches, Apricocks, Almonds, Raisins of the Sun,
whereof some were little and without stones, Kernels of Nuts, Pistachoes, and
several Indian fruits, preserved in Sugar and Honey, and over them were large
pieces of Satin or Taffata.

We were hardly set, ere came in the two Ambassadors of Persia and Poland, who
had upon their ordinary Habits, the Vestiments which the King of Persia had
presented them with, and the Iacobin Friar had a Golden Cross upon his breast
as well as the Armenian Bishop. They took their places next the Ambassadors,
and being well skilled in the Latin, Spanish, Italian, and French Languages,
their discourses were accordingly without any trouble, and full of diversion.

It Is the custom of Persia to begin their Feasts with Fruits and Preserves. We
spent two hours in eating only those, and drinking Beer, Hydromel and
Aquavitae. Then was brought up the meat in great Silver Dishes. They were full
of Rice of diverse colors, and, upon that, several sorts of Meat boiled and
roasted, as Beef, Mutton, tame Fowl, wild Ducks, Fish and other things, all
very well ordered, and very delicate.

The Persians use no knives at Table, but the Cooks send up the meat ready cut
into little bits; so that it was no trouble to us to accustom our selves to
their manner of eating. Rice serves them instead of bread. They take a
mouthfull of it, with the two fore-fingers, and the thumb, and so put it into
their mouths. Every Table had a Carver, whom they call Suffretzi, who takes the
meat brought up in the great Dishes, to put it into lesser ones, which he fills
with three or four sor^s of meat, so as that every Dish may serve two, or, at
most, three persons. There was but little drunk till toward the end of the
repast, and then the Cups went about roundly, and the Dinner was concluded with
a Vessel of Porcelane, full of a hot blackish kind of drink, which they call
Kahawa, whereof we shall have occasion to say more hereafter.

The Persians expressed their civility toward us so highly, both in word and
deed, at this (...) we could not have desired more in our own Country. Having
taken leave both of our Entertainer, the Ambassadors of Persia and Poland, and
the rest of the Company, which was done with much honor and civility on all
sides, we drew off with the noise of the Timbrels and Ha^^boyes, which sounded
a retreat, after a very pleasant manner. Two of the most considerable of the
Company brought us to the City Gate, where they renewed their civilities, and
acknowledged the honor the Ambassadors had done them, and re-assur'd us of
their friendship and services. As the Ambassadors went into the Shallop, some
of the Ship Guns were fired, which had also been done when they went out of it
to go to the Feast.

The 27. the Ambassadors, with some few persons about them, took a walk, and
having gone about the City, they went a league farther to see the habitations
of the Tartars. We found by the way, that, in those parts, Oxen and Horses
tread out the Corn, whereas in other places it is thrash'd; whereby we
explained that Law, which forbids muzzling the Ox that treads out the Corn.
No Hut but had its Hawk or Faulcon; in our return we met with one of their
Princes coming from his sport, The Tartars much given to Hawking.
having his Hawk on his fist, and a Sheep-skin on his back, as all the rest
had. He expressed his trouble that he had not been at home to entertain the
Ambassadors.

The same day went thence the Poslanick Alexei Sawinouits, continuing his
Voyage to Persia by the Caspian Sea.

The 28. The Treatment of another Persian Merchant.
The Ambassadors were treated with the same magnificence and ceremonies by the
other Persian Merchant, namely, Noureddin Mahumed, save that the Stage, or
Theater, for the Muscovians, was erected in the Court, opposite to the Table,
but more richly adorned than that of the Cuptzi. He had also invited the
Religious Men before spoken of, certain Indians, and two Muscovites, who came
from the Weywode, and understood the Language. The Ambassador Brugman being
engaged in discourse with them, Brugmans ^^nprudence.
broke out into very injurious expressions against the Turks, who, though
enemies to the Persians, yet were not then in any hostility against the
Muscovites: whereupon the former fearing it might reflect on them, as being the
Masters of the Entertainment, entreated the Ambassador not to engage into any
further discourse concerning public Affairs, but to be merry, and to assure
himself, that the expressions they then made us of their affection, were but
slight earnests of the friendship we were to expect from them after our arrival
into Persia.

The 29. Another Tartar-Prince visits the Ambassadors. The Weywodes Present.
we were visited by the Myrsa, or Tartar-Prince, whom we had met two days
before returning from his sport. He made us a present of some wild Geese, which
he had taken, and invited us to go along with him a-Hawking the next day, which
we had accepted, but the Weywode would not permit it, as we said before.

September. the last, the Weywode sent us a Present of some of the Country
Preserves; to wit, Ginger-bread, and the juice of Goosberies reduced to a Past,
whereof some was disposed into the form of great Cheeses, some flat, and some
in Rolls. It was, in taste, somewhat sharp and picquant, and not unpleasant.
The Muscovites put of this kind of paste into most of their sawces.

October the first, OCTOBER.
the Secretary of the Embassy, with two other Officers of the retinue, were
ordered to go to the Weywode about some business. He received me with much
civility, made me set down by him, and gave me a very favorable audience. But
before he answered the Proposions we had made to him, he made great complaint
of the unhandsome treatment, which Rodivon, our Pristaf, whom the Great Duke
had ordered to conduct us as far as Astrachan, had received from the Ambassador
Brugman. He had given him very uncivil language, and had called him Bledinsin,
Sabak, etc. never considering that he was employed by the Great Duke. He told
us further, that, to his knowledge, the Pristaf was a person of honor, and
prudent in the management of his charge: but that it was a great indiscretion
in the Ambassador to treat him after that rate, though Rodivon had not done his
duty, and that he should rather have made his complaints of him to his Czaarick
Majesty, or at least to those who represent the Prince's Person at Astrachan,
of whom he might have expected satisfaction: That he could not believe the Duke
of Holstein would take it well, no more than the Great Duke, that any public
Officer of his Country should be treated in that manner: That he was obliged by
the concernment of his charge to make those remonstrances to us, but, that
there was not, on the other side, any reason the whole retinue should suffer
for his mis-carriage, and that that should not hinder him from giving us a
speedy dispatch; as indeed he immediately did.

The days following were spent in carrying aboard the Provisions which we had
bought, Provisions for the continuation of the Voyage.
for the prosecution of our Voyage. Our own people had baked Bread and Biscuit,
and had brewed a certain quantity of Beer. We had bought of the Tartars twenty
fat Oxen, at between eight and fourteen Crowns a piece, as also several Barrels
of Salt-fish, intending to go to Sea with the first opportunity. And in regard
we knew not what kind of sailing it was on the Caspian Sea, and that it was
represented to us as very dangerous, by reason of the shallowness of the Wolga
thereabouts, for several leagues together, besides our Muscovian Pilot, we
hired certain Tartars of the Country, who promised to go before us in a Boat,
and to bring our ship into the main Sea.

Accordingly, Oct. 10. we left Astrachan, The Ambassadors leave Astrachan.
about noon, having very fair weather, taking our course toward South, and
South-west. But we had not got a league, ere a contrary wind rising forced us
to the shore, and kept us there all that day, and the next. We there received
the visit of a certain Myrsa, or Tartar-Prince, a very handsome graceful
person, and one of the most considerable in those parts, who presented us with
a Mutton, and a Barrel of Milk.

We observed that near Astrachan, and for the most part all along the River
Wolga, the Earth produced Simples in great abundance, Simples of extraordinary
bigness.
and of incredible bigness. The Herb, which the Latins call Esula, grew there
as high as a Man, and the Root of Angelica was as big as a Man's arm.

The Tempest being over, the 12. we set forward, but could get but a league
that day. We got not much more the 13. and were forced to cast Anchor near a
little round Mountain, on our left hand, 15. werstes from Astrachan.

The Muscovites call this mountain Tomanoi-gor. We gave it the name of the
Snakie Mountain, Snakes.
by reason of the abundance of Serpents we met with there. It was full of
Caper-trees, and had abundance of the Herb called Semper-vivum, of several
kinds, as Sea-house-leek, Prickmadame, etc. The Plain, which is at the foot of
this Hill, affords one of the most delightful Prospects of the World, and that
for several leagues together. At night, we saw in a Boat the Strelits who had
convoyed the Poslanick, as far as Terki. They told us there was no danger in
our way, and that they had come it in 24. hours.

The 14. the wind North-north-east, we continued our Voyage, and came in the
afternoon over against a Chapel called Zuantzuk, 30. werstes from Astrachan.
Hereabouts is the best fishing in the Country; The Tartars call it Vtschu, and
it belongs to the Convent of Troitza, or of the Trinity, at Astrachan. The
River Wolga, in this place, divided into several Channels, making so many Isles,
which are covered all over with Bushes, Canes, and Ozier, as is also the Coast
of the Caspian Sea, as far as the River Koisu. There is, among the rest, one
Isle named Perul, 15. werstes from Vtschu, in which we saw a house built of
wood, of a considerable height: having on the roof of it a long pole with a
Sheep's skull at the top of it, and we were told it was the Sepulcher of a
Tartarian Saint, near which the Inhabitants, as also some among the Persians,
when they either take a Voyage, or are safely returned home, sacrifice a Sheep,
part whereof serves for the Sacrifice, the rest for a Feast after the
Sacrifice. Having ended their Prayers and Devotions, the Sheep's head is put on
the top of the pole, where it is left, till it be either relieved by another,
or fall off of it self. The Muscovites call this place Tataski Molobitza, that
is to say, The Sacrifice of the Tartars. Behind this Isle, on the left hand,
there were, upon a high, but very smooth ascent, a great number of Hutts.

At night we came to another Fishing-place, 15. werstes from the Sea, where the
River is shut in with a Palizadoe, and kept by a hundred Muscovian Musketeers,
who keep a guard there against the Cosaque Pirates. In this place we saw a
great number of Dog-fishes, or Sea-hounds, as also of that kind of Fowl which
Pliny calls Onocratalus, whose Beaks are long, round, and flat at the
extremity, as a Spoon beaten out. Putting its Beak into the water, it makes a
noise not much unlike that of an Ass, whence it has the name: but particularly
we took notice of a kind of Geese, or rather Cormorants, whereof we made
mention before. The Muscovites call them Babbes, the Persians, Kuthum, and the
Moors of Guiny, Bombu. As to their feet, legs, neck, and color, they are
like other Geese, but they are bigger in body than Swans. Their Bills are above
a foot and a half long, and two fingers broad, and forked at the end. Under
their Bills, they have a great bag of shrivelled skin, which they can dilate
so, as that it is able to contain near three Gallons of liquor, and they make
use of it as a reservatory for the fish they take, till such time as they can
swallow them down. For their throats are so wide, that people are not only
obliged to shut them, when they make use of these Birds in fishing, as they
often do, but also, if we believe Franciscus Sanctius, it was discovered, that
one of these Birds, which was taken upon its having overcharged the said bag,
had swallowed down a Moor-child upon the Coasts of Africa. The Persians are
very expert in dressing the skins of them, and making Tabours thereof, or
covering therewith some other Musical Instruments. The Ambassador Crusius
killed one of them upon the Caspian Sea side, which was above two else and a
half between the extremities of the Wings, and above seven foot from the head
to the feet. Franciscus Fernandez, in his History of the living-Creatures and
Plants of Mexico, says, that, in those parts, there are some that have teeth
within their Bills; but we are not to go out of Africa into America.

We saw hereabouts another kind of Bird, much after the form of wild Ducks,
save that they are somewhat bigger, and black as Crows, and have longer necks,
and the end of their bills forked. The Muscovites call them Baclan, and they
are seen only in the night time; their quills are harder and bigger than those
of Crows, and very fit for designers.

The 15. we came to the mouth of the River Wolga, and the entrance into the
Caspian Sea, which is 12. leagues from Astrachan, and full of small Islands,
covered ^^th Reeds and Canes till a man comes six leagues within the Sea. Some
attribute to the Wolga as many mouths as there are Islands thereabouts; but
they are mistaken, for those Islands are to be accounted rather made by the
Sea, than the River.

The bottom is all muddy, having but between four, or four foot and a half
water, which put us to inexpressible trouble, and took up our time so, as that
we hardly got four leagues in seven days. Our worst days were the 18. and 19.
of October. The 18. we were got on a Bank, at five foot water, and having spent
as many hours in getting off, we found indeed six foot water, but soon
discovered that it was only a pit, which of all sides, had Banks, at four and
four foot and a half water.

Having, with no less trouble, got again to the Bank where we had five foot
water, the wind being turned to the North-west, the water fell so sensibly,
that we had but three foot, the Ship being as it were fastened in the mud. We
unloaded part of our Provisions into the Tartarian Boat that went before us,
and set all our people on work, to get off; but though they took incredible
pains, so as that they had not the leisure either to eat or drink, yet could
they do no good, so that all could be done was patiently to expect the return
of the water, which we could not hope for but with the change of the wind. This
was no small affliction to those, who considered that we were there at the
mercy of the Cosaques, who might easily have taken us prisoners, and forced us
to ransom our selves. With all these misfortunes there happened to be such a
thick mist, that we could not see from one end of the Ship to the other, and
occasioned a great oversight in us, by firing a great Gun, according to the
order of the Ambassador Brugman, at a Muscovian Boat that passed somewhat near
our Ship: Those who were in the Boat returned us their curses, and told us,
that they might as freely pass that way, as we, who were Strangers, and went by
the Great Duke's permission, whom we were obliged to acknowledge for Sovereign
of that Sea, and their Prince; that since we were so much given to shooting, we
might keep our powder to be used against the Cosaques, who not far thence
expected us. This reproach caused two other Boats to fare the better, and our
selves also, for, instead of injurious speeches, they sent us some of the
fruits of Circassia, to wit, an excellent kind of Pears, Nuts, and Medlars.

Oct. 21. at night, we first perceived that the water was risen to five foot,
which begat in us a hope, that we might put off to Sea. The Tempest, which rose
the 22. with a South-south-eastwind, brought it up to nine foot; but it was so
violent, that not daring to make use of our Sails, we were forced to continue
still at Anchor, and expect fairer weather, which came not till five days
after.

The 23. in the morning, the sky being clear, I observed the Sun at its rising,
and found, that, in respect of the Compass, it rose 22. degrees more toward
the South than it should, by which means we discovered, that, in that place,
the needle declined 22. degrees from the North, toward the West.

The 27. the Tempest being over, we returned all our things into the Ship, and
dismissed our Boat, and, having hoised Sail, got into the Sea; but we hardly
made a league, ere we were again in the mud, and obliged to send for the Boat.
But perceiving we had water enough, the 28. and seeing thirteen Sail behind us
coming out of the Wolga, whom we conceived to be the Caravan, we ordered the
Boat to be sent back. It was the Tartar-Prince, two Merchants of Persia, and
five hundred Muscovian Musketeers, with their Colonel, who were going to
relieve the Garrison of Terki: but what put us most to a loss, was, that,
finding the Muscovian Pilot, whom we had taken up at Astrachan, absolutely
ignorant in the business of Navigation; and the Maps, by which we intended to
direct our course, absolutely false, we knew not what resolution to take.

We resolved at last to address our selves to the Officer that commanded the
500. Musketeers, and to send to him in the evening, while all the ships lay at
Anchor, to entreat his assistance and advice in that conjuncture, and to desire
him to give us an able man that might be our Pilot on the Caspian Sea. He came
aboard us, and having drunk sufficiently, he made us the greatest protestations
of friendship in the World, and told us, that the trouble it was to him to see
us in those difficulties had bereft him of his sleep; that his joy to find us
in good health was so much the more extraordinary, and that he would not fail
to send the Weywode notice of it by an express Messenger; that all under his
Command were at our service, and that as soon as he were got aboard, A
Muscovian Slurr.
he would send us a Pilot we might confide in. But the merry Companion was no
sooner got to his own ship, but he set sail, and left us in the lurch. I think,
what troubled him was, that we had not made him some present according to the
custom of the Country; but he regarded so little the slur he had put upon the
Ambassadors, that he had the impudence to come and Visit them in their ship, in
the company of several other Tartarian Lords, after our arrival at Terki, and
made no other answer to the reproaches he received upon that occasion, than, ja
wi nouat, a great business indeed to be talked of.

Finding our selves thus abused, The civility of a Persian Pilot.
we sent to the Master of the Persian ship, to entreat his assistance. He,
though Mas^^^ of the ship, and owner of all the goods in it, came aboard us, to
proffer us his service as a Pilot, with more kindness and civility than we
could have expected from a Christian, and, having recommended his own ship to
his servants, stayed with us. He was a very understanding man, and was not only
acquainted with the Navigation of those parts, but also with the Compass, much
beyond what the Persians ordinarily are versed in, who do not willingly venture
very far into the Sea, but for the most part keep in sight of Land. So that
finding the wind served, An ominous day.
he caused the Anchor to be weighed, about eleven at night, taking his course
toward the South, with an East wind. We observed it was the same day that we
left Travemunde the year before, and accordingly we had the same success in
this second Voyage. We had all that night but ten foot water; but toward day,
we had eighteen. The Country on our right hand, which is called Suchator, had
four Hills, which made a great Promontory, reaching a great way into the Sea;
and from that Cape to Astrachan are counted 100 werstes, and to Terki 200. but
on both sides they are very short ones.

The 29. The weather fair, we kept on our course, in the morning Southward, and
with a South-East wind, and in the afternoon, South-west-ward, having about
twenty foot water, and finding the bottom gravelly, and full of little shells.
We could discover no Land that day, and the night following, we cast Anchor.
Here the Needle declined twenty degrees, from North to West.

October. 30. We set sail at the break of day, and soon after Sunrising, we
discovered the Country of Circassia, which lies all along the Seacoast from
the South-West, to North-East, compassing it about, much after the form of a
Crescent, and making a spacious Bay.

It was our design, to get beyond the point of the Gulf, but the wind coming to
South-East, had almost forced us into it, which obliged us to cast Anchor about
noon, at the entrance of the Gulf, at three fathom and a half water, finding at
the bottom a kind of fat earth, about six Leagues from Terki. We discovered in
the Bay, about 20. or twenty five Boats, and upon the first sight thereof, it
run into our imagination, that they were the Cosaques; but we were soon
undeceived, and found them to be Tartarian Fishermen, belonging to Terki, and
were then coming to bring us fish to sell. For those we bought of them, we gave
them fifteen pence a piece, but they were very great ones, and we found in
their bellies a great number of Crabs and Lobsters, among which there were some
alive.

The remainder of the day we spent in giving Almighty God solemn thanks, for
all his merciful deliverances of us, particularly that which happened on the
very same day the year before, when we were in so great danger, amidst the
Rocks and Shelves of Ocland. Our Persian Pilot went that day to his own ship,
which was at some distance behind us, to give his men Order what they should
do, leaving us somewhat of an opinion, that he would show us such another trirk
as the Muscovite had done before: but he afterward made it appear, that those
of his Nation are not only made up of Complements, for he returned very betimes
the next morning, having sent his Boat before us, to serve us for a Guide.

The last day of October, we had, in the morning, a thick Mist, with a great
Calm. The Sun having dispelled the one about noon, and the wind being come to
the North, we endeavored to get out of the Gulf, and with much ado, by
laveering, got the point, near which we stayed at Anchor till after midnight,
and came very betimes in the morning, NOVEM*
on the first of November, before the City of Terki. We cast Anchor about a
quarter of a League from the City, because we could not come any nearer, by
reason of the shallowness of the water. The night before, the Cosaques had a
design to set upon us, but happily missed us in the dark, and met with the
little Fleet which brought the Tartar-Prince; but the noise of the Strelits or
Muscovian Musketeers having discovered to them that they were mistaken, and
imagining they should find a vigorous resistance, they drew back, but made it
appear they were the Germans that they looked for.

Intelligence coming, in the morning, to the City, of this attempt of the
Cosaques, raised a verry hot Alarm there, in regard it was known that Mussal
their Prince was coming, and that he might be in some danger. The Inhabitants
were confirmed in that opinion, when they heard the going off of our great
Guns, a noise they are not accustomed to in those parts; insomuch that they
began to get together, and look on us as Enemies; but they were put out of all
fear by the arrival of their Prince, who having given us a Volley as he passed
by, and invited us to honor him with a Visit at his Mother's, satisfied the
Inhabitants, that there was no danger either to him or them.

The City of Terki lies somewhat above half a League from the Sea, Terki
described.
upon the little River Timenski, which issues out of the great River Bustro and
facilitates the correspondence there is between the Sea and the City, to which
there is is no other way to come by reason of the Fens, which encompass it on
all sides, for a quarter of a League about. It is seated in a spacious plain,
which is of such extent, that the extremities thereof cannot be discovered by
the eye; whence may be corrected the error of the Map, drawn by Nicholas
Iansson Piscator, alias Vischer, though in all other things the best and most
exact of any I could ever meet with, who places the City of Terki upon a
Mountain, but, by a mistake, confounding the City of Tarku in the Province of
Dagesthan, with that of Terki in Circassia. The Elevation of the Pole, is,
here, at 43. degrees, 23 minutes. It is distant from Astrachan sixty Leagues by
Sea, and seventy by Land, and is the last place under the Jurisdiction of the
Great Duke of Muscovy. It is in length 2000. foot; and in breadth 800. all
built of Wood, even the Towers and Rampires, yet very well furnished with great
Guns, among which there were then two battering Pieces, placed upon Carriages,
before the Governors house.

The Great Duke has lately caused it to be fortified after the modern way of
Fortification, The Garrison of Terki.
with Rampires and Bastions of earth, by a Dutch Engineer named Cornelius
Nicholas, who went Masters-mate along with us into Persia. The ordinary
Garrison consists of two thousand men, 1500. whereof are under the Command of a
Weywode, or Colonel, and divided into three Pricasses or Regiments, each of
500. men. The Prince is assigned the other 500. for his Guard, and they are
maintained upon the Great Duke's charge, but obliged to join with the others in
case of necessity. The Tartars of Circassia have their habitations on this side
the River. We shall speak of their Religion and manner of life hereafter, as
having had more leisure at our return, to make a more particular observation
thereof.

The next day after our arrival, The Cuptzi's Present to the Ambassadors.
the Cuptzi and the other Persian Merchants sent a Present to the Ambassadors,
which consisted of excellent Fruits, in great abundance, as also to ask them,
whether they were resolved to prosecute their Voyage by Sea, or would travel by
Land, with this by way of Invitation, that if they would go by Land, there was
an opportunity to do it with all imaginable convenience, in as much as, within
three days, there was expected at Terki a Muscovian Ambassador, who was upon
his return from Persia, and would bring with him to the Frontiers, two hundred
Camels, and a great number of Mules, which might carry our baggage. To this, it
was added, that, by this convenience, we might pass safely through the Country
of the Tartars of Dagesthan, and avoid falling into the hands of their
Schemkal, or Captain, who was one of the greatest Robbers in the World; and
that we might be the further assured there was no danger, they proffered us
their company in our Travels. This proposal was so well received by the
Ambassadors, that they immediately sent to the Weywode to desire his permission
to take their advantage of this opportunity, and dispatched Rustan, our Persian
Interpreter, to the Frontiers of Dagesthan, six Leagues from Terki, to take
order for the prosecution of our Voyage by Land; but being come thither, he
found the Camels, and all the other beasts fit for carriage, were returned into
Persia.

The Weywode had at first absolutely denied us the Liberty of passage; but as
soon as he heard there was no convenience of taking that way, he sent an
Officer to tell us, that, though he had received no express order from the
Great Duke to permit any such thing, yet he would not stick to grant us
passage, and assist us in order thereto what lay in his power.

The night following, A mutiny in the ship.
the Mariners, belonging to our ship, fell into a mutiny, against Michael
Cords, our Captain, and the noise was so great, that many of them were put
into Irons. The next day, an enquiry was made into the disorder that had been
committed in the night, and Anthony Manson, a Sayl-maker, being found the most
guilty of any, he was condemned to remain a Prisoner at Terki, till our return
out of Persia. The Weywode sent for him, by two of his Officers, at the
entreaty of the Ambassadors. One of those Officers had a Coat of Mail under his
Casaque, and a tin Gantelet; the other, who by his quality was a Knez; had a
Garment of Crimson Velvet.

Nov. 4. Our Music played in the morning betimes, it being the birth day of
the Ambassador Brugman; which ended, the great Guns were discharged. The same
morning, the Tartar Prince's Mother sent one to complement the Ambassadors, and
to give them thanks for their respects and civilities toward her son in his
Voyage, entreating them to honor her with a Visit at her house, An Eunuch
belonging to the King of Persia visits the Ambassador.
and to come and receive her Benediction. In the afternoon, we were Visited,
aboard, by a Persian Lord, who had a retinue of many servants. He was an
Eunuch, and the King of Persia had sent him express, to bring along with him
the Tartar Prince's sister, to whom he was to be married. He made extraordinary
proffers of friendship to the Ambassadors, and was so well pleased with our
drink, that he grew perfectly drunk, in so much that he knew not which way to
get out of the ship. They that came along with him were so edified by his
example, that one of them was so laden, that we were forced to let him down by
a rope into the Shallop.

The 5. The Ambassador sent M. Mandelslo, the Pastor and Secretary of the
Embassy, accompanied by our Tartarian and Persian Interpreters, to the Weywode,
Their Presents to the Weywode.
to Present him a large Vermilion-guilt-cup, and the two Chancellors or
Secretaries each of them with a Ruby. They were also ordered to go and wait
upon the Tartar-Prince's Mother, and to complement her upon the safe return of
her Son. We were very kindly received in all places, and treated with
Collations of Fruit, Beer, Hydromel, Aquavitae, and Wine. The Weywode
entertained us with the same magnificence as that of Nisenovogorod, and falling
into discourse of the nature and manner of life of the Persians, he told us,
that they would, no doubt, be extremely liberal of their good words and fair
promises, but that it requires a strong faith to believe one half of them, in
as much as their performance would not be consonant thereto.

Prince Mussal received us in Person, Their message to the Tartar-Prince.
with very intimate demonstrations of affection, at the entrance of the Court,
and conducted us into a high and spacious Hall, whereof the Walls were of
earth, and so built, that a man might see on all sides, at an equal distance, a
certain number of Neeches vaulted, in which there were either rich beds, with
coverlets of silk or cotton; or there were laid up in them several pieces of
Persian Tapestry, and coverlets; wrought or embroidered with gold and silk, of
diverse several colors, with great chests covered with the same.

All along the wall, just under the seeling, there hung two rows of dishes, of
wood and earth, of diverse colors; and the pillars, which underpropp'd the
structure, were hung all about with excellent Cymitars, Quivers, and Arrows.
The Princess sat in a chair, having about her a black loose Gown lined with
Sables, and made after the fashion of a morning-coat.

The Princess's name was Bika, The reception of the Envoys from the Ambassadors
by the Tartar-Princess.
and she was of a very noble stature, and had a good countenance, and might be
about 45 years of age. She wore, at her neck behind, an Ox-bladder, blown to
the utmost, which was wound about toward her hair, with a rich Scarf
embroidered with Gold and Silk, and had about her neck another Scarf, the two
ends whereof hung down over her shoulders. Behind the Chair stood a Lady, who
had also a Bladder at her neck, and we were told afterward that it was the
Badge of Widdowhood. On her right hand stood her three Sons, the two younger
whereof were no better in Clothes than the most inconsiderable persons in the
Country. Behind them, stood certain Servants, on whose foreheads and faces
(which they had torn with their nails) might still be seen the marks of their
mourning for the death of the elder brother, who had been executed at Moscou.
On the left hand stood, all in a file, several Tartars, who were all very aged
Persons, and represented the Council and Officers of the Court. The Princess,
having answered our Complement, ordered Seats to be brought; and a little Table
furnished with Fruits for the Collation, The Collation.
at which our drink was Hydromel and Aquavitae. We would have had the Princes
to have sat down with us, but they would not by any means do it, alleging,
that it was not the Custom of the Country, and that the respect they ought
their Mother permitted not their sitting down in her presence.

The Collation being ended, The curiosity of the Tartar-Ladies.
and the Princess and others of the Company having handled and taken particular
notice of our Clothes all over, the Princess her self presented to each of us,
a large Cup, full of a sort of Aquavitae extracted out of a Millet, which we
found as strong as Spirit of Wine. The three Princes Presented us also with
each of them a Cup, and entreated us not to take it ill, if they did the same
honor to our Servants. In the mean time there was opened, behind the Princess,
a Chamber Door, at the entrance whereof were to be seen several Ladies, and
amongst the rest the Princess's Daughter, who was betroathed to the Sophy of
Persia.

She might be about sixteen years of age, and was very handsome, the clearness
of her complexion having so much the greater luster, by reason of the
extraordinary blackness of her hair. These Ladies seemed to be no less desirous
to see our Clothes, than those who were in the Hall, thrusting one another
toward the door, which they immediately shut upon the least sign made to them
by the Princess: but they opened it again soon after, to take a further view of
us. They called one of our servants to them, to take the more particular notice
of his Clothes, the fashion whereof they very much admired, as also that of his
Sword, which they desired him to draw, that they might see the blade of it. But
the Persian Envoy, who every day visited the Princess, coming into the Room
while they were so employed, the Chamber door was immediately shut upon them,
and we took leave of the Princess and the Princes her Sons, and went to view
the City. We there met with several Women, handsome, young, and well made,
having on them a kind of smocks of frocks of diverse colors, who made no
difficulty ever and anon to stay us, till they had taken particular notice of
our Clothes.

Nov. 6. The Cuptzi sent us a Letter from the Governor of Derbent, in answer
to that which he had writ to him from Astrachan, the 25 of Sept. before. The
contents of it was, to express his joy at our arrival, and to order the Cuptzi
not to come away without us, but to bring us along with him by Sea.

The 7. Our Interpreter Rustan returned from the frontiers of Dagesthan, with
this news, that those, who had conducted the Muscovian Ambassador to the
frontiers, were returned into Persia before his coming thither; and that they
thought it not enough to carry away the Camels and all the other Beasts fit for
carriage, but they had also taken along with them the pieces of Timber and
Fagots, without which it was impossible to get over those places where the Road
was bad: upon which intelligence it was immediately resolved, that we should
continue our Voyage by Sea.

The 8. The Princess sent the Ambassadors a present of two Sheep, fifty
Pullets, and several other Provisions. The high Chancellor of Muscovy sent us a
Sheep, a barrel of Beer, and aanother of Hydromel. In the afternoon, the Prince
Mussal came to give us a visit, to bid us adieu. There came along with him a
Myrsa of Dagesthan, a Brother of the Prince of Tarku's, who made us believe, he
was come expre^s to conduct the Ambassadors as far as the place of his
Brother's residence. He was no better clad than the other Tartars, having, over
his old clothes, a Cloak, of a sort of very coarse Cloth, but as to his
corntenance and behavior, he expressed a fierceness beyond any of them, not
dissembling the trouble it was to him, that we discovered a greater respect for
Mussal than for him, and refusing to stand at the drinking of the Great Duke's
health. And when Mussal entreated him to consider the place he was in, he
confidently made answer, that he knew not whether the Country he was then in,
were the Great Duke's or his own, and began to pick a quarrel with him,
reproaching him, that, with all his gay Clothes, he was but a slave to the
Muscovite, whereas himself, though but in rags, was nevertheless an absolute
Prince; that acknowledged no other superior than God: insomuch that at last,
not able to govern his passion, he absolutely refused to drink the Czaar's
health in any posture, The Tartars inclined to theft.
and went his ways. Some of his servants stole from our Minister, a silver
Spoon and a Knife, and cut off one of the sleeves of my Doublet; but they were
forced to leave it behind them, it being engaged under some other Clothes.

Prince Mussal staid with the Ambassadors, and begged of them the pardon of the
Mariner whom we had sent Prisoner to Terki. The Ambassadors very freely
satisfied his desire therein, and so sent late that night, the Secretary of the
Embassy and another Gentleman, to the Weywode, to entreat him to return the
Prisoner into our hands, and to desire justice of him against the Muscovian
Pilot, who had run away from us two days before. A good while after night a
Lacquey was sent after us, The Ambassadors leave Terki.
to press our immediate return to the Ship, which was then ready to set sail,
to make all the advantage they could of the Wind, which for some hours had
blown very fair. We had dispatched all our business, when the Lacquey came to
us; but notwithstanding all the expedition we could use, we found the Ship
under sail, but it was not long, ere the Wind, turning to the direct contrary
point, forced us to continue in the same place.

The Weywode in the mean time sent us his Present, The Weywode's Present.
which consisted of a hundred pieces of hung Beef, four tuns of Beer, a
puncheon of French Wine, a tun of Hydromel, a puncheon of Vinegar, two Sheep,
four great Cakes of Ginger-bread, and several Loafs of other bread. There was
bestowed among those that brought the Present, about 20. Crowns, and good store
of Aquavitae, insomuch that they went their way very well satisfied.

Nov. 10. the Wind coming to South-west, we set sail at the break of day,
intending to take the course of the City of Derbent, which is the nearest of
any of that frontier. About noon, we discovered a Bark, which at first, took
its course so as if it would have passed on the right hand of us, then made as
if she would come up straight to us, and not knowing well what resolution to
take, they ever and anon made more or less sail; whereby perceiving that those
who were in it, were afraid of us, the Ambassador Brugman gave order that the
Ship should make straight toward the Bark, put the Soldiers in their stations,
and commanded a certain number of great Guns to be fired at random, the more
to frighten them. The poor people immediately struck sail, and came near us.
They were Persians, Fruit-Merchants, and the Bark was then laden with Apples,
Pears, Quinces, Nuts, and other Fruits. The Master of it, who was Brother to
our Pilot, seeing him among a sort of people such as he had never seen before,
and believing he was their Prisoner, began with horrid Cries and Lamentations
to bewail his Brother's misfortune, as also his own, which he expected to fall
into, though he cried several times to him, Korchma duschman lardekul, Fear
not, they are friends, among whom I am with my own consent. But the other would
hear of no persuasion to the contrary, imagining, that they forced him to speak
to that purpose, and could not recover himself out of the fear he was in, till
his Brother had acquainted him with the occasion which had brought him to our
Ship. Then was it that he took the courage to come himself into our Ship, with
a present of all sorts of Autumn-fruits, whereof he also sold good store, so
cheap, that a quarter of a hundred of very great Apples came not to a penny. He
was treated with Aquavitae, after which he returned to his Bark very well
satisfied.

Much about this time, we came near an Isle which the Muscovites call Tzetland,
An Island in the Caspian Sea.
and the Persians, Tzenzeni, eight Leagues from Terki, on the left hand. There
we cast Anchor, at three fathom and a half water, and staid there four and
twenty hours, according to the custom of the Pesians. We had lying before us a
Treatise written by George Dictander, (who had Traveled into Pesia in the year
1602. with an Ambassador sent thither by the Emperor Rodolph 11.) who,
speaking of this Isle, says, that, being the only man left alive at his
return, and staid in that place by the cold, he had been forced to kill the
Horses which the Sophy had bestowed on him, after he had consumed all the other
Provisions. Having at our coming thither, four or five hours of daylight
remaining, the Ambassadors thought it not amiss to go into the Island, to see
whether what they observed there, were consonant to what the other had written
thereof: But all we could meet with worth our Observation was, only three great
poles fastened together, and set up at one of the points of the Island, beset
all about with Roots and Boughs, to serve for a direction to the Mariners, and
two great Ditches, wherein some time before fire had been made. This, in all
probability was done by the Cosaques, who make their frequent retreats into
that Island. It lies at forty three degrees, five minutes elevation, and
reaches in length from North-east to South-east, about three German Leagues.
The soil is for the most part sandy and barren, and toward the extremities,
either covered with shells, or fenny; and it is the only Island that is to be
seen, as we go to Kilan, Westward of the ordinary course.

From this Island, there may be seen in the Continent, toward the South-west,
such high Mountains, that we took them at first for Clouds. Our people called
them the Mountains of Circassia; but the Muscovites, nay the Inhabitants of
Circassia themselves, call it the Mountain Salatto, and it is properly that
Mountain which the Ancients call Caucasus, Mount Caucasus.
in the Province of Colchis, which is the same that at this day is called
Mengrelia; Mengrelia.
and is so famous in Antiquity, for the fabulous expedition of Jason for the
Golden (...) Its height, which indeed is extraordinary, in as much as it seems
to extend it self to the Stars, has furnished the Poets with that fancy, that
it was from this Mountain Prometheus stole fire from the Sun, to communicate it
to men. Quintus Curtius affirms, that it crosses all Asia. Certain indeed it
is, that the Mountains of Aratat and Taurus are so near, and do so as it were
cloze with it, that it seems to be but one continued Mountain, extending it
self all through Asia, from Mengrelia, as far as the Indies. From the Caspian
Sea, toward the Euxine Sea, and Asia the lesser, it is near fifty Leagues in
breadth. But let us see what Quintus Curtius says of it, in the seventh Book of
his History, where he gives us this account of it. They reach, says he, from
thence, toward Mount Caucasus. which divides Asia into two parts, and leaves
the Cilician Sea on the one-side, and on the other, the Caspian Sea, the River
Araxes, and the Deserts of Scythia. Mount Taurus, which is to be ranked in the
second place for its height, is joined to Caucasus, and, beginning in
Cappadocia, crosses Cilicia, and reathes as far as A^^nia. It is as it were a
continued concatenation of Mountains, out of which arise almost a^l the Rivers
of Asia, some whereof fall into the Red Sea, and others, into the Hyrcanian, or
that of Pontus. The Army passed the Caucasus in seventeen days, and came in
sight of the Rock, which is ten Stadia in compass, and about four in height,
where Prometheus was chained, if we may credit the Poets.

Mount Aratat, Mount Aratat.
upon which Noah's Ark rested after the deluge, and which the Armenians call
Messina, the Persians, Agri, and the Arabians Subeilahn, is without comparison
much higher than the Caucasus, and is indeed but a great black Rock, without
any Verdure, and covered with Snow on the top, as well in Summer as Winter, by
means whereof it is discovered fifteen Leagues into the Caspian Sea. The
Armenians, and the Persians themselves, are of opinion, that there are still
upon the said Mountain some remainders of the Ark, but that time has so
hardened them, that they seem absolutely petrified. At Schamachy in Media, we
were shown a Cross of a black and hard Wood, which the Inhabitants affirmed to
have been made of the Wood of the Ark: and upon that account it was looked upon
as a most precious Relick, and, as such, was wrapped in Crimson Taffata. The
Mountain is now inaccessible, by reason of the precipices whereby it is
encompassed of all sides.

Imaniculi Sulthan, whom the Sophy sent Ambassador to the Duke of Holstein, our
Master, and whose Territories lie in those parts, in the Country of Karabah
told us many very remarkable particulars of it. These high Mountains are a
great direction to those who have no Compass to sail by in the Caspian Sea; in
as much as changing their form according to the several prospects they afford,
the Pilots by that means easily discover whereabouts they are.

The 11. we continued our Voyage presently after Sunrising, taking our course
along the Isle Southward. At the extremity of the Isle, there is a kind of
Straight, near a Cape or Promontory which comes out of the Continent into the
Sea, much about the same place, where, on the Isle side, a great Sand-bank
advances it self toward the Land, and so makes but a narrow passage. Which
obliged us to cast Anchor, that we might have the more convenience of Sounding,
so to avoid the flats or shallows, which make Navigation very dangerous
thereabouts. We found, at first, but two fathom water, but soon after we were
at six or seven fathom; insomuch that the Wind becoming more favorable, we
took our course South-South-west, directly toward Derbent, along the shore,
and in sight of it. After midnight, the Wind being not so much for us as
before, we were forced to laveer it all the remainder of the Night; but we
advanced little or nothing; insomuch that a Tempest rising thereupon, we at
last resolved to cast Anchor, which we did, at twelve fathom water. We lay at
Anchor all the 12th. till 9. at night, and then the Wind coming to the North,
we set sail with a favorable Wind, taking our course to the South-South-east.

About 11. the same night, we found between 20 and thirty fathom water, and an
hour after, no bottom, A Tempest.
so that the wind being turned again to an absolute Tempest, we conceived, that
it would be dangerous for us to bear much sail upon a Sea we were not
acquainted with, and that in the Night time, Whereupon having furled them up,
we let the Ship go directly before the wind, by which means we got two Leagues
in less than an hour. We had, besides our double Shallop, two other Boats, one
whereof, which we had bought of the Muscovites, was only for their convenience
who sounded the depth of the Water, and the other served for the unloading of
our Ship, which drew both of them after her. There were two Seamen appointed
for the guiding of the Shallop, which, having in it only certain small Pieces,
Bullets, Chains, Cables, Pitch, and other things necessary for Navigation, was
made so shallow, that being ever and anon filled with water, the Seamen,
finding themselves no longer able to guide it, came aboard the Ship, and
fastened the Shallop to the stern. The other Boats were soon overwhelmed with
water and lost. The Shallop held out a while, but at length followed the
others, and this proved the beginning of our wrack upon the Caspian Sea. Our
Ship, which was built only of Firr, and had been much endammag'd by the
Sand-banks of the Wolga, bowed under the high and violent waves of that Sea, as
if it had been a Snake, and opened in so many places, that we were forced to be
always at the Pump, and continually employed in emptying the water that came
in of all sides. Our Persian Pilot had not the least share of the common fear
and distraction we were all in, and no doubt wished himself in his own Ship, or
nearer Land; in regard that had we been cast away there, we had all inevitably
perished.

Nov. 13. at the break of day, we perceived, that we had still kept in sight of
Land, and we particularly discovered the Mountain of Derbent, which, as we
conceived, could not be above ten Leagues distant from us. The Tempest abating
a little of its Violence, we hois'd the mizen Sail, and afterward the main
Sail, with a resolution to run the Ship strait a-ground. But having, the Night
before, taken our course too high, and the wind continuing still from the
North-west, we were forced to comply with it, and, to our no small regret, pass
beyond the City of Derbent, along the Persian Coast, which, in that place,
reaches from North to South, but so as that we could not find any Road or
Haven, where we might save our selves; for as much as there being only Rocks at
the bottom for the space of six Leagues from the Land into the Sea, it is
impossible to make the Anchor take any hold. At last, about four, in the
afternoon, we cast Anchor, at four fathom water, before the Village of
Niasebeth, which our Authors call Nisavay, the bottom muddy; but we thought not
our selves more safe at Anchor, than when we were tossed up and down in the
main Sea. The waves were so violent by reason of the extraordinary roughness of
the Sea, that it was not long ere they broke the hindges of the Rudder, which
obliged us to take it quite off, and to fasten it with a Cable behind the Ship,
lest beating against the Castle it should have broke it all to pieces; the
Water coming still into the Ship so fast, that we were forced to spend the
remainder of that day, and all the night following, in emptying it.

The Tempest abated a little of its violence the next morning, being the the
14. of November, and invited us to think of some course for the disembarking of
our selves, but we had neither Boat nor Shallop to help us to Land, and though
we had caused several Volleyes of great and small shot to be discharged, to
oblige the Inhabitants of the Country to come in to our relief, yet could we
not perceive any body; but we had hardly made a shift to clap a certain number
of deal Boards together like a flat-bottom'd Boat, ere we saw coming toward us
two Boats, which the Kaucha, or Judge of the Village, had sent to our relief in
that extremity.

They brought us a present, of two baggs of Apples, with a very obliging
Complement, protesting that they were no less glad at our arrival, than we
might be at theirs. Which done, they exhorted the Ambassadors to get out of the
Ship as soon as they could possibly, taking along with them what they accounted
of greatest Value, and not to be over-confident of the clam, The Ambassadors
disembark with part of their retinue.
which, no doubt, would not last many hours. The Ambassadors took their advice,
and having put into the Boats what they thought most considerable, they ordered
some part of their retinue to go in also, and certain Soldiers with their
Officers; leaving in the ship the Sieur Vchterits, their Steward, and the
Secretary of the Embassy, with an intent to send for them as soon as they were
landed themselves.

The Kaucha was on Horseback at the Seaside, and perceiving that the Boats
could not come near enough, by reason of the shallowness of the water, he
alighted, and sent the Ambassadors his Horse for their more convenient Landing.
And thus it was that the Ambassadors first set foot in Persia. But as soon as
they were got ashore, the Tempest grew more violent than it had been before,
insomuch that it was impossible for them to send back the Boats: which put us
that were left aboard to the utmost hazard of Shipwreck and Life. The Ship,
being now in a manner quite unloaden, was tossed up and down like a Ball by the
Waves, the Sea raising her, one while, up to the Clouds, another swallowing her
up in its abysses. There was constantly above a foot water upon the Deck, so
that we were not able to stay upon it; and at last the Ship opening above, just
in the middle, we began to fear the absolute dissolution of her. We observed
also by the Trees that were upon the Seaside, that the Anchor was loose, and
that the wind had carried us above a quarter of a League from the place where
he had disembarked the Ambassadors, whereupon we cast two others, both which
were lost about 11. the same night, as also our Rudder. The biggest Anchor held
still, but the Vessel drew so much water, that the Pump being of no further
use, we were forced to empty her with Kettles. About midnight the wind came to
the East, and broke off our main and mizen Masts, and over-turn'd them into the
Sea, the Ship shaking in that interim with so much violence, that the edges of
her were ever and anon even with the water. The Seamen entreated the
Secretary, to give them leave to cut the Ropes that still held her, to see if
that would deliver us out of the extremity we were in; which he made no
difficulty to grant them. We had not eaten ought in three days, and watching,
with continual labor, had brought us so low, that having lost all courage,
together with the hope of ever saving our Lives, all our thoughts were taken up
with the disposal of our selves for Death. Our Carpenter was the only person
who had the courage to go under Decks, and to take so large a dose of
Aquavitae, that being come up on the Deck, he fell down dead at our feet. Nor
indeed could we have imagined him to be otherwise, if the Exhaltations of the
Aquavitae, that ascended from his stomach, had not discovered the nature of his
indisposition. A strange resolution in the utmost hazard.
The Seamen remitted nothing of their labor all this time, and exhorted the
rest to be of good courage, putting us in hope, that, within some few hours,
either the weather would change, or the Ambassadors would not fail to relieve
us, as indeed they were both of them earnest to do all lay in their power for
our preservation. Nay the Ambassador Brugman would, with his Sword drawn, have
forced some of our people to come in the two Boats to look after us, but he
could by no means prevail with them, to hazard themselves.

Perceiving the day slipped away without any hope of relief, and fearing the
Tempest might grow more violent the night following, I took the Master's-mate
aside, and was desirous to know of him, whether, the Tempest continuing in the
height it was then at, it would not be our best course to run the Ship a-ground
to save the men. His answer was, that he believed the Ship could not make any
great resistance, and that it were not amiss I took the advice of the other
Officers, and propose it to the Captain and the Master, who both confessed,
that the ship was in so ill a plight, that they were confident the Ambassador
Brugman himself would have commanded her to be run a-ground, had he been among
them: and yet they were withal of opinion, that, continuing their labor for
some hours longer, it was not impossible but the Vessel might be saved. But
they discovered by their discourse their main fear to be, that, when there were
no ship, they would be looked on as useless persons, and that there might be
some dispute about their wages for the rest of the Voyage. Hence it came that
they were unwilling the ship should be run a-ground. But the Sieur Vchterits
and the Secretary, overcome with the importunities of the rest of the company
to have that course taken, in so great an extremity, the Captain and
Masters-mate at last gave their consent, provided a promise were made them in
Writing, that the Ambassadors should not call them to an account for their so
doing: which was accordingly done, and the Secretary drew up an Act to that
purpose, which was signed by all. But the Captain and Master beginning to make
new difficulties, after they had gotten a discharge, as aforesaid, all our
people would have mutini'd, and cried out, that if they delayed the running of
the ship a-ground any longer, they should answer before the Tribunal of God, to
give an account for what should happen thereupon. The Captain would have
excused himself, alleging, that though the ship were run a-ground, as was
desired, yet were it impossible for him to save all our people: but answer was
made him, that they were resolved to run the hazard of it, and he was so
earnestly pressed thereto, that he consented, after he had obliged the Sieur
Vchterits and the Secretary of the Embassy to give the first stroke upon the
Cable: which when they had done, The Ship runs a-ground.
the Seamen soon made an end, and having struck the only sail we had left us,
we made strait to land, and run the ship a-ground, about thirty pearches
distant from the place where the Ambassadors and all our friends expected us,
with no less trouble for us, than we had for our selves. Nay some of them, to
make a greater expression of their affection, came a good way into the water,
and carried us ashore.

It proved no great trouble to us to justify the resolution we had taken of
running the Ship a-ground, in regard that, as to that particular, the
Ambassador Brugman himself prevented us, and told us he had been long before
resolved to send the Captain orders to do it, but that he could not meet with
any person that would undertake the execution thereof.

As concerning the Caspian Sea, A description of the Caspian Sea.
it has not in all places the same name, but it is changed, either according
to the diversity of the Inhabitants that live about it, or the Provinces that
border upon it. It was called anciently the Sea of Chosar, from the Name of the
eldest Son of Thogarma, who was the Son of Gomer, and Grandchild of Iaphet,
third Son to Noah. Nubius's Geography calls it the Sea of Travisthan. The Moors
call this Sea, as they do also the Gulf of Arabia, Bohar Corsuin; and the
Persians call it Kulsum, which name they also give the Red Sea. The Greek and
Latin Authors call it the Hyrcanian Sea, as also Mare Caspium and Caspianum.
The Persians call it by another name, the Sea of Baku, from the City of Bakuje,
in the Province of Schirwan; and the Muscovites name it Gualenskoi-more. But a
man must be very cautious how he credits what is affirmed by Dionysius Afer,
1366.
Pomponius Mela, Pliny, Solinus, and those who follow them, as Strabo,
Martianus Capella, St. Basil the Great, Macrobius, and others, that it is only
a Sinus, or Gulf of the great Sea of the Indies, or of the Tartarian Sea, or
that it has some communication which the Euxine Sea, and Paulus Meotides by
the River Tanais; in as much as it is most certain, that it has not any
communication at all with the other Seas, but it is of all sides so encompassed
with Land, that it may be more justly called the Mediterranean, Is a sea by it
self.
than that which is known only by that name. Herodotus and Aristotle are much
more worthy credit, when they affirm, that the Caspian Sea is a particular Sea
by it self, having no communication with any other: and this is no more than
what the Inhabitants of Kilan, who live upon that Sea on the East Side, have so
strongly confirmed us in, that we lay it down as a thing no longer to be
disputed.

But what on the other side is much to be wondered at, is, that though so great
a number of Rivers incessantly pay the tribute of their waters into it, yet can
it not be said what becomes thereof. We at first could hardly be induced to
believe what was told us concerning all those Rivers; but when, at our return
out of Persia, between Rescht and Schamachy, which was twenty days journey, we
took notice, that we had crossed above fourscore great and small Rivers, we
made no difficulty then to acquiesce in the Relations we had before received
thereof. The most considerable of those we saw, are, the Wolga, Araxis, or
Aras, which is joined to the Cyrus, which is now called Kur, the Kisilosein,
the Bustrow, the Aksai, and the Koisu. Toward the North are the Rivers of
Iaika and Iems; and toward the South and East, the Nios, the Oxus, and the
Orxentes, which Q. Curtius calls, Tanais.

And notwithstanding this vast Contribution of waters, this Sea is not
perceived to be any way increased thereby, nor can it be said, by what passages
all these Rivers are conveyed thence. Some are of opinion, that they are, by
subterranean Channels returned into the Ocean. The Persians told us, that near
Ferebath, between the Provinces of Tauristan, and Mesendan, there is a Gulf,
where all those waters are lost, as in a bottomless place, and conveyed away
under the neighboring Mountains. But in regard a man must consequently to this
assertion, imagine that Gulf to be as big as the whole Sea, to swallow down the
waters of so many Rivers, I cannot be easily persuaded to side with the
maintainers of that opinion. On the contrary, I think it may be probably held,
that there may be alleged, for the Caspian Sea, the same reasons as are urged
for Ocean's not overflowing the Earth, though an infinite number of Rivers fall
into it: To wit, that, besides the Mists, which are very frequent there, and
consequently consume a great part thereof, the rest is returned by secret
Channels, to the sources of the Fountains and Rivers, according to the wise-mans
saying, that all the Rivers come out of the Sea, and return thither again,
whether it be that the weight of the Seawater, which is not all within its
Center, forces that which is lowest into the clefts of the earth, as far as the
sources, and that this is done with such violence, that at its breaking out of
the earth, it spouts higher than the Sea it self; or that there are in the
earth certain veins, which, drawing the water to them, distribute it to the
Fountains and Rivers. The first ratiocination is Julius Scaliger's, in his 46.
Exercitation, where he says, that he does not believe, the Argument which is
deduced from the difference of the qualities of waters can destroy the force of
his, in regard we find by experience, that the water, passing through the
earth, is cleansed from its filth, and leaves its Salt at the bottom, from
which it is divided, much after the same manner as if it were distilled through
an Alembick. Which is evidently seen by this, that the greater distance there
is between the Sea and the Fountains, the sweeter their waters are. It is also
acknowledged, that there is no Mountain higher than the Sea, which making but
one part of the roundness of the Terrestrial Globe, the swellings and
emmencies, which are upon the earth are not higher than the Sea. Which I affirm
to be so much the more certain, upon this account, that, being, in my return
from Persia, between Schamachie and Derbent, at the Village of Soray, I had the
curiosity to go up into one of the adjacent Mountains, where I took the Horizon
with my Astrolabe, and having put my Dioptra into it, I turned myself toward
the Sea, which was two Leagues distant thence, and could easily discern it.

The Authors who have written of the Caspian Sea, affirm, that, it is, in
length fifteen days journey, and in breadth, eight; which may fall out
somewhat right, if it be in a great calm, and that those who are to pass it,
make use only of their Arms and Oars, and have no advantage of wind. The length
and breadth of the Caspian Sea.
Whereupon I propose it as a particular observation, that, contrary to the
common opinion of all Geographers, as well ancient as modern, the length of the
Caspian Sea reaches not from East to West, as it is set down in all Maps, even
in those that have been published since the former impression of this Relation,
where I condemned that error, but that it is to be taken from South to North,
and that, on the contrary, it is its breadth which reaches from West to East.
And this I know, not only by the most exact observation I made thereof, but
also by a curious inquiry of the situation of all the Maritime Provinces,
according to the Catalogue or Register, of Longitudes and Latitudes, which I
had from the Persians, as also consonantly to the Astronomical fragments of the
Learned M. John Graves. For it is certain, that the true length of the Caspian
Sea, 1636.
is from the mouth of the River Wolga, below Astrachan, to Ferabath, in the
Province of Mesenderan, reaching eight degrees of the Equator, which make 120.
German Leagues; and that its breadth, from the Province of Chuaresm, named by
others Karragan, to the Mountains of Circassia, or to Schirwan, is six degrees,
which make but 90 German leagues. According to this account thereof are to be
corrected all the Geographical Maps, though the opinion we introduce be new,
and directly contrary to that which has been received for so many ages.

Nor are we to give any more credit to what Q. Curtius affirms, The water is
Salt.
when he says, that the water of the Caspian Sea is fresher than that of the
Ocean, unless he be conceived to speak only of the coast of Hyrcania, which is
now called Kilan, where indeed the water is neither salt nor fresh, but
brackish (as it is in several places of Holland) by reason of the mixture of
the waters of diverse Rivers, which fall into the said Sea on that side. For, in
the Sea it self, the water is as salt as any other that ever I could taste of.
Polybius and Arrian affirm the same thing of the Euxine Sea; and Ovid confirms
it by this Distick.

Copia tot laticum, quas anget, adulteret undas,
Nec patitur vires aequer habere suas.
It is besides our design to engage into any discussion of Scaliger's position,
who says in his 53 Exercitation, that the water of all Seas is sweet, or fresh,
at the bottom, nor yet to examine the Reasons alleged by him for that opinion,
as falling not under the subject of our Relation. But this we shall presume to
affirm, that the Caspian Sea was not much known to the Greeks, in the time of
Alexander, since Arrian says, in the seventh Book of his History, that that
great Conqueror issued out his commands, that Timber should be felled in the
neighboring Mountains, for the building of a Fleet, which he intended to
employ in the discovery of that Sea. It is certain also, that Q. Curtius speaks
not of it otherwise than according to the knowledge which some had thereof, in
a time when that of the Romans had not passed the Euphrates. no more than their
Arms. For though Pliny says, lib. 6. chapter 17. of his Natural History, that
Seleuchus and Antiochus, the Successors of Alexander, made a discovery of that
Sea by Patroclus, their Admiral, yet he is withal forced to acknowledge, that
there were many other things to be discovered; as it was also our intention, to
make use, to that purpose, of our Ship and Shallop during the abode we should
make at the Court of Persia, if our misfortune in being cast away upon this Sea
had not defeated us of our expectations. Certain it is, that this Sea does
neither Ebb nor Flow, Neither Ebbs nor Flows.
nay that indeed it is not capable of either; forasmuch as it has no
communication or correspondence with the other, which, in that particular,
follows the motion of the Moon.

The Persians, Tartars, and Muscovites seldom venture upon this Sea but in the
Summertime, and then dare they not hazard themselves far into it; for sailing
only in wretched small Barks, or Boats, they keep as near as they can to the
shore, and never are out of sight of Land. It has in a manner no safe Havens
or Harbors. The best it has, is the same we spoke of before, near Terki,
between the Isle of Tzenzeni and the Continent; at which place the Persians are
wont to cast Anchor, and stay for a night. The havens of Baku, Lenkeran and
Ferabath are none of the worst, nor are they on the other side the safest; and
the best Haven of all this Sea, is on the side of the grand Tartary, and near
the City of Minkischlak, which may be found in the Itinerary of Anthony
Ienkinson, under the name of Manguslave, but misnamed.

But, how ere it be Haven'd, we may confidently affirm this, that we have been
long enough upon the Caspian Sea and its Coasts, to undeceive those who are apt
to believe, what is delivered by Petreius in his History of Muscovy, to wit,
that the water of it is as black as Ink, and that it is full of Islands, which
are well stored with Inhabitants, and have in them a great number of Cities and
Villages; both which we affirm to be absolutely false. For the water of it is
of the same Color, as that of all other Seas; and though we discovered but
some part of the Caspian Sea, yet having made particular enquiry as to this
particular, all the Persians, Tartars and Muscovites I ever discoursed with
concerning it, unanimously assured me, that in all that Sea there is but one
Island, wherein there is, I will not say either City or Village, but so much as
a House, unless it be in that of Ensil, near Ferabath, where the pastures being
very good, such as keep Cattle, have made certain Huts, not so much for their
settled Habitations, as to prevent the injuries of the Weather at certain times.

I also enquired of the Inhabitants of Kilan, whether the Caspian Sea bred such
an infinite number of great Serpents, as Q. Curtius would make us believe: but
they all assured me they had never seen any, and that it was a thing they never
had heard spoken of before, no more than they had of a certain great round Fish
without a Head, whereof Ambrosius Contarinus speaks in the relation of his
Travels, which Father Bizarrus has Printed together with his History of
Perisa. He says, that this Fish is an ell and a half Diameter, and that there
is a certain Liquor drawn out of it, which the Persians use in their Lamps, and
to grease the Camels, But the Persians told me, that they stood not in need of
any such Oil to burn, since that near the City of Baku, under the Mountain of
Barmach, there are inexhaustible sources of a certain Liquor, which they call
Nefla, and make use of in their Lamps. And of this there is daily such great
quantities taken up, that it is transported all over the Kingdom.

Certain indeed it is, that there may be seen in those parts a certain kind of
Fish, which they call Naka, that is, Glutton; which has a very short Nose, and
the Head as it were within the Belly, having a round Tail, and being seven or
eight foot in breadth, and not much less in length. It fastens it self with the
Tail to Fisher-mens Boats, and, if they be not very careful, over-turns them.
The Persians told us also, that the white Fishes, of which we have spoken
heretofore, do the same, and that thence it comes, though the weather be ever
so calm, the Fishermen never venture far into the Sea. This is the only
Creature, which may in some measure make good what Pomponius Mela says in his
Geography, to wit, that the Caspian Sea breeds so great a number of monstrous
Fishes, which he calls Belluae, wild Beasts, that that is one of the main
Reasons, why it is not Navigable. This fish delights much in the Liver and
Flesh of Beef and Mutton, whence it is that the Inhabitants of Kilan,
especially those who live toward the Mountain of Sahebelan, as being the most
hindered in their Fishing, make baits thereof, wherewith they cover strong and
sharp Hooks fastened to Great Cords, with which they draw them to Land. Nor are
we to credit what the same Bizarrus and Contarinus affirm, when they say, that
there is no other fish in the Caspian Sea; for, on the contrary, it is
extremely well stored with fish, and there are in it abundance of Salmons and
Sturgeons, as also a kind of Herrings; nay there are in it some fish, which in
other places are numbered among the fresh-water-fish, and are had only in ponds;
as for instance Breams, which they call Chascham, and Barbels, which they call
Schwit: but the latter are tough and insipid, if they exceed two foot in
length. There is also a kind of Trouts, which they call Suggaht. These are not
eaten fresh, but falted and hung up in the smoke, and their way of dressing
them, is, to lay them on the hearth, with a clean linen Cloth about them, and
then to cover them with hot ashes, till such time as they are ready: being thus
ordered, they make a very pleasant and delicious dish. There are no Pikes nor
Eels in all Persia, insomuch that those Persians, whom the King sent along with
us into Germany, when they saw us eat Eeles, conceived a horror thereat, as
taking them for Snakes. The King of Persia farms out the fishing of the Caspian
Sea, toward the mouths of Rivers, which brings him in very considerable sums
of Money, many times more than the Farmers make thereof, for instance, the City
of Kesker, where a Farmer named Schemsi paid eight thousand Crowns for the
farming of five Rivers, which that year had yielded but six thousand. Their
fishing is only from September to April, and during that time, there is a
Palisadoe or kind of Hedge made in the Sea at the mouth of the River, to hinder
the fishing of those that have no right to fish, within that enclosure; but all
the year besides it is indifferently permitted to all, and in the Sea it self,
at all times.



THE TRAVELS OF THE AMBASSADORS FROM THE DUKE of HOLSTEIN INTO MUSCOVY,
TARTARY, and PERSIA.
The Fifth Book.
THe Country where we Landed, 1636.
or rather where the wrack cast us ashore, is called Muskur, and makes part of
the Province of Schirwan, or the Ancient Media, under the Jurisdiction of the
Sulthan, or Governor of Derbent, and comprehends, from the City of Derbent to
the Province of Kilan, about two hundred Villages. But before we come to give
an account of what we have seen in Persia, it is requisite in this place, that
we give a general description of that Country and its Provinces, upon this
consideration, that there is not any Author that has hitherto undertaken this
work, but has confounded the Ancient names of Cities and Rivers with the
Modern, and speaks thereof almost in the same terms, as the Greek and Latin
Histories, which treat of the ancient Persia. The Map of this Country, which
was some few years since published at Paris, is, no doubt, the most exact of
any that have yet come to light: but if any man will be at the pains, to
confront the Names it gives the Cities and Provinces of Persia, with those
which are in this Map of ours, he will easily find the difference there is
between the one and the other.

As to the name of Persia, The name of Persia.
Herodotus, in the seventh Book of his History, says, that the Am^assador,
whom Xerxes, King of Persia, sent to the Greeks, would have them believe, that
he derived his original from Perses the Son of Pers^us and Andromeda. Ammianus
Marcellinus affirms, that the Persians are originally Scythians; and, if we
credit Pliny, the Scythians call them Chor^ur^. The Holy Scripture calls them
Elamites, and they give themselves the name of Schai, thereby ^o be
distinguished from the Turks, who, upon the same account, give themselves that
of Sunni. And as the same Turks have an affectation to call themselves
Mussulmans, so the Persians are much pleased, when they are called Kisilbachs,
that is to say, Red-heads. But of the Etymology of that word, we shall give an
account hereafter, when we come to treat of the habits of the Persians.

It is most certain, that Parthia and Persia were heretofore two distinct
Kingdoms, and that the name of Persia has not been common to both, till they
became both subject to the same King, and were inhabited by the same people.
Upon the same Consideration it is, that we now comprehend under the name of
Persia, not only the Kingdom of Persia it self, but also all the other
Provinces which have been annexed thereto, 1366.
either by Conquest or otherwise, and are now under the Jurisdiction of that
Monarch. Hence it is, that when we speak of Persia, our meaning is, to
comprehend, under that name, all that Country, which reaches from North to
South-west, from the Caspian-sea, to the Gulf of Persia, and from East to West,
from the River Euphrates, which the Turks call Morat su, to the City of
Candahar, upon the frontiers of the Indies. By assigning it the Caspian-sea for
its frontier, our meaning is to comprehend therein near the one half of that
sea, along the Mountains of Armenia, reaching Westward as far as the River of
Ruth-Cane Kurkahn, by the Ancients called Oxus, which divides the Persians from
the Vsbeques, who are the same that are called the Tartars of Buchar, and are
for the most part Tributaries to the King of Persia.

Whence is to be observed by the way the error of Bottero, who, in his Politia
Regin says, that the extent of Persia from North to South is eighteen degrees.
Wherein he is so much the more mistaken, by how much it is certain, that, from
the first City of Persia from the Caspian Sea, to its utmost frontiers toward
the Persian Gulf, there are hardly twelve degrees. For, let a man but cast his
Eye, not only on the Map, which we here give of it, but also on that of M.
Sampson, and particularly on that of the Learned Mr. John Graves, not long
since published by him in England, and he will find, that the City of Husum,
which the Inhabitants of the Country call Rescht, within two small Leagues of
the Caspian Sea, lies at thirty seven degrees, and that the City of Ormus, upon
the Persian Gulf, is but at twenty five, which make but twelve in all. We
acknowledge that it contains above twenty degrees in length, from the Euphrates
to the Indies: but we are to consider withal, that one degree of Longitude
under the thirty seventh degree of Latitude, under which Persia ^ies, consists
but of fifty minutes at the most.

The principal Provinces of the modern Persia are those of Erak, Fars,
Schirwan, Adirbeitzan, Kilan Thabristan, M^senderan, Iran or Karabag, Cherasan,
Sablustan, Sitzestan, Kirman, Chusistan, and Tzisire, or Diarbeck.

The name of Erak, The Province of Erak.
or Hierak, is common to two several Provinces, to wit, that whereof the City
of Babylon or Bagdat is the Metropolis, which is commonly called Erakain, and
without all question is the ancient Assyria. But it is not of this Province
that we have any account to give in this place. Our Province of Erak, which is
also called Erak-atzem, to distinguish it from Erakain, lies in the midst of
all Persia, next to the Province of Fars, and is the ancient Parthia. The
Archontology, Printed not many years since at Frankfort, gives it the name of
of Charassen, but it confounds this Province with that of Chuaresm, which lies
upon the Caspian Sea, on the East Side, and is inhabited by the Tartars called
the Vsbeques. The chief Cities of the Province of Erak besides that of Ispahan,
which is the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, are Caswin So^thanie, Senkan,
Sawa, Kom, Kaschan, Rhey, Schaherrisur, Ebbcher, Hemedan, Darkasin, Theheran,
and Kulpajan, at which last place, the best Bows in Persia are made.

The Province of Fars, The Province of Fars.
which De Laet, in his description of the State of Persia, calls Farc, or Parc,
but unadvisedly, is properly the ancient Persia, whereof Persepolis was the
chief City. Alexander the Great caused it to be set on fire, out of a fond
Compliance for a common Prostitute, with whom he had over-drunk himself. It is
reported, that the ruins of that City became the foundation of that of Schiras
upon the River Bendemir, which Q. Curtius calls Araxis, Its principal Cities,
besides that of Schiras, whereof there will be an account given in the
following Travels of Mr. Mandelslo into the Indies, are Kasirus, Bunitzan,
Firusabath, and Astar: whereto may be added the City of Lahor, with the little
Province which derives its name from it.

The Province of Sciruan is known in the Maps under the name of Servan, The
Province of Sciruan.
and is no doubt that which the Ancients called Media Acropatia, though
Ienkinson, in his Itinerary. affirms, that it is the ancient Hyrcania. It is
indeed the most Northerly part of the ancient Media, which Herodotus and Strabo
deliver to be Mountainous and Cold. Whereof we had a sufficient experience in
our Travels, after our departure from Schamachie, as will be seen in its due
place. Schamachie is the Metropolis of the Province, wherein there are besides,
Bakuje seated at the foot of a Mountain upon the Caspian-sea, which from its
name is called the sea of Baku: That of Derbent, which is one of the Passages
which the Ancients called Pylae Caspiae. This is that which Alexander the Great
caused to be built, and called Alexandria, upon which account it is that the
Inhabitants do often call it Schacher Iunan, that is, the City of the Greeks:
That of Schabran, in the Country of Muskur, near the place where the wrack cast
us ashore. The City of Eres, or Aras, is destroyed; but there may be seen the
remainders of what it has been heretofore, upon the River Arras, which is now
called Arisbar.

The Province of Iran, which the Inhabitants of the Country commonly and for
the most part called Karabag, The Province of Iran.
is seated between the two famous Rivers of Araxes and Cyrus, which are now
called Aras and Rur, and comprehends some part of the two Provinces of Armenia
and Georgia, which the Persians call Armenich and Gurtz. It is one of the
noblest and richest Provinces of all Persia, 1636.
and in this particularly, that it produces more Silk than any other. It is
sub-divided into several other lesser Provinces, to wit, those of Kappan,
Tzulfa, Scabus, Sisian, Keschtas, Sarsebil, Ervan or Iruan, Kergbulag,
Agustawa, Aberan, Scorgd, Saschat, Intze, Thabak-melek, Thumanis, Alget, and
Tzilder. The principal Cities, Forts, and Towns of it are Berde, Bilagan,
Skemkur, Kentze, Berkuschat, Nachtscuan, Ordebad, Bajesied, Maku, Magasburt,
Tiftis and Tzilder. This great Province might very well deserve a larger
account to be given of it; but in regard it borders upon the Turk, and that I
have been so fortunate, as to meet with a very accurate Map of this Country,
together with a particular relation of what ever is most observable therein, we
shall endeavor to find elsewhere some occasion to speak of a thing, which to
treat of in this place would make too great a Digression.

Adirbeitzan, The Province of Adirbeitzan.
which the Europaeans are wont to name Aderbajon, or Adarbigian, is the more
Southerly part of the Ancient Media, to wit, that part which the Ancients call
Media Major. And forasmuch as it is acknowledged that the Province of Kurdestan
is that which the Ancients called Assyria, we may in some measure be satisfied
with what Nubius's Geography says, to wit, that it is the more Northerly part
of Assyria, since they have their Frontiers common, and in a manner confounded.
It is divided from the Province of Schiruan, by the Deserts of Mokan, and from
that of Karabag, by the River Aras, and it has, on the East, the Province of
Kilan. Adirbeitzan is also sub-divided into many other little Provinces, as
Erschee, Meschkin, Kermeruth, Scrab, Chalchal, Tharumat, Suldus, Vtzam, etc.
Its principal Cities are Ard^bil and Tauris. The former is famous for the Birth
of Schich Sefi, Author of the Sect of the Perses, who lived and died in that
City, where his Tomb is yet to be seen, as also those of several other Kings of
Persia, of whom we shall have occasion to speak hereafter. The City of Tauris
or Tabris, which is thought to be that of Gabris according to Ptolomey, and
which Ortelius affirms to be the ancient Ecbatana, heretofore the most
considerable place in all the East, and the ordinary residence of the Kings of
Persia, is seated at the foot of the Mountain Orontes, eight days journey from
the Caspian Sea, and is one of the richest and most populous Cities of Persia.
The rest are Merrague, Salmas, Choi, Miane, Karniarug, Thesu, Thel, and
Tzeuster. Tzors and Vrami are two places excellently well fortified, and in the
latter is to be seen the Sepulcher of ^urla, the Wife of King Casan, which if
it bears any proportion to the stature of that Woman, she must needs have been
a Giantess, and of an extraordinary height, since the Tomb is above forty foot
long.

The Province of Kilan derives its name from the people that inhabit it, The
Province of Kilan.
who are called Kilek. It is the ancient Hyrcania. For its situation absolutely
agrees with that which is given it by Quintus Curtius, and that it is
encompassed, after the manner of a Crescent, with a Mountain covered with
Trees. It is watered by many little Rivers. It comprehends several other
Provinces, among which, some number that of Thabristan or Mesauderan, which is
the same with that, whose Inhabitants, in the time of Alexander the Great, were
called Mardi. The rest are Kisilagas, Deschteuend, Maranku, Maschican,
Lengerkunan, Astara, Buladi, Schigkeran, Nokeran, Kilikeraa, Houe, Lemur,
Disekeran, Lissar, Tzeulandan, Rihk, Kesker, Rescht, Lahetzan, and Astarabath,
containing forty six Cities, and a very great number of Villages. The principal
Cities are, Mesanderan.
Astrabath, Metropolis of the Province of the same name; and Firascu, where may
be had the fairest Turquoises in the Kingdom. In Mesanderan are Amul,
Funkabun, Nei, Sarou, Nourketzour, and the noble and pleasant City of Ferabath.
It was heretofore called Tahona, but Schach Abas was so pleased with it, that
many times he passed over the Winter therein, and gave it the name it now has,
from the word F^rah, which signifies pleasant or delightful. Indeed the whole
Country is such, so that they who affirm that fruits hardly ripen in it by
reason of its coldness, injure it very much; unless it be that they speak of
its Mountains, which indeed are not habitable: but the plains are very
populous, and very fertile, and so pleasant, that the Persians say it is the
Garden of the Kingdom, as Touraine is, of France. Whence the Hakim, or Poet,
Fardausi had reason to say, Tschu Mesanderan, Tschu Kulkend^ Sar?
Nikerem we nesert, henis che besar?


That is, Lahetza^.
What is Mesanderan? Is it not a place set with Roses? neither too Hot, nor too
Cold, but a perpetual Spring? Lahetzan is famous for its Silk, which it has
better than any other place; and its principal Cities are Lenkeru, Kutsesbar,
and Amelekende. In the Province of Rescht, Rescht*
besides the Metropolis of the same name, are the Cities of Kisma, Fumen,
Tullum, Scheft, Dilum, and Massula. This last is built upon a Mountain, by
reason of an Iron-mine, by which the inhabitants, who are most Smiths, maintain
themselves. There are also in those parts abundance of Wall-nut Trees, whereof
are made most of the Wooden dishes that are all over Persia. Kesker.
In Kesker are the Cities of Kesker, Scaherruth, Kurab, Enseli, Dulab, Schal;
and toward the North, Ruesseru, Miunscaker, Senguerasara, Houe,
Chosckkaderene, Henk^lan, and Kisilagats. There is no entrance into the
Province of Kilan, but by the four passages, whereof we shall speak hereafter,
in the last Book of the Travels of the Ambassadors, as also of the Caspian
gates, the insolence of the people who live between Mesandaran and Kesker, and
the History of Karib Schach.

Chorasan, The Province of Choralan.
or the ancient Bactriana, has on the West, Mesanderan, and comprehends also
several other lesser Provinces, whereof the chiefest is that of Heri, the
Metropolis whereof is Herat. This Province is one of the greatest, and most
fertile of any in Persia, and that which drives on the greatest Trade of any.
The City of Mesched, which, in the Catalogue or Register of their Cities, may
be found under the name of Thus, is no doubt the most considerable of any. It
is encompassed with a noble Wall, set out with many sumptuous Structures, and
among others with two, or if we may believe Texeira, three hundred Towers,
distant one from the other about a Musket shot. In this City is to be seen the
Sepulcher of Iman Risa, one of the twelve Saints of Persia, of the Family of
Aly, which, as to its Structure, Revenue, and Wealth, is equal to that of
Ardebil, and all things are performed there with the same Ceremonies. The same
Devotions are also done there as at the Tomb of Schich Sesi. In the Country
about Mesched, near the City of Nisabur, there is a Mountain, where are found
such Excellent Turquezes, that the King permits them not to be sold to any but
himself. Herath is the second City of the Province, and there, is made the best
Persian Tapistry. The Indians Trade thither, and it is a place they must
necessarily pass through, who go from Candahar to Ispahan. There it was that
the Horses of the Great Mogul's Ambassador were stayed, whereof we shall say
more hereafter. Thun, Thabeskileki, and Thabes-M^ssinan, are very considerable
Cities, as well upon the account of their greatness, as of the several
Manufactures of Silk that are made there, and wherewith they drive a vast
Trade. All the other Cities, as Sebseuar, Turschis, Kain, Puschentz, Badkis,
Meru, Merurnd, Tzurtzan, Fariab, Asurkan, Belch, Bamian, Semkan, Thalecan, and
Sus, are also very populous, and eminent for Merchandise, and in these parts is
found the best Manna in the World.

The Province of Sablusthan lies more toward the East, The Province of
Sablusthan
Q. Curtius calls the Inhabitants of it Paropanisadae, from the neighboring
Mountain, called Paropamisus, which is a branch of Mount Taurus, and it is all
Woody. The people living in it, is, at this day, as simple and barbarous as
they were in the time of Alexander. It is upon this Mountain that Goropius
Becanus would have Noab's Ark rest, after the deluge, contrary to the opinion
of most of the Fathers, who, for the most part, agree, that it rested upon
Mount Aratat in Armenia. The Cities of this Province are Beksabath, Meimine;
Asbe, Bust, and Sarents.

The Province of Sitzistan, Sitzistan.
by others called Sigestan, Sagestan, and Siston, lies Southward from the
Province of Sablustan, and is the Habitation of the people, who were heretofore
called Dragae. It is encompassed of all sides by a high Mountain; and it is the
Country of the Grand Rustam, who is known not only in their Histories, but is
also the only celebrated Heroes of all their Romances. The principal Cities of
this Province, are Sistan, Chaluk, Ketz, etc.

The Province of Kirman is also one of the greatest of the Kingdom of Persia.
Kirman.
It lies between those of Fars and Sigestan, and reaches as far as the Sea, and
the Island of Ornus. The Country is somewhat un-even, and Mountainous, but the
Valleys of it are very fertile and delightful, abounding in Fruit, and every
where covered, and as it were strewn with Flowers, especially Roses, whereof
this Province produces such great quantity, that a considerable part of its
Revenue is raised out of the water made of them. The Inhabitants call it Gulap,
whence it may be well imagined that the Word Iulip comes, and they drive a
great Trade with it, especially at Ispahan. Those who Trade most in it, are the
Lurs, who are a sort of people by themselves, distinguished from the other
Persians by what they wear about their Heads, which is a kind of Coiffure, that
is longer and narrower than the ordinary Turbants, and there is fastened to it
a tuft or tassel, which hangs down over the Back. There is also in this
Province a Drugg very soverain against the Worms, which is called Daru Kirman,
as well upon account of the Province, as also hence, that the Word Kirman
signifies a Worm. And concerning this, there is a story of one of their Kings,
who being in the fields on Horseback, heard himself called by his own name. He
looked back, as if he had heard the voice behind him, and seeing only a dead
man's skull half rotten upon the ground, and doubting the voice proceeded
thence, he asked, who it was. The skull answered, that that was all was left of
what he had sometime been; that he had worn a Crown as well as himself, and had
Conquered several great Provinces, but that desirous to add, to his other
Conquests, that of Kirman, he had been overcome and eaten; exhorting him to
reflect on what he had seen, and to make his advantage of that Philosophy. The
Province is barren enough toward the North, having on that side abundance of
heathy grounds; but toward the Seaside it is very fertile. Its principal
Cities are Birsir, Bermasir, Bem, Chabis, Tzirest, Kamron, and Ormus, Kamron is
a Seaport, whence it is many times called Bender, or Bender Kamron. Ormus, by
the Persians called Hormous, is an Island, three Leagues distant from the
Continent: but of these two places, the Reader will have a further account in
the first Book of Mandelso's Travels into the Indies. There is comprehended
also under the Province of Kirman, 1366*
that of Mekeran, wherein are the Cities of Firh, Kitz, and Chalak.

Chusistan is the same which was heretofore called Susiana, and in the time of
the Hebrews Elam. The Province of Ch^sistan*
It lies between the Province of Fars and the River Dilsel, and its Metropolis
was Susa, famous for the Vision which the Prophet Daniel had there, concerning
the determination of the Persian Monarchy, and the beginning of the Grecian. It
is now called Desu. It was also in these parts that the palace of Susa stood,
upon the River Vlai, where King Ahasuerus, King over twenty seven Provinces,
made his great Feast. Its chief Cities are Ahawas, Ramchormus, Scabur, Askar,
and Arhan. The heats in these parts are so great, especially toward the
South-part of the Mountain, that, in the Summer time, the Inhabitants are
forced to forsake the Cities, and retire themselves into the Mountain.

Tzisire is found in the Catalogue of the Provinces of Persia, The Province of
Tzisire, or Diarbek.
and it is the ancient Mesopotamia. Now it is commonly called Diarbek, and lies
between the Rivers Euphrates and Tigris, which the Turks call Digel. This
Province has been often taken and retaken by them from the Persians; so that
it is not always under the Schach's Jurisdiction, but then only when he is
Master of Bagdat, or Babylon, and Mosul, which some affirm to have been the
ancient Ninive. It Is true, Bagdat is not properly in the Province of Diarbek,
but in that of Eracain, as are also the Cities of Wasith, Besre, Rusa, and
Medain.

As to the City of Bagdat, there is nothing so certain, as that it was built,
out of the ruins of the ancient Babylon, but not in the same place, in as much
as Babylon stood upon the Euphrates, which ran through it, as is expressly
affirmed by Strabo; whereas Bagdat is seated upon the Tigris, which joins with
the Euphrates, a League below the City. The Persians are of opinion, that the
Inhabitants of Babylon had heretofore their Summer-Houses and Gardens at the
place where now Bagdat stands, insomuch that after the destruction of the City,
they found it no great difficulty to remove their habitations thither. And
indeed, the word Bag, which singnifies a Garden, and Bagdat, a place full of
Gardens, does in some measure confirm their opinion.

To resume our former discourse, The Province of Schiruan^
the Country where we were cast ashore, is very pleasant, it was all over
green at the time of our arrival, and the Birds, which were not yet sensible of
the Cold, ordinary in our parts, continued their Chirping and Singing till near
the middle of December. The soil there is very good, bringing forth Rice,
Wheat, and Barley, in great abundance. They make no Hay, because their Cattle
are out Winter and Summer; but if they make any, it is only for the convenience
of Travelers. Their Vines were scattered up and down, Planted without any care
or order, all along the Hedges the Vines being fastened to the Trees, so as
that they spread up to the extremities of the Boughs, from which the small
branches hung donw three or four Else in length. All the Province of Kilan is
full of them, and at our return, we saw very fair and very large ones, at
Astora. The Country affords good store of Wild-fowl, especially Pheasants, as
also of Hares, the Hunting whereof found us good sport during the abode we were
forced to make there. There is also in these parts a certain kind of Foxes,
which they call Shakal, about the bigness of those of Europe, (of which kind
there are also abundance, and the Inhabitants call them Tulki) but instead of
Furr or Hair, they are covered with Wool, and have white bellies, Ears all
black, and less Tails than those of our parts. We heard them in the night time
running in Herds about the Village, and were not a little troubled at their
Cries, which was a drawling and doleful noise, without any intermission.

The Inhabitants make use of Buffles or wild Oxen, more than they do of Horses,
but instead of loading them upon their Backs, they make them draw Wood, or any
other things of great weight. Their ordinary sustenance is Feny-greek,
wherewith they sow whole Fields, as we do with Vetches and Lentills, and they
cut it while it is yet green, Herb and Seed together, and so give it those
Creatures to eat. The Milk, I mean that of the Females, is so fat, that it
makes a Cream two fingers thick, of which they make exellent Butter. They never
make any Cheese of Cow's-milk, but only of sheeps.

The Village of Niasabath is at 41 degrees. 15 min. Elevation, The Houses of Persia.
and has not above 15 or 16 poor Houses, which lie scattered up and down, all
built of Clay, and absolutely square, having flat Roofs, and covered with
Turfs, so as that a man might walk upon them without either danger or
inconvenience. And indeed it is ordinary among the Persians, to erect Tents
upon them, to eat, and, in the summertime, to lie on them all night, that they
may the more participate of the coolness of the Air. Here it was that I first
understood what the Gospel says of the Paralytick, who was let down through the
Roof of the House; and the Counsel our Savior gave those who were upon the
Housetop, not to come down into the House; for this is their way of building
all over the East. We were at first lodged in the Houses, which were very
handsome within, and the floors of the Chambers for the most part covered with
Tapistry, and the Masters of the Houses received and treated us the first day
very well. But the Village being but small, not able to find Lodging for all
our retinue, and our abode being likely to be too long there for us to lie upon
the charges of the Inhabitants, we got Tents pitched near the Lodgings of the
Ambassadors, where we continued till the Court of Persia took order for our
departure thence. We had no Bread; our Beer was lost with the ship, and the
Village had no spring of fresh water; so that we were forced to look after our
Moldy scraps, and to content our selves with the troubled water of a small
Torrent, which passed near the Village, while our ship furnished us with firing
for the Kitchen and the Chambers.

Nov. 19. Schachewerdi, Governor of Derbent sent to complement us, upon the
occasion of our arrival there, two Persons, very well clad, one whereof was
Brother to the Kaucha of Niasabath. They delivered the Ambassadors the
Sulthan's Letter, which came with a Present of two Horses, as many Oxen, twelve
sheep, twenty Pullets, three great Pitchers of Wine, one Pitcher of Water, two
Paniers of Apples, and three sacks of Wheatflower.

But the Ambassadors coming to understand, that the Sulthan's Letter made
mention only of one Horse, they would not receive the other, though the
Persians earnestly protested, that the mistake came only hence, that the
Sulthan imagining there had been but one Ambassador, had accordingly sent but
one Horse, and that they, coming afterward to hear there were two, had bought
another horse, out of an assurance that it was the Sulthan's intention to have
done so. Brugmans incivility.
But notwithstanding all their allegatons and instances, the Ambassador Brugman
would by no means accept of the horse, for no other reason, doubtless, than
this, that his was not so good as his Collegue's. The Persians were not a
little troubled thereat, and looked on it as an affront done the Sulthan, who
resented it so highly since, that he did us all the ill-Offices lay in his
power, being also further troubled in this respect, that, contrary to the
custom of Persia and Muscovy, upon the Ambassador Brugman's untowardness, his
People had been sent away without Presents.

The 22. the Ambassadors sent Francis Meurier, one of our Retinue, with our
Persian Interpreter, to the Chan or Governor general of the Province of
Schiruan, whose ordinary residence is at Scamachie, to acquaint him with our
arrival, and to entreat him to supply us with all things necessary for the
continuation of our journey. The Governor, who had heard of it by some other
means had immediately sent a Mehemander to us (so they call in Persia those who
among the Muscovites are called Pristafs, whose charge it is to conduct the
Ambassadors through the Country, and to see them furnished with Provisions and
Carriage) but our people had mist him by the way.

This Mehemander came to our Quarters the 29. of November. He was most
sumptuously Clothed, and excellently well mounted, on a very gallant horse,
the Harness whereof was covered with Gold, and beset with Turquezes. He
acquitted himself very handsomely both in his address and complement, with
promises of all the civilities and services it was in his power to do us, as
long as we should be under his conduct, which was as far as Schamachie. Having
answered his Complement, we invited him, and those who came along with him, to
taste of our fruits, and of all sorts of Aquavitae, wherewith we were well
stored. We also caused our great Guns to be discharged, and we entertained them
with our Music, wherewith they seemed to be much taken. As soon as the
Mehemander was returned to his Lodging, he sent us a Present of five sheep,
three Pitchers of Wine, and some Pomegranates.

Nov. the last, came back Francis Meurier with the Interpreter, bringing this
account, that the Chan being not at Scamachie, at their coming thither, they
had been obliged to follow him into the Country, where they had found him
encamped under Tents, with a Retinue of about four hundred persons: That he had
received them kindly, and had assured them, that he had already sent a
Mehemandar, whose care it should be to see the Ambassadors supplied with all
things necessary for the continuation of their journey; that he had told them
further, that he heard the Ambassadors had a Retinue of about three hundred
men, but they should be all welcome, though they were twice the number: That it
was a great while since we first heard of this Embassy, and that he was very
desirous to see us. To which account the Interpreter added only this, that the
Governor had particularly desired to be informed by him, of the quality and
humors of the Ambassadors, as also of that of the persons whereof our Retinue
consisted, and our manner of life.

The first ill Office the Sulthan of Derbent did us, was, in denying us a
sufficient number of horses and other cattle for the carriage of our selves and
our Baggage. The Governors resentment.
Which proved so considerable a^^ rub in our way, that our Mehemander was
forced to return to Scamachie, where he spent above a month in getting
together such a number of cattle as might carry us and all we had: during all
which time we were forced to continue still in the Village of Niasabath.

During that time was dis-embarqu'd, much about the same place, the Cuptzi or
Persian Merchant, The Cuptzi comes to Niasabath
of whom we have spoken before, after he had run the same hazard upon the
Caspian Sea as we had so narrowly escaped.

Nov. 24. came in thither a small Boat with five persons in it, who were all
left of fifty, who had been cast away with the ship, which was bound for Kilan,
the thirteenth before; so that those poor people had been ten days together
struggling with the wind and waves ere they could get Land.

The joy we might well conceive at our being in Persia, after so troublesome a
Voyage, wherein we had run through so many dangers, was much abated by the
inconveniences which the untowardness and humoursomness of one of the Chiefest
in the Company run us into: but I shall spare the Reader the dissatisfaction of
finding any thing in this relation but what is divertive. The better to
overcome the affliction it put us all into, we, who were of M^snie, entered
intred into a little society among our selves, and taking our advantage of the
fair weather we had the first of December, we went all together in a Company
about a quarter of a League from the Village, where we found out a little
place, whereof the Rivulet makes almost a Peninsula, so pleasant and inviting,
that the fairest Meadows in Europe afford not any thing so delightful in the
best Season of the year. The water came almost round about that little parcel
of ground, and the Pomegranate-Trees, which had joined their verdure with that
of the Vines, invited us to rest our selves under their shade, and to divert
our selves with the memory of our dear Country: to which divertisement our
Physician, Dr. Graman, contributed very much, by the good cheer he made us of
Gamons of Bacon, Neats Tongues, and two or three sorts of Sack and Aquavitae,
whereof he had still good store left. This was our divertisement for several
days.

December. 9. The Tartar-Prince of Dagestan visits the Ambassadors.
The Ambassadors were visited by the same Tartar Prince of Tarku, who had given
us a Visit at Terki. He was accompanied by his brother, and attended by a
Retinue of about twenty persons. After his Visit, he went to the next Village
to look for Lodging, there being none to be had in ours, and sent us the next
day, as a Present, an Ox, some Sheep, and two great Paniers of Apples. That
which the Ambassadors sent in return thereto, consisted in certain Else of
Cloth and Satin, a Vessel of Aquavitae, and a Roll of Tobacco. And whereas he
had expressed, that they would do him a great kindness to give him a little
Gunpowder, to be revenged for the incursions which Sulthan Mahomet had made
into his Territories, the Ambassadors sent him a Barrel that weighed 80. pounds.

The return of our Mehemandar, who came back the same day, made us the more
joyful, in that he assured us, that within 15. days, there should be brought
us out of Scamachie and Derbent such a number of Wagons, Camels, and Horses, as
that nothing should retard our journey any longer.

According to this promise, the 12. there came in some Horses and Camels, but
we heard of no more afterward. The Mehemandar excused himself upon the Snow
that had fallen the night before, and said, that the Persians were wont to
travel in the cold, and that the Camels whose hoofs are not so falt as those of
other Creatures, would not have been able to go by reason of the slipperiness
of the way. Whereto he added, that it had happened, that whole Caravans had
perished, through cold, in the Mountains, for want of Wood and Lodging, which
are very scarce upon that Road, though there be but twenty Leagues, or
Farsangs, from Niasabath to Scamachie. True it is indeed, that for some nights
we had Snow, but the Sun melted it as soon as he appeared over the Horizon. But
how ere it happened, we were forced to stay there ten days longer; which made
us imagine that what was done was out of design, purposely to defer our
departure thence, till they should receive the Orders which they expected from
the Sophy concerning our subsistence; for till then we had been upon our own
charge.

During our stay at Niasabath, Brugman 's indiscretion.
the Ambassador Brugman would needs cut some certain beams, which the Sophy
had, which vast charge, brought to the Seaside, to be employed in the building
of his ships, and cause Carriages to be made thereof for our Artillery, not
regarding the Remonstrances of the Persians, who told him, that if he made use
of those beams, the ^ophy could not build his ships that year. The Ambassador
went on in his intended design, and told those of our Retinue, who would have
dissuaded him from it, that it was the humor of that Nation, not to do any
thing till they are forced to it, and that the only way was to domineer over
them. But the Persians had afterward the advantage to laugh at us, when they
furnished us with so few horses, that being not able to draw our Artillery, we
were forced to leave our Carriages behind, and to load our Guns upon Camels.

December. 21. there came to us two Mehemandars, one from Scamachie, the other
from Derbent, bringing along with them about forry Camels, thirty Wagons drawn
by wild Oxen, and eighty Horses, which being laden with the Baggage, went
before, with some of our servants. But when the Ambassadors themselves were to
go, and that what belonged to their Chambers and the Kitchen was to be packed
up, there were but sixty Horses left for all the rest of the Retinue, which was
94. persons. The Mehemandar swore by the head of his King (which is the
greatest Oath among the Persians) that he could not possibly find any more,
telling us, that while we were within the Government of the Sulthan of Derbent,
whom, without any occasion, we must needs disoblige, we were not to hope any
better treatment, (...) that as soon as we were come within the Government of
Scamachie, we should not want any thing requisite for the prosecution of our
journey, if in the mean time we could pluck up a good heart, and set our selves
once in the way.

Hence it came, that upon the 22. of December we were forced to depart, some on
Hors-back, some behind them, and the rest, to wit, the Lacqueys, the Guards,
and the Soldiers, afoot. Our way lay Southward along the Caspian Sea, The
Ambassadors leave Niasabath.
and we crossed that day four small Rivers. The first place we Lodged at was
the Village of Mordou, within the Government of Scamachy, somewhat above four
Leagues from Niasabath. The houses there were all round, and built up of Ozier
and Canes, as those of the Tartars. The Inhabitants call them Ottak. The nights
were cold enough, and there was no Wood in the Village, so that we spent our
time there uneasily enough, especially those, who had wetted themselves by
going through the water afoot.

The word Mordou signifies a Fen, and the Village derives its name from the
Fenny places which lie about it, wherein there are many Springs, which send
forth their water with such violence, that there is no cold so great as to
congeal them. Whence it comes, that there are abundance of Swans there, even in
the Winter, whose down is gathered for the Sophy's Beds and Pillows. Padars. a
people.
This Village is inhabited by a certain people whom they call Padars, who have
their particular language, though with some relation to the Turkish and
Persian. Their Religion is the Mahumetane, inclining to the Turkish, but
accompanied besides with infinite Superstitions. Among others they have this,
that they leave their meat after it is dressed, to grow almost cold before they
eat it, and if it happen that any one, ignorant of their customs, should blow
or breath upon it, they cast it away as impure.

The Ambassador Brugman sent for the Kaucha or Bailey of Niasabath, and
complained to him of the ill Offices done us by the Sulthan of Derbent, in not
allowing the Carriage necessary for the prosecution of our Voyage; insomuch
that he was obliged to see some part of his Retinue, whom he loved as his own
eyes, go afoot, and likely to miscarry by the way, of which proceeding he
should give the Sophy a full account as soon as he came to Court. The Kaucha
made answer, that it must needs be, the Sulthan knew not we had so much
Baggage; but said withal, that he could not imagine what pleasure we took in
carrying along with us Sails, brass Guns, and Carriages, which could only put
us to trouble, and retard our journey, and that if the Ambassador did put up
his complaints, the Sulthan for his part would easily find out ways to
justify himself. The next day, our Mehemandar brought us twenty horses more,
so that having lessened our Baggage by certain Chests and useless Vessels,
which were ordered to be broken, we made a shift to set all our people on
Horseback. We traveled that day three leagues, and came at night to the
Village of Tachousi, which lies in a bottom, and has very handsome Houses.

The 24. we got three Leagues further, They lodge in a Caravansera.
and came to the high Mountain of Barmach, at the foot whereof we took up our
quarters, in a great Court, which was all open, and had only the four bare
Walls. The Persians call those places Caravanseras, and they are as the Ventas
in Spain, and serve for Inns upon the Highway, in the deserts of Persia. They
are within a days Journey one of another, for the greater convenience of
Travelers, who are obliged to bring along with them Provisions and Forage for
Horse and Man, for you find in them, at the best, but Chambers and Halls, and
those not furnished with any thing, and have only a Roof to keep you dry.

The Waggoners and Mule-drivers of Derbent made a show as if they would have
returned, and have left us there, to stay till other conveniences of Riding and
Carriage were brought us from Schamachie: but finding, on the other side, that
the Ambassadors had ordered the Drums to be beaten to bring their people
together, and that command was issued out that all should march a-foot, and
abandon the Baggage, to be made good at their perils who refused to supply them
with necessary carriages, they changed their resolution, and staid.

The Caravansera was a very ancient structure, all built with large
Free-stones, being forty two paces square. Over the Gate, there were two
Chambers, where we found certain Inscriptions and Hebrew Letters, and some
Characters, which none in the company could either read or comprehend.

The 25. being Christmas day, we did our Devotions in the great Stable which
was appointed for the Camels; which done, some of our retinue had the curiosity
to go and take a view of the Mountain, induced thereto by the maraculous
relations which the Persians had made us thereof by the way.

This Mountain lies within a quarter of a League of the Caspian Sea, The
Mountain of Barmach.
and, by reason of its extraordinary height, is seen at a very great distance.
It is in a manner round, having on the very top of it a great Rock straight up,
and very steepy of all sides, from which it has the name of Barmach, that is,
finger: because it looks like a finger stretched out above the other adjacent
Mountains. We understood since, that there is a path, which will commodiously
enough bring one to the top of it, but we knew it not then, so that we ran
great hazard of our Lives in getting up by dreadful precipices.

It was so cold upon the Mountain, that the Grass, which was high enough there,
was all covered with a white frost as with Sugar Candy, whereas at the foot of
the Mountain, near the Caravansera, the weather was fair and mild. Upon the
edge of the Mountain, and at the foot of the Rock, there is a plain of about
fifty perches square, which has in the midst of it, a very fair Well, built
about with stone, and about that Well may be seen the ruins of a very thick
Wall, flanked at the corners with certain Towers and Bulwarks, wherewith that
structure had sometime been fortified, as also with two good deep ditches built
about with Freestone, which satisfied us they were the ruins of an impregnable
Fortress. Toward the Northern part of the Mountain, Ruins of Fortresses.
we met with other ruins, which could be no other than the remainders of
another Fort. They facilitated our access to an ascent, which was cut in the
Rocks, and conducted us almost up to the Top, where we saw a Vault, and the
remainder of a third Structure, which had sometimes served for a Dungeon, or
place of retreat, after the loss of the two other Forts.

I imagine that this may have been one of those Fortifications, The opinion of
the Persians concerning these Fortresses.
which the Ancients called Portae Caspiae, or Ferreae, whereof there is a
description in the Greek and Latin Histories. The Persians are of opinion, that
these structures were built by Iscander, so they call Alexander the Great, and
that they were demolished by Tamberlane. We rested out selves upon the Rock,
where we sung Te Deum, and renewed among our selves the friendship, which we
had before mutually promised each other by most unfeigned protestations: and
having gathered certain Figs off the Trees, which grew out of the clefts of the
Rock, we got down again with less trouble and danger, by the ordinary path.

The 26. we left Barmach, having very fair weather, the Sun casting at that
time a greater heat than it does with us in May. The Wagons, with the Baggage,
took the way of the plain toward Bakuje, and the Ambassadors, with those of
the retinue, who were on Horseback, took that of the Mountain. We Traveled
that day five leagues, and came at night to a Village named Chanega, within the
Mountains. There, we met with abundance of excellent Fruits, and good store of
Honey; but the water thereabouts was troubled, corrupted, and stunk.

The next day, The Sepulcher of a Persian Saint.
December. 27. we got five Leagues further, to a Village named Pyrmaraas, three
Leagues from Scamachie. This place is very famous, by reason of one of their
Saints named Scid-Ibrahim, whose Sepulcher is to be seen there. The Persians
affirm it to be very ancient, and so great a Veneration had for it, that
Tamberlane, who had no religious respect for any thing, would not meddle with
that Sepulcher, though he destroyed all else that lay in his way. This
structure has its Walls, and its two Courts, as a Castle. Our Ambassadors sent
the Mehemandar to the Guardian of the place, to entreat him, that they might be
permitted to enter; but all they could obtain, was only to see the first Court,
which was full of square stones, which were set up-an-end, to distinguish the
Graves of private Persons.

I had a great desire to get a little nearer, The Sepulcher described.
and, if it were possible, to see the Saint's Sepulcher. Whereupon, I returned
thither in the Evening, and set down in my Table Book the Arabian Inscriptions,
which I found Engraved here and there upon the Walls. The Persians, who imagined
what I did was in honor of their Saint, suffered me to proceed in what I was
about. I made my advantage of that liberty to slip in at the Gate of the second
Court, where I found many other Inscriptions. I bestowed about half an hour in
Copying them out, and perceiving they took no further notice of me, I ventured
so far as to open the Door which goes into the structure it self, which being
made fast only with a wooden pin, it was no hard matter for me to open it, and
to get in. It consisted of many arched apartments, which had no light, but what
came in by certain little Windows, which put me into a little fright. In the
first apartment, there was, just opposite to the door, a Tomb about two foot
high, having as many steps to get up to it, and it was encompassed with a
Balcony, or rather an Iron-grate.

On the left hand, there was a door which led into a great and very lightsome
Gallery, the walls whereof were whitened, and the floor covered with rich
Carpets. On the right hand, there were, in another apartment, which was
Vaulted, eight high Tombs: and it was through this last Vault, that people
passed into a third, in which was the Sepulcher of Seid-Ibrahim. The Tomb was
two foot above ground, and was covered with a Carpet of yellow Damask. At the
head and feet, as also on both sides, there were several Wax Candles and
Lanthorns, upon great brass Candlesticks, and from the Roof of the Vault there
hung certain Lamps. As I came out of this place, I met with our Minister, who
expressed so great a desire to go into it, that I ventured once more to go in
along with him; and he went in thither a second time along with our Physician.

About two Musket shot from the Village, The Sepulcher of another Saint.
on the East Side, there is to be seen, in a Rock, the Sepulcher of another
Saint, which is very sumptuously built. The Persians call the Saint who is
interred in that place Tirbabba, and they affirm he was Master to Scid-Ibrahim,
who had so great an Affection, and so particular a Reverence for him, that he
made it his request to God, that he would vouchsafe, that, after his Death, he
might be seen in the same posture as he was wont to put himself into, when he
did his Devotions in his Life time; and that accordingly he is to be seen at
this day clad in a gray Garment kneeling, which was his ordinary gesture when
he said his Prayers, while he lived. Which a man need make no great difficulty
to believe, if there may be any credit given to what is affirmed by Camerarius,
in his Historical Meditations, after Varro, and Ammianus Marcellinus, to wit,
that the Bodies of the Persians are not corrupted, and that they are only dried
up: I am of opinion, that this is to be understood only of such Bodies as are
not interred, but exposed to the Air, nay it is further requisite they should
be Bodies brought very low either by age or sickness: for full Bodies are
subject to corruption, in Persia as well as other places

These two places are very famous by reason of the Pilgrimages upon which the
Persians resort thither, especially about the time that Tiribabba has a new
Garment bestowed on him, and that the old one is torn to pieces, to be
distributed among the Pilgrims. The Inhabitants of the Country relate strange
things of the Miracles of these Saints: but in regard they can be no other than
Fables, or the effects of Sorcery, and that the Persians are very apt to
believe any stories, and are very much inclined to Sorcery, I thought it more
discretion to wave the relation of their impertinences.

Upon the door of this Sepulcher, there was this Inscription in Arabic
Letters, Alla mufethi hibebuad, that is to say, O God, open this door. There
are cut within the Rock several Chambers, Neeches, and Holes, in which the
Pilgrims are lodged and do their Devotions; nay there are some so high, that
they must have Ladders of 12. or 15. foot long to get up to them.

There were three of us ventured to get up to the top of the Rock by dreadful
precipices, helping one the other as we got up. There we found four spacious
Chambers, and, within, several Neeches cut in the Rock, to serve for Beds. But
what we thought most strange was, that we found in that Vault, Shells in
mountains far from the Sea.
upon the very top of the Mountain, Muscle-shels, and in some places such
abundance of them, as would induce a man to imagine, that the Rock was made up
of sand and shells. In our return from Persia, we observed all along the Caspian
Sea, several of these shelly Mountains. whereof we shall give a further account
hereafter.

The Inhabitants of this Village of Pyrmaraas never drink any Wine, out of a
fear, as they say themselves, that, breaking the Laws of Mahomet and the
Directions of the Alchoran, the Holiness of the place might be thereby
profaned. At the entrance of the Village, near the Sepulcher of Seid-Ibrahim
there is a great Vault, or Cestern of 52. foot in length and twenty in breadth,
compassed with a wall of Freestone, which in the Winter time they fill with
Water, Snow and Ice, to be used in the great heats and drought of Summer, as
well for themselves as their Cattle.

The 29. the Chan sent us word, that we might send our Harbinger to Schamachie,
to take up Lodgings for us, and that we might follow him in the afternoon. But
after we had loaded part of our Baggage, and just as we were going to take
Horse, the Chan sent an express Messenger to us, to entreat us to continue that
night at Pyrmaraas. And that we might be assured, this was not done out of any
design upon us, he sent us several refreshment, and among other things, four
great Pitchers, and two Leathern baggs full of Wine, good store of
Pomegranates, Apples, Pears, Quinces and Chest-nuts, and to each of the
Ambassadors an excellent Horse sadled and bridled. The superstition of the
Persians.
We could not then imagine what might occasion this delay; but it was told us
afterward, that the Minatzim, or Astrologer, belonging to the Chan, had
persuaded him, that that day was not a fortunate day to receive strangers in.

The next day, The reception of the Ambassadors at Schamachie.
Dec. 30. we left Pyrmaraas, about eight in the Morning, taking our way
straight to Schamachy, into which we made a very noble entrance. Within two
leagues of the City, we met with one afoot, who came to tell us, from the Chan,
that we were welcome, and that he would come out of the City in person to
receive us. This man marched on still in the front of our Cavalcade. Within a
league of the City, we met with about thirty Gentlemen on horseback, very well
mounted, who came only to take a view of us, and immediately returned, in full
speed, to the City. After this, we met, near a certain Village, with about a
hundred men on horseback, who opened, to make us way to pass through them.

About two Musket Shot thence we met with another Troop of Cavaliers, among
whom there were tweleve that had a particular Coiffure about their heads,
having their Turbants pointed upwards like the Spire of a Steeple, which they
call Takia; and we were told it was by Privilege that they were so dressed, it
being to signify that they were of the posterity and kindred of their Prophet
Aaly. These saluted us with a low inclination of the head, and bid us welcome,
by saluting us with their Chosckeldi, in the Turkish Language, which they would
rather speak than the Persian.

Having kept company with these about half a League, we perceived on our right
hand a body of about 500. men; and whereas we were told, that the Chan and his
Calenter, or Lieutenant, were there in person, it was taken into consideration,
whether we should keep on in the Highway, or turn aside and make-towards them.
The Ambassador Brugman would have had us keep on in the Highway, which led
straight to the City, alleging that it was the Chan's duty, who received us,
and who ought to be his own Master of the Ceremonies, to come to us. But our
Mehemandar, and others of the Company assuring us, that the Highway was very
deep and dirty, and that the fields were more fit for the reception of the
Ambassadors, and the Complements and Ceremonies occasioned thereby, The Chan of
Schamachie meets the Ambassadors.
they prevailed with us, so that we went straight toward the Chan, who stayed
for us upon a little Hill, and advanced toward the Ambassadors, as soon as he
perceived them coming up. He had on his right hand six men, very proper
persons, Armed with gilt Bows and Arrows; on his left, as many of his Guard,
with their Muskets, and after him came a very great number of Gentlemen on
Horseback, very well mounted, and clad in Garments of Brocado, and Mantles and
Caps embroidered with Gold and Silver. Being come up to us, he would needs do
our Nation the greatest honor imaginable, which was by taking the Ambassadors
one after the other by the hand, contrary to the custom of the Persians. The
first Complements over, he commanded Wine to be poured into a silver Vessel,
drunk to the Ambassadors, and obliged each of them to pledge him twice.

The Calenter, and Muscovian Poslanick, Alexei Sauinouits, who were about the
Chan, bid us also heartily welcome, and took us by the hand.

As we marched along, we had before us our loud Music, which consisted in
Hawboyes, Timbrels, Cornets, and Tabours, but particularly in a kind of
Instrument, called Kerrenai. These are made somewhat like our Hawboyes, save
that they are of Brass, being above eight foot in length, and at the extremity,
above two foot Diameter. There were four of these Instruments, and those who
played on them made a halt ever and anon, and stood in a Circle as our
Trumpeters, holding up the end of their Kerrenai to the sky, and making a
noise, which has not only nothing of harmony in it. but is more like a
dreadful howling than any thing of Music. There were also common Hawboyes,
which they call Surnatzi, and earthen Timbrels, made like our Butter-pots.
Having marched on a little way in this Company, the Chan ordered all to make a
second halt, that the Ambassadors might drink, causing in the mean time, a
certain Buffoon, or Jeaster, one of those whom they call Tazusch, to make
wry-faces, and show a thousand postures. He also used Castagnets, and sung very
pleasant songs.

Within a quarter of a League of the City, there was a body or battalion of
above two thousand foot, most Armenians. This battalion consisted of five
Regiments, distinguished one from the other by so many Colors, which were
fastened to the top of a great and long Pole, so as that it was as much as a
man could do to carry one of them. They had their particular music, consisting
of Pipes and other Instruments, one whereof was very remarkable, and consisted
of two brass Basins, which they struck one against the other. All these people
bid us also very welcome, and expressed their joy at our arrival, some by
clapping their hands, others by turning their Caps about their heads, or
flinging them up into the air. There the Governor commanded a third halt to be
made, that the Ambassadors might drink once more. Coming near the City-Gate, we
were entertained with another band of music, consisting of Timbrells.
Hawboyes, Trumpets, and other Instruments, which joining with those of our
Company made such a noise as would have drowned Thunder it self.

The Chan invited the Ambassadors with the chiefest of their Retinue to Supper,
and made them cross the Court on horseback, till they came to the Lodgings
into which they were to go; but the Gentlemen, and the rest of the Retinue were
obliged to alight at the outer Gate. The floors of all the Chambers were
covered with very rich Tapistry. The Persians took off their shoes before they
went into the Chambers; which put us to so much the greater trouble, in that
being all, in riding-boots, we durst not venture to go in, till some of the
Chans Domestics took some of the more forward by the hand and brought them in;
without putting us to the trouble of pulling off our Boots.

We passed through three very fair Chambers, and were brought into a spacious
Hall very sumptuously furnished, and hung with excellent pieces of Painting,
representing those parts which are not commonly seen naked. In the midst of the
Hall, there was a Fountain, the cast of the water representing the form of a
Glass. They had set, to cool, all about the Fountain, several silver Flaggons,
and Bottles of Wine; and there were several Tables covered with all sorts of
Conserves, Allows them seats; contrary to the custom,
The Governor knowing we were not accustomed to sit down after the Persian
way, had caused seats to be made, and the more to oblige the Ambassadors, he
sat down, after our way of sitting, opposite to the Fountain, causing the
Ambassadors to sit down on his right hand, and on his left, but upon the
ground, the Calenter or Lieutenant, the Minatschim or Astrologer, his
Physician, and several other persons of Quality. The Gentlemen and Officers
belonging to the Ambassadors sat down on the floor, the other side of the Hall.

The Musicians stood before the Chan. At the entrance of the Hall there were
several young men, very handsome persons, having on Garments of Brocado, with
their Bows and Arrows in the posture of shooting. All that were in the Hall,
whether sitting or standing, had their backs to the Wall, and their faces
toward the Chan and the company, so as that not one had his back turned to
another, according to the ordinary custom, which they observe in all their
Assemblies.

There were brought to the Company several little Tables covered with Fruits
and Conserves, to be served to two at a time, while two Pages went round the
Hall to fill Wine, it being all they had to do, The services of the Feast.
unless it were, when they had ended one round, to begin another. After every
one had eaten some few Conserves, they were taken away, and the like Tables
were covered with a very fine Cotton-cloath of several colors, to serve the
Meat upon. About an hour after, the Meat was taken away, and Conserves were
served up again, and after that began the Preparatives for Supper. The little
Tables were taken away, that the whole Hall might be covered, upon the
Tapistry, with great pieces of Linen, which were to serve for a kind of
Table-cloath. The Butler having done his duty, the Carver comes in with a great
Wooden Dish full of a certain thin baked Past. A strange sort of Napkins.
The Persians call it Iucha, and every piece is above three foot in length, and
as many in breadth. He calst one of them to every one of the Company, to serve
instead of a Napkin. That done, the Meat was brought in, in great Pewter
Dishes, which were set in the midst of the Hall, where the Suffretzi, or
Carver, kneeling down, cut it into pieces, and disposed it into little Dishes,
whereof every one had one brought him.

All the Guests had every one standing by them a Tulsdan, The neatness of the
Persians.
or Pot to spet in, made as our Chamber-pots, save that the mouth is narrower;
and they make use of them instead of a Basin to spet in, as also to put in the
bones, parings, and cores of fruits, and other superfluities, which might
injure the Tapistry or the floor.

We had Music, while we were at Meal. The Music consisted of Lutes and Viols,
very poorly pla^d on; as also of Tabours and Voices, which made a wretched kind
of Harmony. The two Pages who had filled the Wine at the Collation, danced to
the sound of all these Instruments: so that they seemed as if they would give
us a taste of the delights of the Terrestial Paradise, a^^er the hardship we
had suffered since our coming from Moscou. The Governor's Palace lies upon
the ascent of a little Hill, whence might be discovered all the houses about
the City; and he had commanded all the Inhabitants to set a row of Lamps in
their windows, which represented to our eyes above twenty thousand Stars,
enough to dispel the greatest darkness of the night, and added much to the
divertisement, which they endeavored to give all our senses, while the Music
of the Hawboyes and Timbrels made all the Rampires of the City to resound again.

The Governor, The Chan an exellent Marksman,
desirous to let the Ambassadors see how expert he was in shooting, bid them
observe one of the Lamps that stood near them, to see whether he struck it out
with the first Musket Shot: which he did twice together, without missing any
one time. This Feast having lasted till it was somewhat late in the night, and
that we began to think it a little cold, the Governor carried us into another
Room with a fire in it, One of the company kills himself with drinking
Aquavitae.
where he called for Conserves, Wine, and Aquavitae, which the Persians were so
greedy of, that one of them, a person of quality, who never had drunk any
before, and would needs do it out of compliance to us, took so much of it, that
the next day he was found dead in his bed.

After this treatment, which lasted till midnight, the Chan permitted us to
withdraw, and assigned us Lodging among the Armenians, because they were
Christians; but in regard our Hosts had had no notice of our coming, and that
our Baggage was not yet arrived, we found neither Beds, nor Benches, nor
Tables, so that after so good a Supper, we had a very ill night of it.

The last day of December, the Chan sent the Ambassadors several refreshments,
Wine, wild Fowl, and other Provisions. The Calenter or Lieutenant ordered to be
allowed us for our daily Provision, seventeen Sheep, twenty Pullers, a hundred
Eggs, a certain quantity of Salt, and Bread, fifty quarts of Wine, and twenty
burdens of Wood. This was very punctually observed for the four or five first
days; but the Mehemander being obliged to get in these Provisions out of the
neighboring Villages, which he could not so procure but that it was sometimes
three or four days ere we could get our allowance, the Chan sent us word, that
it were more for our convenience to send to the Market for our Provisions, and
that we might be assured, that what we laid out should be reimburs'd at our
departure thence. To that purpose, he caused it to be Proclaimed by sound of
Trumpet, that all Provisions should be sold to the Frenqui (for so they call
the Germans, as well as the French, Italians, and Spaniards) at a reasonable
rate.

We continued three full months at Scamachie, expecting orders from the Court
for our expense, and the prosecution of our journey. The Governor and Calenter
endeavored what they could, in the mean time, to make this long stay of ours
there the less ^eadious by the continual entertainments they made us, as also
by the divertisements of Hunting, and the Visits they often gave the
Ambassadors, together with the frequent Presents they sent them of Wine,
wildfowl, and fruits.

M.DC.XXXVII.
We began this year with the Ceremonies of the Persian Gentleman's Enterrment,
who had killed himself by his excessive drinking of Aquavitae, 1637.
at the first Entertainment, which the Governor had given us, the day of our
arrival. We shall have occasion hereafter to speak of the Ceremonies of their
Enterrments, and therefore shall give no futher account of it here, than that
ordinarily the Bodies are carried into the Metzid, Mosquey or Church, whence
they are afterward transported to Babylon, Kufa, or Netschef, to be interred
near their Prophet Aaly, or near some other of their Imans, or Saints.

January 2. the Governor and the Calenter visited the Ambassadors, and brought
along with them, Conserves and Wine, for the Collation. The Chan's design was,
to hear our Music, whereof he had heard much talk; and accordingly, he was so
taken therewith, that he importuned the Ambassadors to go and sup with him at
the Castle, and to bring their Music along with them. It consisted of a
Violin, a Base-Viol, a Bandore, and a Voice. The Ambassadors would at first
have put him off, but his instances were such, that they could not possibly do
it; insomuch that we passed away the remainder of that day, in the same
Divertisements as he had entertained us with the first day of our arrival. Only
there was this extraordinary, that the Governor ordered to be brought out of
the Stable some of his best Horses, to the number of twenty seven, among which
there were three, which the Sophy had sent him, not long before, as so many
assurances of his favor. He caused one of the Gentlemen belonging to his
Chamber to mount them all, and to take several turns thereon about the Hall,
though the floor were covered with very rich Tapistry.

Ian. 5. the Chan sent the Ambassadors word, that if they were desirous to be
present, the next day, at the Ceremonies performed by the Armenians at the
Consecration of their Holy Water, at which he should himself be in person, he
would order a particular place to be kept for them. The Armenians call this
feast Chatschae Schuran, that is the Baptism of the Cross.

The Ceremonies are performed without the City, The Armenians bless the Water
on T^ei^day.
near a Bridge called Puli Amberi. The Armenians celebrate this Feast, as do
also the Muscovites and some other Christians, upon the sixth of January, which
is the day of the Epiphany, or appearance of the Star to the Kings or Wisemen.
They began it with a Mass, which was said betimes in the morning before day.
After Mass there was a Sermon preached, the former being said in a manner with
the same Ceremonies as the Roman Catholics do it in Europe. The Ambassadors,
assist at their Service.
The Ambassadors, whose Lodgings were near the Chapel of the Armenians, made no
difficuly to be present at both Mass and Sermon; and after the latter, they
were Complemented by the Bishop who had Preached it, and who came purposely for
that Exercise, from the place of his ordinary residence.

He gave them to understand by an Interpreter, how glad he was to see their
Devotions honored by the Presence of Persons of that quality, since it could
be no small comfort to them, to see in their Churches Europaean Christians, who
had never come into them before. Whereto he added, that their Excellencies the
Ambassadors knew not who he was, but that he should find a time to acquaint
them therewith: from which Discourse of his we inferred, that he was some
Missionary of the Pope's, sent into these parts, to endeavor the Reunion of
the Gre^k Church with the Roman.

He further entreated the Ambassadors, to use their Mediation to the Governor,
that they might be permitted to carry on the building of a Monastery, which the
Armenians had begun; which they promised to do.

About noon the Armenians, by order from the Governor, brought us fifteen
Horses, upon which we rode to the River, which is about half a League from the
City. Those poor people, who were come to the City from all the adjacent
Villages, went out of it in Procession, with abundance of Images, Crosses and
Banners, guarded to the Riverside by a strong part of Soldiers, which the
Governor had assigned them, for their Protection against the injuries and
affronts of the Mussulmans, or Mahumetans, who make it their sport to abuse
them. The Governor had caused a Tent to be pitched over against the place,
where the Consecr^tion was to be performed, very richly hung with Tapistry, and
had ordered a sumptuous Collation to be made ready in it. There were on his
left hand the Muscovian Poslanick, and a great number of Gentlemen, and the
right he had kept void for the Ambassadors, and some of their retinue. After he
had received us, The Ceremonies of the Arminians in Consecrating the Water.
and made us sit down, he commanded the Armenians to begin their Ceremonies. As
soon as they begun Reading, at the Riverside, four men, stark naked, leaped
into the water, and swum up and down for a certain time, to open the water,
which was a little frozen over. One of our Spaniels, which was wont to go into
the water, leaped in after them: which found the Persians excellent sport, who
look upon a Dog as so unclean a kind of Creature, that they would not willingly
one should touch them; insomuch that they laughed to see the Ceremonies of the
Armenians profaned by our Water-Dog; though indeed they look on all those poor
people do as so much mummery. Only the Governor himself makes his advantage
thereof, inasmuch as the pains he takes to be present thereat, and consequently
to protect those of that Profession, brings him in yearly a Present of a
thousand Crowns from their Churches.

After the Bishop had read for an hour or better, and the Assembly given over
singing and playing on the Timbrels, he poured a little Consecrated Oil into
the Water, into which he afterward dipped a little Cross beset with abundance
of Precious Stones, and at last, holding his Crosier over the Water, he gave it
his Benediction.

After that Ceremony, all the Armenians took of it, some to drink, others to
wash their faces withal. There were some among them cast themselves into it,
but most took only so much of it as to sprinkle their faces therewith. Some of
the Governors Domestics made it their sport to dash the Priests and the
Women, nay some were so uncivil with them, that the Chan himself was ashamed of
it, and obliged to command them to forbear their rudenesses: though he himself
made his Jester and others of his Servants Dance, purposely to abouse the
Armenians, who Danced about their Bishop. The Governors Physician, who was an
Arabian born, and a person of no Religion, had the Impudence to ask the
Ambassadors, what they thought of Jesus Christ, and whether they believed him
to be the Son of God. Answer was made him, that they believed him to be the
True God, but that it was uncivilly done of the Physician to laugh at their
Religion, and that they were not come thither to dispute it with him.

All the Ceremonies being over, they fell very seriously a-drinking, and the
Governor took his Liquor so liberally, that being well nigh Drunk, he left the
Company, and got on Hors-back, without taking leave of any one. All the rest of
the Persians followed him; which we were so much the more surpised at,
inasmuch as, not acquainted with their custom, we could not imagine what should
be the reason of his going away: Being got on Horseback, in order to our
return for the City, we met with the Governor, who staid for the Ambassadors
not far from the Tent. We understood afterward, and indeed found it by
exprience, that the Persians think it not much, to rise from Table, and go
their ways, without making Excuse or Complement to those by whom they were
entertained, who for their parts take the same privilege to do the like with
those whom they had invited, when they find themselves in such a condition as
that they are not able to keep them company any longer. Of this we had man
instances, during our abode in Persia, and that sometimes, at the Schach's own
Table.

January 9. the Armenian Bishop gave the Ambassadors a Visit. He came to their
Lodgings with the Cross and Banner, having many Priests marching before him,
who were all in their Pontifical Robes, with Wax-Candles in their hands. As
they came into the Court, they fell a singing and playing on their Timbrels,
Hawboies, and little Bells, and brought us a present of two Pitchers of Wine,
and a dish of Apples, in the midst whereof they had planted a Wax-Candle
lighted. They were above three hours in discourse with the Ambassadors,
concerning the business of their Religion, and when they took leave of them,
they re-iterated the entreaty they had made to them before, of employing their
intercession to the Governor, for the building of their Church.

Ian. 10. The Calenter, or King's Lieutenant, entertained the Ambassadors and
all their retinue at a very great Feast: The Calenter's Feast.
but before we sat down, he would needs give us the satisfaction to see his
Palace, which was incomparably both better built and furnished than the
Governor's. The Hall, where we were to Dine, was all arched and set out with a
certain Plaister-work done in Leaves and Branches, which argued much the
Ingenuity of the Inventor. The Hall looked into a very spacious and very fair
Garden; the situation whereof, we thought so much the more advantageous, in
that the Hall being high, and the Garden very low, it might be all seen out of
the Windows thereof. On one side of the Hall there was a Gallery, out of which
issued a Fountain, which casting its water at first very high, charmed us with
a low, but delighful noise, which the water thereof made by falling into
another lower Basin opposite to a Chamber under the Hall, and thence into a
third which was in the midst of the Garden. The Governor, who was also at this
entertainment, with the chiefest of his Courtiers, had brought thither along
with him the Marshal of the Sophy's Court, who was then newly come from
Ispaban. The Feast lasted till night, which being somewhat dark the Persians
brought us to our Quarters with Torches: though they themselves were so well
furnished, as to stand in need of conductors, at least as much as we did.

The 18. of January, The Ambassadors Presents to the Chan.
the Ambassadors sent the Steward of their Household, the Secretary of the
Embassy, and the Controller, to the Chan, to make him the ordinary Present,
which was, ten Else of Scarler, five Else of blew Satin, a Barrel of Aquavitae,
a Chest, or Cellar, in which they sent him two dozen Bottles of all sorts of
Spirits of Wine, and two pair of Knives, the hafts whereof were of Amber. This
Present put him into so good an Humor, that we thought it a seasonable time,
The Governor permits the Armenians to build a Church.
to present to him the Petition of the Armenians, concerning the Building of
their Church.

In answer to which, he told, us that although, ever since the establishment of
the Mahumetan Religion in Persia, the Christians never were permitted to build
a Church at Schamachie, and that accordingly, it never had been his intention
to suffer the Armenians to (...) any; yet such was the respect he had for the
Intercession of the Ambassadors in their behalf, that they might assure
themselves, he would no longer oppose it: and that they might have no occasion
to doubt his reality herein, he would needs have the Orders for that purpose
dispatched in their presence.

The Armenians were so overjoyed thereat, that, not thinking it enough to give
the Ambassadors their humblest thanks, they promised so to order things, that
their intended Structure should acquaint posterity with their Names, and the
Good Offices they had done them upon that occasion.

Ian. 20. came back the Courier, or Express, whom the Chan had sent to Ispahan,
even before we left Niasabath; upon which the Ambassadors sent to him, to
desire him to communicate to them the Orders of the Court, concerning the
prosecution of their Journey. Answer was made us, that he had not received any
new Orders at all, and that, if we desired it, we might hear the Letter read,
which he thereupon gave his Physician to read. The Physician, a person the
fittest in the World to represent a Fool in a play, after he had kissed the
Letter, put it to his forehead, and at last read it. The Contents of it, at
least what he read, was to this effect; That the Express from the Sulthan of
Derbent being come to the Court, before him whom the Chan of Schamachie had
sent, all the account he had brought, was, that there was arrived at Derbent
any Envoy, or Poslanick, from the Great Duke of Muscovy, who had reported,
that, within a few days, there would come into those parts certain Ambassadors
from one of the Princes of Germany: That the Schach, who had received no other
account of their arrival, thought it enough to order the Governor of Derbent
to receive them, to entertain then kindly, during the stay they should make
there, and to supply them with all things for the continuation of their
journey, as far as Schamachie, and that when they were come thither, the Chan
of Schamachie should send an Express to give an account thereof to the Court,
from which he should immediately receive orders what to do, as well in respect
of the maintenance of the Ambassadors, as their departure thence. The Chan
demanded of us a Catalogue of the names and qualities of all of our Retinue;
nay, he would have had it expressed in the said Catalogue, what Professions
they were of, and that we should not fail setting down, that we had among us a
Physician, a Chyrurgeon, a Painter, and Musicians; which we would not do; but
thought it sufficient, to give them, in writing, only the names of our people,
and the Offices, and employments they were in, upon the account of the Embassy.
We had a great suspicion that the said Letter came not from the Court, and that
there was somewhat more or less in it, and the more to be assured of it, we got
the Courier to come the next day to our quarters. The Wine we gave him, and the
small Presents which were secretly made him, unlocked the man's breast, and
drew out the whole secret. He told us, upon promise of secrecy, that the
Governors Brother, having been, not long before executed, and that misfortune
having, in some measure, engaged the whole Family in the disgrace of the
deceased, there was not any man durst undertake the delivery of his Letter to
the Sophy, as being ignorant what the contents thereof might be: but that after
a months delay, one of the Kings Chamberlains having ventured to lay it at his
Majesty's feet, the Sofi would make no answer at all thereto, but ordered
another to write to him, and sent him word, that there was no answer to be made
to his Letter, by reason of the orders sent to the Sulthan of Derbent, which
were contained in the Letter, The Schach^ orders for the Ambassadors.
whereof we had heard the reading. That it was not thought fit to add any thing
thereto, but an express command to the Governor, to see cut to pieces in his
presence all those Persians that durst affront or injure the Germans, during
the stay they should make in his Government. So that we were forced to stay
there, in expectation of what orders the Sophy should send, upon the
Dispatches, which the Chan was then sending to the Court by an Express.

Ian. 25. the Governor accompanied by the Poslanick, and a great number of
Courtiers, gave the Ambassadors a Visit; but in regard their Lent was already
begun he would not participate of our Collation, and so having heard our
Music, he returned to his own Palace.

Ian. 28. The Muscovian Poslanick went for Ispahan, not well satisfied with the
treatment he had received from the Governor and Calenter. The Muscovian Envoy
leaves Schamachie.
All the revenge he could take was upon the Mehemander, who had been assigned
to Conduct him, taking any occasion to affront and abuse him. Some of our
Retinue accompanied him a League out of the City, where they took leave of him.

February the fifth, FEBRU.
walking abroad with some of our company, we went into a great house near the
Marketplace, A College for the instruction of Youth.
which they call Basar. It was a very noble Structure, having many Galleries
and Chambers, like a College. Meeting up and down with several persons, some
ancient, some young, some walking, some sitting, with books in their hands, we
had the curiosity to enquire what place it was, and found that it was a School
or College, which they called Mandresa, of which kind there are very many all
over Persia.

While we were viewing the Structure, one of their Maderis, or Regents, who
read public Lectures, entreated us to come near him, and perceiving that I had
caused to be graven upon a Cane I walked with all these words in Arabic, 1637.
Bismi alla, rahman rachim, that is, in the name of the merciful God who
shows mercy (a sentence which the Persians put at the beginning of their
writings) he desired me to bestow it on him, upon a promise that he would give
me a better the next day: but finding I made some difficulty to part with it,
he cut out the word alla, which in their Language is the proper name of God,
and put what he had cut off in a piece of clean paper, very gently and
carefully, and told me, the name of God ought not to be written upon a walking
stick, which was many times thrust into the dirt.

The next day I went again to the same College, whether I had caused to be
brought along with me a very fair Celestial Globe, but, by mistake, I went to
another School, where nevertheless they received me very kindly. The Professors
and Regents, as also the Students, very much wondered to see me come with so
noble a Globe, and to understand thereby, that Astrology and the Mathematics
were better taught among us than in Persia, where they are not yet acquainted
with the invention of Globes, and make use only of the Astrolabe, for the
instruction of their Students. They took much delight in viewing my Globe, and
they named to me in the Arabian Language all the Signs of the Zodiac, nay,
gave me to understand further, that they knew all the names, and all the
significations of most of the other Stars.

Another day, A School for Children.
I went into a Metzid, or Church, in that part of the Town where we were
quartered, to see, how they instructed their Children. They were all sat
against the Wall, excepting only the Molla, or Master of the School, who, with
some other aged persons, sat in the midst of the Hall. As soon as they saw me
coming in, they invited me to sit down by them. The Molla, who had an Alchoran
in his hand, very fairly written, suffered me to turn it over awhile, which
when I had done, he took it back from me, kissed it, at the begginning, and
would have given it me to kiss also: but I only kissed another book I had in my
hand, and told him, that, knowing well what book I had my self, I made no
difficulty to kiss it, but not understanding what was contained in his book, I
should not be too forward to honor it so much. He laughed and told me I had
done very well. There was among them an Arabian named Chalil, who was a
Minatsim, or Astrologer, born at Hetsa, near Meca, aged about 65. years. He
understood Astrology, and read Enclid to some of his Disciples. I presently
knew the book by the figures in it, and made him some demonstations, as well as
I could express my self in the Persian Language: whereat the good old man was
so much pleased, that desirous, on his part, to show me what he could do, he
took out of his bosom a little brass Astrolabe, and asked me, whether I had
ever seen the like, or understood the use of it. Whereto having answered him,
that I understood it very well, and that I had one at my Lodging, he seemed to
be very desirous to see it, which obliged me to go home to fetch it, and to
bring along with me the Globe, which they wondered very much to see, especially
when they understood that I had made it my self. The honest Arabian desired me
to show him, how I could set down the Degrees so exactly, in regard they have
no Instruments wherewith to make their Circles and Degrees. I showed him the
invention of it, and how in a short time, and with little trouble he might
attain thereto, for which discovery, he acknowledged himself very much obliged
to me, insomuch that ever after, he let slipno occasion, whereby he might
assure me of his friendship, expressing it as well by his frequent visits,
coming one day with abundance of excellent fruit, and dishes of meat ready
dressed purposely to Dine with me at his own charges, as by his earnest
proffers of all the service that lay in his power. He gave me the Longitudes
and Latitudes of the chiefest Cities and places of all Asia, which I compared
with the observations I had my self made thereof, and found them very exact.

The Molla, or Master of the Metzid, was called Maheb Aaly, and was a very
young, but mighty good natured man, and of an excellent humor, one who did all
that lay in his power to serve me, doing me the greatest kindnesses he could
upon all occasions, especially in my study of the Arabian Tongue. He brought me
also acquainted with a certain friend of his, named Imanculi, who was an
Ohnbaschi, or Captain of a Troop of Horse. These two came to see me every day
alternately, as well to teach me their Language as to learn mine. Which they
did with very great improvement daily, especially Imanculi, who no doubt had in
a short time arrived to the perfection of it, had it not been for the envy or
jealousy of some of our own, which proved so great, as to make it suspected,
that those poor people had some design to change their Religion: so that they
were forced to keep out of the way, and for the most part to make their visits
in the night. Insomuch that one day, to wit, Febr. 11. being gone to the
Metzid, to take a Lesson in the Language, there came thither a Persian servant,
to tell the Molla, from the Governor, that he much wondered, how he durst
suffer those Christians to come into their Temple, that they had nothing to do
there, and that it was his best course to dismiss them. The Molla was, at
first, a little startled thereat, but upon second thoughts, considering with
himself, that the Persians are never forbidden the company or conversation of
Christians, he doubted this was some trick put upon him; and having taken the
servant aside, he understood from him, that it was not the Chan, but our
Interpreter who had sent him, to hinder my study of the Language. The next day,
we had such another Message sent us; but we knew before both the Author and
occasion of it, and therefore made no account thereof. Some time after, there
happening some difference between the Ambassador Brugman, and our Interpreter, he
acknowledged, that it was by order from his Excellency, that he had sent the
said servant, to hinder my learning of the Language. Upon the same account was
it that the said Ambassador ordered me to reduce Persia and Turkey into one
Map, that so I might be taken off the study of the Language, at least as long
as I should be employed about that teadious and troublesome piece of work.

Febr. 7. An Augustine Monk visits the Ambassadors.
the Ambassadors were visited by a Monk, a Roman Catholic, named Ambrosio dos
Anios, born at Lisbon in Portugal. The account he gave of himself, was, that he
came from Tiflis in Georgia, which lies about ten days journey from Scanachie,
where he was Prior of a Monastery of the Order of St. Augustine, and that he had
undertaken that journey out of no other design, than upon the news he had
heard, that a Potent Prince of Germany had sent a solemn Embassy into Persia,
and that he could not imagine, it should be upon any account so much as the
advancement of Christian Religion in those parts: That he had been the more
willing to be at the trouble of that journey, out of the hope he had, that
their Excellencies the Ambassadors, would not take it ill that he had taken the
freedom to wait on them; not only to congratulate their happy arrival in
Persia, but also to serve them in any thing lay in his power: That he had been
seven and twenty years in the Kingdom, and that during so long a Tract of time,
he had not been so negligent in inquiring into the affairs of the Country, and
the humor of the Nation, as that he might not be in some measure serviceable
to them in their Negotiation.

We knew not, upon the first proposal, what to imagine of the intentions of
this Religious Man, and therefore we thought fit to stand as it were upon our
Guard, till that after ten days conversation with him, we really found him
sincere in all his proceedings, insomuch that we made no difficulty to trust
him absolutely in all things. Besides the Portuguez, which was his
Mother Tongue, and the Latin, in which he entertrain'd the Ambassadors, he
understood also the Georgian, the Turkish, and the Persian Languages, for the
attaining of which last, he gave me many excellent directions.

About this time, many of our people were troubled with burning Fevers, which
was a consequence of their abundant drinking of Wine, after the much Water
they had been forced to drink before. The Wine of Persia is very good, but
strong, and our people drunk so freely of it, that the Ambassadors were forced
to forbid the use thereof by a very strict order. There were two and twenty of
them kept their Beds at the same time, but by Gods mercy, and through the
extraordinary care of the Physician, not one dyed.

The same day, A Feast in memory of Haly.
which is, according to the account of the Persians, the 21. day of Ramesan,
they celebrated their Auschur, or solemn Feast, in memory of Haly, their great
Saint and Patron. The Ceremonies and Devotions were performed in a House built
for that purpose, without the City. The Governor, his Calenter, and the other
chief Officers, were in a Gallery of the said House, and opposite to the
Gallery, there was an open Chair, about eight foot high, which was placed under
a piece of Linen Cloth which had been pitched there, A Persian Priest
pleasantly dressed.
for the convenience of the Chatib, that is, their Prelate, who sat in the said
Chair, clad in a blew Garment, which is the Mourning-Colour of that Country. He
spent above two hours in reading in a Book, which they call Machtelnama,
containing the Life and Actions of Haly, singing with a loud and doleful, yet
clear and intelligible Voice, and that without any intermission, unless it were
when he came to some remarkable Passage, or some Moral Sentence, whereof he
only said the first Word, leaving the rest to be sung out by the other Priests,
whereof there stood a great number about the Chair. One of those Priests cried
out at the end of every passage, Luanet Chudai ber kuschendi Aaly bad, that is,
Gods Curse be on him who killed Haly: whereto the whole Assembly answered,
bisch bad kem bad, that is, rather more than less. When he comes to the passage
where Haly said to his Children, (there are some believe he was well skilled in
Judiciary Astrology, and that he foresaw his own Death) that he should not
live long, and that it would not be long ere he were killed by one of his
Domestics, discovering it should be Abdurraman ibni Meltzem, upon which the
Children, with tears in their eyes, entreat him, to be careful of his Person,
and rather to prevent Abdurraman, then suffer them, upon his Death, to become
Orphans, destitute of all Comfort, and exposed to the discretion of their
Enemies; when the Chathib, I say, comes to this place, you shall see the
Persians weep and sob most bitterly; as they do also when the Chathib
represents how Haly was killed in their Metzid, as he was at Prayers, A
Procession.
and the desolate condition his Children were in upon his Death. When the
Chathib has given over Reading, the Chan sends him a Garment of Silk, which he
immediately puts on, and then there were conducted, in Procession, three Camels
carrying Coffins, covered with black Cloth, to represent those of Haly, and
his two Sons, Hassan and Hossein. After that followed two Chests covered with
blew Cloth, in which were the Books and spiritual Treatises written by Haly.
Then came two excellent Horses, having at the Pommel of the Saddles, andupon
the Saddles, several Bows, Arrows, Turbants, and Flaggs. After them marched one
man alone, carrying upon the top of a long pole a kind of Tower or Steeple, in
which there were thrust four Cimiters, but they were covered with so many
Ribbons, and other Toys, that they could hardly be perceived: and at last many
men carrying on their Heads little Boxes covered with Feathers, and Flowers of
several colors, in which the Alchoran lay open.

These last Danced and Leaped, in cadence to a certain doleful Music of
Hawboyes, Timbrels, Flageolets and Tabors. On the other side, many young Boys
Danced and Sung together, clapping one another upon the shoulders, and crying
Heder, Heder, which is the name of Haly, Hassan, Hossein; and with these
Ceremonies they took their way toward the City. Upon this day the Death of
Haly is celebrated all over Persia: but Mahomet, their great Prophet, has no
particular Festival.

The 14. of February, was the new Moon, at which ends the Lent of the Persians,
which began the 16. of January, which according to their account is the first
of Ramesan; but in regard it was the eve of their Sabbath, The Ambassadors
treated by the Chan.
which is Friday, their Ecclesiastics thought fit to continue the Fast till
that day. The next day after the Feast, the Chan made a great Entertainment for
all the Grandees of his Court, to which he invited also the Ambassadors with
their retinue, and treated them very Magnificently.

The 27. An order from the Court for their departure.
came back the Courrier, whom the Chan had dispatched thence ever since the 21.
with express orders for our departure, with the first convenience, for Ispahan.
This good news put some of us into an humor to go a Hunting. The Governor
lent us his excuses, that, some business of importance intervening, he could
not go along with us; however, he sent us his Huntsmen, his Hounds, and his
Hawks; as also a Leopard, which, being Excellently well taught, started with as
much swiftness as a Greyhound, and gave us all the satisfaction Hunting could
afford. He discovered no Hare which he took not, and came on at the least call,
with more command than any Setting Dog, leaping up behind the person who had
the ordering of him. The Chan had in the mean time caused a sumptuous Collation
to be made ready for us in his own Garden, without the City; but the person he
had sent to invite us to pass that way, mist the Company, and overtook us not
till we were coming into the City; so that it being too great a trouble for us
to go then back again, he sent to our quarters some part of the Meat which had
been prepared for our Entertainment.

The first of March, MARCH
which according to their Almanac, called by them Taguim, is the fourteenth of
Scheual, the Persians celebrated another Feast, which they call Chummehater, in
memory of the day, on which Haly took possession of the Estate of his Cousin
and Father-in-law Mahomet. The Chan treated us again this day very
Magnificently, near the River under a Tent, where, during the time of the
Entertainment, he gave us the Divertisements of several sorts of Dances, and
among others that of a Youth of about twenty years of age, who Danced to the
Music of two little Cimbals, which he himself played on excellently well; as
also that of a Moor, or black Arabian, who leaped and danced between the
Porcelane Dishes, wherein the Meat had been brought up, with such exactness,
that he broke not one. Nay, as it should seem, all the people were willing to
contribute to our Divertisement, by the public Acclamations which filled every
street: And the Chan himself would needs give us another trial of his skill at
the Bow. He told us that heretofore he had cut a Hair with his Arrow, at a
considerable distance, and that he would try, whether he could do as much at
the age he was of then, which was forty five years. Having therefore fastened
to a Horses hair one of those Rings, which the Persians make use of to bend
their Bows, and commonly wear them upon their Thumbs, and having caused the Boy
that held it to stand at the distance of above six paces, he cut it twice one
after another with his Arrow. He also, with a Fire-lock, shot an Apple, which
he had caused to be cast into the Air.

In our return to the City, after an Entertainment which had lasted six hours,
all the Officers took occasion, in a spacious plain, to give us a Trial of the
swiftness of their Horses. I must needs confess it is extraordinary, and that
there is no English Horse comes near them: but it is certain withal, that this
is all they teach them. They also gave us the Divertisement of their
Engagements or Horseback, and their manner of Skirmishing with their enemies,
and showed us an incredible and miraculous Activity, not only in casting their
Switches, which, in that Exercise, they made use of instead of Javelins, Riding
with full speed upon those whom they pursued, but also in catching them in
their hands when they were cast at them, and immediately Darting them at the
pursuers. Of all those engaged in that Exercise, the Chan's Master of the Horse
behaved himself the best, and had bestowed on him by way of recompense, one of
the best Horses out of his Master's Stable.

The third of March, Another Festival.
the Persians celebrated another Feast, which they call Tzar Schembesur, that
is, the fourth sad Sabbath, and it is the next Wednesday before the Vernal
Equinox, by which they begin their year; of which they are persuaded, that this
Wednesday is the most unfortunate day. And this, they say, they know not only
by Tradition, but also by Experience, which has discovered to them, that there
never happened any thing but misfortune to them that day. Thence it comes, that
they do not any business that day, they keep their Shops shut, Swear not, nor
make any Debauches; but above all things, take they an especial care, not to
pay away any Money that day, out of a fear, they should be obliged not to do
any thing else all the year after. There are some who spend the whole day in
telling what Money they have in their Houses: others go, without speaking a
word by the way, to the River, for some water, wherewith they sprinkle their
Houses and Household Stuff, thinking by that means to divert the misfortune
which might befall them. If they meet with any one of their acquaintance, as
they return homewards, they cast some water into his face with their hands, or
happily, pour the whole Pitcher full upon him: but this is a kindness they do
only to their best friends, out of a persuasion, that those who are so served,
and have their Clothes all wet, cannot fail being happy all the year after.
Young people that are not Married, find also their Divertisement at this
solemnity, which is, to walk up and down the Streets, or along the River side,
playing upon certain Timbrels of baked Earth, which they carry under their
arms. Others carry great Staves in their hands, and go up to their knees in the
River, to dash those who come to fetch water, either by casting it at them with
their hands, or taking hold of them, to wet them, or to rub their faces with
the borders of their wet Garments, or happily they break the pitchers with their
Staves. These last are looked upon as ill-presaging Birds, so that those who
can keep out of their clutches, think they have avoided many misfortunes that
should have happened to them that year. Upon which account it is, that there
are some, who to avoid meeting with them, go and fetch in their water before
day: but all these fopperies are done only in the morning, for as soon as it is
afternoon, they go a walking, and bestow the time in any of their other
ordinary Exercises. The Author of the Preface before the High Dutch Translation
of the Kalusthan, says, that this Festival is Dedicated to Saint John Baptist,
and that it is in Commemoration of his Baptism, that the Persians do all those
Ceremonies. True it is indeed, that the Persians have a certain Veneration for
that Saint, and that they go, to this day, upon Pilgrimage to his Sepulcher at
Damas, and it may be, that was the intention of him who instituted this Feast;
but now, there is no track to be seen of any such thing.

March the tenth, The first day of the Year.
that is, the 20. according to our style, (for the Author means in all places
the old) they celebrated the first day of their year, which they call Nauras,
with great solemnity. For though they commonly count their years from the
Hegira, or the day of Mahomet's flight, from Meca to Medina, which is their
Epoche, and co-incident with the 16 of July, Which consists of 12, Lunar
months.
according to our Almanacks; yet so it is, that, their year, consisting only of
twelve Lunar months, and consequently being eleven days shorter than ours,
they take a certain day for the beginning of their year, which is that, on
which the Sun enters Aries, at the Vernal Equinox, in what quarter of the Moon
soever it happens; but of this we shall give a further account elsewhere.

The Ambassadors sent some of us to the Castle to complement the Chan upon the
beginning of the new year, and to wish him a good one. We found him at Table,
having near him the Minatzim, or Astrologer, who rose up ever and anon, and
taking his Astrolabe, went to observe the Sun, and at the very moment that the
Sun came to the Equator, he published the new year, the beginning whereof was
celebrated by the firing of some great Guns, both from the Castle and the
City-Walls, and at the same time, there might be heard a Music of all sorts of
instruments. Opposite to the Chan sat one of their Orators, whom they call
Kasiechuan, who made an Oration, intermixed with more Faces and Gestures than
any Player can show on the Stage, speaking only of the Victories obtained by
the Kings of Persia over the Turks, the Vsbeques, and other enemies of that
Nation. The remainder of the day was merrily spent in Eating and Drinking,
whereof we, who were sent upon the Complement, participated sufficiently, for
the Chan would needs oblige us to sit down at Table with him. The Festival
lasted till the next day, and then the Chan made a great Entertainment for the
Ambassadors, whereto he invited also the Monk I spoke of before.

March 20. the Chan and the Calenter came to see the Ambassadors. They were
both gotten sufficiently Drunk, and the occasion of their Visit was this, that
the Chan being to take a Journey (as he would make us believe) and not likely
to return before our departure thence, he came to tell us, that he thought it
unhandsome to go without taking leave of the Ambassadors. He brought along with
him his Hakim, or Physician, who had also some smattering in Astrology, as most
of that Profession have. His Hakim told him, after he had observed the Sky a
while, that the Stars signified it was an unfortunate hour to go into the
Lodgings of the Ambassadors, and upon that Prediction, they sat down in the
Court and fell a-drinking. The Chan having taken notice of one of the
Ambassador Crusius's Pages, a beautiful and well-timbred Lad, he desired him to
come near him; which when he had, addressing his speech to the Physician, he
asked him, whether he did not think him a fine Boy, and wished he had been his
his own Son. The Physician, having taken another view of the Heavens, though
the Air were not very clear, and that it was not near night, made answer, that
if, after he had earnestly viewed the Boy, and by that means Imprinted an Idea
of him in his imagination, he went and lay with a Woman, he would certainly get
as handsome a Boy as that was. This the Chan and his Company believed as an
Oracle; insomuch, that having for some time well considered the Page, he got on
Horseback and departed.

There was at Schamachie a Persian slave, named Faruch, who being a Muscovite
by Birth, had been stolen and sold into Persia, where he had been circumcised,
while he was yet very young. He delighted much to be among us, because there
were in our retinue some persons who could talk with him in his own Language:
insomuch that being, by his often coming to our quarters, grown familiar with
some, he came one day to tell us, that we should have a care of our Persian
Interpreter, Our Persian Interpreter proves a Renegade.
whose name was George Rustan; for, to his knowledge, he had written to some of
his Friends at Ispahan, to this effect; That, though he had lived a long time
among Christians, yet were they not to infer thence, that he had abjured the
Mahumetane Religion; but that he should ere long be with them, to give them
further assurances of the contrary. Rustan was a Persian born, and had, not
many years before, traveled into England, where he had been Baptized. Some
years after, he went into Muscovy, where we found him, in the English Residents
retinue, who was his Godfather; and coming to hear that we were to go into
Persia, he made so many friends, and was so importunate with the Resident, that
at last, we gave him leave to go along with us as an Interpreter. Yet was he
not received into our retinue, till he had obliged himself by a Writing under
his hand, to come back with us, and by many solemn protestations assured us,
that his going along with us was out of no other design, than to look after and
receive what was due to him of his Patrimony, that he might have somewhat to
Trade withal as a Merchant at his return. Accordingly, we were no sooner come
to Ardebil, but we found the truth of what we had been told by Faruch: for,
Rustan, as soon as he was got to a place, where he might expiate his pretended
sin, and declare himself with safety, he went to the Sepulcher of their great
Saint, Schich-Sefi, where he did his Devotions as a right Mahumetane: which
that he had done, he got a formal Certificate. We secured him at Ispachan, but
he made his escape, and got into the Sanctuary, which they call Alla-Capi. That
done, he cast himself at the feet of the King, and the Seter, or Chief of their
Sect, expressed his repentance in tears, begged Pardon, put himself under the
Kings protection, and remained in Persia.

March the 22. Father Ambrosio took leave of us, being to return to his
Monastery at Tiflis.

March 24. the Chan sent away the New Years gifts, which the Governors are
wont to send the King at the beginning of the year, and which were at this time
so much the greater, by how much the disgrace and death of his Brother imposed
upon him a necessity of Courting the Kings favor. The Present consisted in a
certain number of excellent Horses, richly Harnessed, several Camels laden
with Russia Leather, several rich Stuffs, and thirty bags full of Swan's down:
but what augmented the value of this rich Present, was a great number of
handsome Boys and Girls, whom he sent along with it. The Chan went himself out
of the City, with an intention, as was given out, to conduct the Present two or
three leagues: but he returned not, leaving, by that means, upon the Calenter,
the trouble of providing all things for the prosecution of our Journey.
Immediately after the Chan's departure, there was sent to our quarters the sum
of sixty Tumains, which amount to about a thousand Crowns, by way of
re-embursement for the charges we had been at during our stay at Schamachie.

But, in regard it amounted not to one half of what we might expect, according
to the allowance which was assigned us at our arrival, The Ambassadors
re-embursed their expense.
the Ambassador Brugman, sending us to the Calenter about other business,
charged us to ask him by the way, whether it were upon any order from the King,
or out of the Governors kindness toward us, that the said sum had been sent
us, and to let him know, that though it was not the intention of the
Ambassadors to receive any money, yet since the Calenter had sent it under his
own Seal, they would carry it so sealed to Ispahan: That they could not forbear
complaining of the injury had been done them in keeping them there so long,
contrary to the orders they had received from Court, to take the speediest
course they could for their departure.

The Calenter made answer, that it lay not upon him to maintain the
Ambassadors, and to furnish them with money: That it was not to him their
Master had sent them, but to the King, and that it was accordingly by his
Majesty's appointment, that he had sent the foresaid sum: That he could not
hinder them from making their complaints, but that they should advantage
themselves nothing thereby: That, for the clearing of himself, he would produce
their acquittance at the Court, and that the Chan and himself had supplied them
out of their own, till the Kings Order was brought them: That he was much
troubled at the inconveniences which the Ambassadors had been put to, during
the long stay they had made in that City, but that it was not their fault,
since it had been impossible, in so short a time, to get Horses and Wagons
enough, for so many people, and so much Baggage, entreating us, ere we went
away, to honor him so far as to Dine with him once more, which we did.

^ March the 27. there were brought us sixty Wagons for the Baggage, and for
the conveyance of some of the Retinue who were sick, or not able to ride, and a
hundred and twenty Sadle-Nags. We sent away our Steward with all the Baggage
that night.

But ere we take our leave quite of a place where we had sojourned so long,
Scamachie described*
it will not be amiss to give here a short account of the City of Scamachie.
Father Bizarrus, in his History of Persia, and Joseph Barbaro, in his Travels,
call it sometimes Summachia, sometimes Sumachia, or Samachia, and the Spaniards
write it Xamachi. Some Geographers place it in their Maps below Derbent, others
place it above, and there are also some who put it in twice, for fear of
failing. Its true name, according to the pronunciation of the Persians, is
Scamachie, and it lies forty German Leagues, or six great days journey from
Derbent: it being supposed a man takes the Mountain way, which is very much
about. For if a man goa-foot, or on horseback along the Caspian Sea, by the
City of Bakuje, and the Mountain Lahatz, where the King has a place for the
receipt of customs upon foreign Commodities, he may easily travel it in two
days. The Camels ordinarily take the latter way, and perform their journey in
four or five, and at most in six or seven days, according to the burden they
carry. Scamachie is the chief City of that noble Province, which the ancients
called Media Atropatia, or Media Minor, and which is now called Schiruan; which
is the more to be observed, in respect of their mistake, who place this City in
Hyrcania. It lies at thirty four degrees, forty minutes longitude, and at forty
degrees, fifty minutes latitude, in a valley between two Mountains, which hide
it so, as that it is hardly seen till a man comes to the very Gate. The
Persians affirm, it was built by Schiruan Schach, and that it was heretofore
much larger than it is now, since there were in it five thousand houses. It was
destroyed by the Turks in the time of King Abas, who perceiving the Emperor of
the Turks took in only the strongest places, thereby to secure his Conquests,
and minded not open places, and considering withal, that so many strong and
fortified places were rather a burden than an advantage to him, and being in
the midst of his Kingdom were hard to keep, ordered the pulling down of the
Walls on the South Side of the City, where they were strongest. He took the
same course with the Cities of Tauris, Nachtzuan, Kentza, etc.

This South-part of Scamachie makes as (...) were a City by it self, as being
divided from the North-part, which is still compassed with a strong Wall, by a
little plain, which serves for a common Marketplace to both. The Persians
affirm, that the Grand Seigneur having taken the City of Scamachie, took the
stones from all the Sepulchers, and therewith repaired the Walls of it. The
North-side of the City lies at the foot of a little Mountain, and is somewhat,
but not much bigger than the other, containing but about nine hundred houses.
It has but a poor Wall about it, which being but low, and having but a
wretched Ditch, hinders not but that a man may come into the City at any time.
Its streets and houses. Its Inhabitants, their Language, etc.
The City has five Gates; its streets are narrow, and the houses low, and most
built of Mortar and Earth. There are very few of Brick, or Freestone. The
Inhabitants are partly Armenians, partly Georgians: who have each their
particular Language, so as that they would not understand one another, if they
did not make use of the Turkish, which is common to both, not only in Schiruan,
but also all over Persia. Their greatest Commerce lies in Stuffs of Silk and
Cotton, whereof there are such quantities made, that Women, nay, very Children
make a shift to get their living there, by spinning and preparing the Silk and
Cotton for the workmen. Most of their shops are in the South-part of the City,
where there is also a Basar, or Marketplace, into which abutt many streets,
which are all covered, for the convenience of the Merchants. Not far from this
Marketplace, there are two Storehouses, containing many Chambers and
Galleries, for the entertainment of foreign Merchants, who sell by wholesale,
and for the disposal of their Merchandises. One is called Schach Caravansera,
and is the place appointed for the Muscovites, who bring thither Tin, Russia
Leather, Copper, Furrs, and other Commodities. The other, which is called Losgi
Caravansera, was built for the Tartars of Circassia, who do not bring their
Commodities thither, but lead them, they being only Horses, Women, young Lads,
and handsome Maids, wherewith they Trade among themselves in their own Country,
where they steal them upon the Frontiers of Muscovy. The Jews, who have also
some part of this latter Storehouse assigned them, upon this account, that the
Muscovites will not admit them into their Company, bring thither, from
Tabefferahn, the best Woollen Tapistry in the whole Country, whereof there is
brought into Europe but the refuse. Stuffs of Silk and Cotton, nay, Gold and
Silver Brocadoes, as also Bows, Arrows, and Cymitars, are sold there at a very
reasonable rate.

In our return from Persia, the Muscovian Envoy Alexei Savinouits woulds needs
go into the Storehouse belonging to the Tartars, and being a person of a
pleasant humor, he fell a cheapning of a Boy, about fifteen or sixteen years
of age, who was handsome enough, and asked the Tartar what price he set him at,
who made answer, he should have him for a hundred Crowns. Alexei, who had no
mind to buy, proffered him two and thirty; but the Tartar laughed at him, and
giving the Boy a clap upon the buttocks, told the Muscovite, that that very
part of him was worth more.

There are also in the City three Hamams, that is, Baths, or public Stoves,
the use whereof is as ordinary in Persia as Muscovy. There are two which are
common to both men and women, but with this distinction, that the women go in
only in the daytime, and the men in the night. The third which they call Hamam
Schach is only for the men. Hard by this third Bath there are two great Trees,
for which the Persians have a great Veneration, as having been planted by one
of their Saints, named Schich-Marith, who is interred not far thence, in a
Metzid, or Church, where there are greater Devotions done than in other Metzids
about the City, wherein there are six in all. The Revenue of this Bath is spent
in Luminaries, Clothes, and other things necessary about the holy Sepulcher.

The Chan, The Chan's charge.
or Governor of the City of Scamachie, has also the command of the whole
Province, jointly with the Calenter, or King's Lieutenant. The Governor is
entrusted with the Administration of Justice, as also the disposal of things
Civil and Military, upon which last account, he is obliged to maintain a
thousand men, out of the Revenue of his Government, and to be in a readiness to
march, upon the first order he receives to that purpose. The Kings Lieutenant
has the oversight of his Revenue, and disposes of the Crown Lands, but is not
obliged to go to the Wars: on the contrary he is left in the Province, whereof
he has the sole command during the absence of the other. The Chan's name was
Areb, and he kept a very noble Court, though he were a person of very low
extraction, son to a Peasant of the Village of Scerab, between Tauris and
Ardebil: but the lowness of his extraction was recompensed in the great
endowments he was Master of. The Persians are very indifferent as to a man's
birth, provided he be otherwise a person of courage and worth, and Areb had
much of both, and had acquired so great reputation by his valor, that
Schach-Sefi made him Controller of his Ordinance, when he besieged Eruan, which
the Turks had taken from the Persians. He discharged that trust so well, and in
all other things answered the opinion the King had conceived of him, that he
bestowed on him then the Government of Scamachie, which became vacant by the
death of Terruch-Chan, who was killed in the siege we spoke of before. Areb
took no small pleasure in showing us the wounds he had received in that War,
and in telling us how many Turks heads he had brought to his King, who sent him
continually upon parties and forlorns, against the Army, which was coming to
relieve that place.

The Governor and his Lieutenant had both very graceful and bold aspects, and
with that all the requisite qualities in Commanders, save that they were both
so addicted to Wine, that they were seldom met fasting: but the Governor had
still this advantage over his Lieutenant, that he was more apt to be overcome
by it than the other.

I may boldly and truly say, that, in all this City, I found not the least
track of Antiquity. For, though I took abundance of pains to find out that
great Tower, whereof John Cartwright an English Gentleman, speaks, in the
relation of his Travels into Persia, where he says it is built of Flint and
Freestone, and that they have thrust many dead men's skulls between the stones,
yet could not find any such thing, or learn any news of it. It Is true, I found
two men's heads cut in the stone, at one certain place of the City-wall, but no
body could tell me what they Represented. It is also true, that, not far from
the City, there are to be seen the ruins of a Castle, which had some time been
fortified, as the same Author says elsewhere. For it is certain, that there
are the remainders of a very strong place within half a League of the City, and
that toward the North-side, upon a very high, and very steepy Mountain, which
is called Kale Kulestan.

I had the curiosity to go up to the top of the said Mountain, and found
nothing whole, but a very noble great Cellar, and near it one of the deepest
Wells that ever I saw, both compassed with the best freestone that ever was
put in any work. We were told that that Province had heretofore had its
particular Kings, and that Schiruan Scach had built that Castle, upon the
account of one of his Chasses, or Concubines, who gave it the name, and that it
was Alexander the Great that destroyed that noble Structure, which none ever
after offered to repair. I am of opinion, that the Castle derived its name from
the neighboring Valley, in as much as, having running through it a Brook,
which makes it one of the most delightful places in the World, and that being
in the Spring covered with an infinite number of Tulips, which nature her self
is pleased to produce there, sit is not to be much admired, that they called
the place Kale Kulestan, that is, the Fort, or Castle of Roses, since the
Persians give the name of Kulestan, or Valley of Roses to all those places,
where they would have it expressed, that there is an extraordinary
pleasantness. So that there is no necessity of seeking the Etymology of that
name in Fables, or in things which might have happened before the time of
Alexander the Great, whereof the Persians have had nothing transmitted to them.

Near Kulestan, Sepulchers of Saints.
between the Fort and the City of Scamachie, there are also two Chapels, upon a
Mountain, which is higher than that we spoke of last. In the greater of the
two, which is built in the form of a Parallelogram, there is a very high
Sepulcher to be seen, and all about it several pieces of Cloth and Rags of all
sorts of colors, with Rods of Iron, whose ends are like the tops of Arrows,
and they are fastened or tied to the Sepulcher with a silk string. In the other,
there were two Sepulchers, adorned much after the same manner with the former.
These are the Tombs of some of their Saints, near which they often do their
Devotions.

From this last Chapel there is a descent into a spacious Vault, The Tomb of a
Princess of Persia.
where is to be seen the Sepulcher of one of their Kings Daughters, named
Amelek Kanna, of whom they relate, that she had so great an aversion against
marriage, that her Father desirous she should match with a Tartar-Prince, she
killed her self, to prevent it. The same Cartwright says, that the young maids
of those parts go once a year to the Sepulcher of this Princess, to bewail her
death. It is possible, that, in his time, some such thing might be done; but
let it be taken for certain, that that custom is now absolutely abolished, and
that it is not Devotion, but the Heat, which obliges the Inhabitants, in the
height of Summer, to retire to this Mountain, as also to Kulestan, for the
greater coolness of the air: and that it is out of such a consideration, that
they do their Devotions near these Saints more frequently in that season, than
at any other time of the year. Tradesmen, and persons of mean condition, stay
there only in the day time, and at night return to the City; but the Chan, the
Calenter, and persons of quality have their Tents pitched there, and remove not
thence during the three hottest Months of the year. During which time they
also drive their Cattle toward the Mountain of Elbours, where they find not
only a more temperate air, but also as good Meadow-ground as any in all Persia.
That Mountain is part of Mount Caucasus, and it is of such height, that though
it be at a very great distance from thence, inasmuch as it lies on one side of
Tabristhan, toward Georgia, yet may it be discovered from Kale Kulesthan, and
the other neighboring Mountains of Scamachie. It was upon this Mountain of
Elbours, The perpetual f^^e of the ancient Persians.
as it is reported, that the Persians kept and anciently Worshipped their
perpetual Fire: but now there is not the least track to be seen of it, neither
there, nor near Iescht, though Texeira, and those who follow him, would have us
believe the contrary. True indeed it is, that there are, to this day, in the
Indies, certain Religious men, who have a Veneration for the Fire, and keep it
in with the same care that the Persians did heretofore; as we shall take
occasion to show in the subsequent Travels of Mandelslo into those parts. But
it is time we return to the pursuance of our Journey.

The Baggage being sent away the 27. of March in the Evening, The Ambassadors
presecute their journey.
the Ambassadors followed the next day, and were upon their way two hours
before day. The Ambassador Brugman, who was dis-satisfy'd with the Treatment we
had received at Scamachie, would not permit the Calenter should have the honor
to conduct us, but gave order we should dislodge and depart without any noise,
and that all should go, while it was yet Night, afoot out of the Gates, where
we took Horse. Having Traveled about two Leagues, we found a Scotch-man of our
retinue, whose name was Alexander Chambers, dead in the Wagon, though, at the
Loading of the Baggage, he seemed to be so well, as that it was conceived he
might have gone through the Journey, which occasioned us to make a Halt, to
dispose of the Body into the ground. We buried him at the bottom of a little
Hill, covered all over with Hyacinths, on the left hand, near the Highway.

Having got half a League further, we came to the Sepulcher of another Saint,
named Pyr Mardechan, in the Country of Fakerlu, where we were forced to take up
our Quarters in the open Air, and without Tents, making a shift in that manner
to pass over one of the sharpest Nights we had in all our Journey, by reason of
the Storm, which came attended by Lightning, Thunder, Wind, Rain, Snow and
Frost; the Ambassador Brugman being desirous to outvy the Thonder, with our
Artillery, which he caused to be several times discharged. The next day, the
same Ambassador having observed, that several pieces of Canon were left behind,
because there were not Camels enough to bring them away, The demeanor of one
of the Ambassadors.
and that the Horses were too weak to draw them, would needs fall out with the
Mehemander, and was so transported with Passion, that he came to Railing, and
Spetting when he named the Chan and the Calenter, and said that the Chan had
not been so good as his Word, and had ly'd in all he said, but that he should
resent it, and that he would either have his Life, or the other should have his.

Some were of opinion, that he would stay there till the pieces we had left at
Scamachie were brought up: but, upon the Remonstrances of some others, that the
place was too incommodious; that we had nothing over our Heads; that we should
want both Wood and Provisions, and that the sick Persons would not be able to
endure the Cold, it was resolved we should go on, which we did, and came, after
two Leagues travel to a Caravansera, called Tach^si, and having gone two
Leagues further, we were got to the top of the Mountain of Schamachie.

Upon the top of the said Mountain there is a fair Plain, and an even and
fertile ground, though in Winter, and at the beginning of the Spring, Rain,
Snow and hard Weather are no strangers there, and bring the same inconveniences
along with them, as they do in some parts of Europe. But as soon as we were
come to the brow or descent of the Mountain, we saw a clear Sky, a cheerful
Sun, and discovered a Country wholly covered with Verdure, in a spacious Plain,
which reaching above ten Leagues, without any excrescency so much as to the
height of two foot, represented to us, as it were in a Map, the Course and
Conjunction of those two Rivers, Araxes and Cyrus, which the Writings of
Ancient Historians and Geographers have so highly celebrated. This descent was
above half a league, but easy, and not very steepy; so that those who went
fore-most, looking behind them, saw the last of our company descending as it
were out of the Clouds. We took up our Lodging that night in certain Ottacks,
or Huts, which the Tartarian Shepherds had set up there near their Flocks.

Mar. 30. we got four leagues, along the Plain, as far as the Village of
Kasilu. We met, in our way, Nomades.
with a company of Sheep-herds and Cow-herds, who marched with their Houses and
all their Household Stuff, their Wives and Children, all as it were shuffled
together in Wagons, or packed up upon Horses, Cows, Asses, and other Creatures,
not ordinarily used in carriage, after a very odd manner, and such as
represented a very Fantastic kind of Transmigration.

Ever after that day, we had nothing but fair weather, a Sky clear, and without
any cloudiness, save that when we traveled over the Mountains, we might, in
the Morning, see the Heavens a little over-cast; but as soon as the Sun
appeared, all was dispelled.

March the last, we traveled two leagues, along the River side, to a Village
named Tzauat, upon the right side of the Kur, or the River, which the Ancients
called Cyrus, all the Houses whereof were built of Reeds and Canes, The
conjunction of Cyrus and Aras.
and covered with Earth. About a quarter of a league above this Village, is the
Conflux, or meeting of this River with that of Araxes, which is now called
Aras, at thirty nine degrees, fifty four minutes Elevation; the Cyrus coming
from West-north-west, and the Aras from South-west. These Rivers after they are
met together are about four hundred paces in breadth. Their water is black and
deep, and the brink on both sides pretty high. All along the River side, and
all the Meadow grounds of the Province of Mokan, were covered with Liquorice,
the stalk whereof is many times as big as a man's arm, and the juice, beyond
all comparison, sweeter and more pleasant than that of Europe.

The River Kur serves for a common Frontier to the two Provinces of Schiruan
and Mokan, The Frontiers of Schiruan and Mokan
and there is a Bridge of Boats over it, near Tzawat. We passed over it the
second of April, APRIL.
and found, on the other side of the River, another Mehemandar, whom the Chan
or Governor of Ardebil had sent to meet us, and to conduct us in the pursuance
of our Journey, as far as the chief City of his Government. He had brought
along with him, for the carriage of us and the Baggage, forty Camels, and three
hundred Horses: in regard, the way we were then to come into being very bad, by
reason of the continued Mountains and Valleys, we could not have made any use
of our Wagons. He supplied us with Provisions in abundance, allowing us, every
day, ten Sheep, thirty Batmans of Wine, and Rice, Butter Eggs, Almonds,
Raisins, Apples, and all sorts of Fruits as much as we pleased. On Sunday,
after Sermon, we departed, taking our way along the River Aras, for above a
League. We lodged that night within half a League of the River, at the entrance
of a great Heath in Hutts, which the Mehemandar had purposely ordered to be
provided, for our convenience.

April the third, we passed over the Heath, which reaches about four Farsangs,
or Persian Leagues, Ahu, a kind of Deer.
and we were lodged again that night in Hutts, as we had been the night before.
We had seen all that day in great Herds, a kind of Deer, which the Turks call
Tzeiran, and the Persians, Ahu, which have some resemblance to our Hearts, save
that they are rather Red than Fawn, and their Horns have no Brow-anclers, but
are smooth, and lie backward like those of wild Goats. They are very swift, and
there are not any of that kind, as we were told, but what are in the Province
of Mokan, and about Schamachie, Karrabach, and Merrage.

April 4. we were forced to leave the way of the Heath, though much the nearer,
and to take another, which brought us, by a great compass of above six Leagues,
to a Torrent called Balharu, out of this consideration, that if we had
traveled along the Heath, we should have wanted water, Tortoises.
both for our selves and our Horses. We found in that place abundance of
Tortoises, which had made their Nests along the side of the Torrent, and in the
Sand of the little Hills thereabouts, but all exposed to the Midday Sun, so to
give the greater heat to their Eggs, which cannot be hatched but in the Hot,
The Inhabitants.
or rather burning Sand. Perceiving some men on the other side of the Torrent,
some of our people had the curiosity to cross it, to observe their manner of
Life: Their Children were stark Naked, and Aged persons had nothing about them
but a shirt or smock of Cotton. The poor people entertained us very kindly, and
brought us some Milk. They thought that the King of Persia had sent for us, to
serve him in his Wars against the Turk, out of which persuasion, they prayed
for our good success, that God would make their and our Enemy fly before us, as
far as Stamp^l, that is, Constanti^ople.

April the 5. we overcame the Heath of Mokan, and came to the Mountain and
Country of Betzirwan, Betzirwan
after we had twelve several times crossed one little River, which lay so many
times in our way. We got that day five leagues, and lodged at night in a
Village called Schechm^r at. Most of the Houses were built at the foot of the
Mountain, and some within the Mountain, and were covered with Reeds: but we
found not any Body in the Village, for those who went along with the Chan of
Schamachie's Present, for Ispahan, had made the Country people believe, us they
passed that way, that we were a sort of Barbarous people, who thought it not
enough to take and ransack all, but did also abuse and beat such as entertained
us: upon which account of us, they were all gone to hide themselves in the
Rocks of the neighboring Mountain. There were some of our company, who got up
a very high Mountain to see what Simples they could find there, and to take a
view of the adjacent Country: but they found not any there, and the other
nearer Mountains, which were higher than that we were upon, absolutely deprived
us of the sight of the Champain.

They met not with any thing remarkable there, save that upon the very top of
the Mountain, there was a pleasant Spring, near which we saw coming out of the
clefts of the Rock a kind of Crabb, which some among us, who had never seen any
before, took for some venomous Creature. The Author is of opinion, that it is a
Seafish; but he is mistaken, for it is properly no other animal than that
which in Latin is called Cancer, is found in Rivers, and is of a different
species from the common Sea-crabb, which is called Acastus. We sat down by the
Spring-side, and, in what Liquor nature had furnished the place with, drunk to
our Friends in Germany.

April 6. We could not possibly get above two Leagues, over Mountains and
Rocks, where we saw a great number of Fig Trees, which the Earth produced there
without any Cultivation. We came at night to a ruined Village, called Tisle;
but ere we had quite taken up our Quarters and unloaded the Baggage, word was
brought us, that it was the Plague, which, the Autumn before, had consumed
(...) the Inhabitants of that place; whereupon we immediately left it. The
Ambassadors caused a Tent to be pitched in the fields, but all the rest of the
retinue had, at first, no other covering over their Heads than the Sky, till
the Mehemandar had sent for some Tartarian Huts, Tartarian Hutts.
which were brought late in the night loaded upon Oxen. These kind of Huts are
made of several pieces of Wood, which are fastened together at the ends, so as
they may be taken a-sunder, or set together in a short time. The Sieur
Vchterits, who had stayed a while in the Village, to see the Baggage laden and
conveyed thence, coming to the Ambassadors* Tent, was so railed at by the
Ambassador Brugman, who reproached him that he came from an Infected House, to
bring the Plague among them, that he fell into a Fever.

There were some in the Company, who finding the weather somewhat close and
cold, went and locked themselves up in a house, where they made a good fire,
and spent the time merrily with the Wine they had kept the day before,
diverting themselves, and singing to drive away Melancholy, and to forget the
froward humor of the Ambassador Brugman, which they were as much afraid of as
the unwholesome air. The Indians had begun the building of a Caravansera in that
place, for the convenience of Commerce, which was grown to a considerable
height; but the Plague had hindered them from finishing it.

The 7. Ill weather,
we had a very sad days journey of it, being forced, in a continual trot, to
travel above ten leagues, without ever baiting, in the cold, the wind, and the
snow, which not only disheartened our people, many whereof fell sick, but lay
so heavy upon the Camels, that diverse of them fell down under their burdens.
There is in these parts abundance of Absynthium, or Wormwood, A ven^^^ous Herb*
and we were told, that the Herb of it is so venomous, that if Horses or any
other Creature eat thereof, they die immediately, upon which account it was,
that we durst not unbit that day. About noon, we came in sight of a
Caravansera, called Aggis, the structure whereof is of the noblest kind we had
seen. The King sends another Conductor to meet the Ambassadors.
Not far from it, we met a Persian, who was excellently well mounted, and
attended by two servants, who told us, that the King had sent him to be our
Mehemandar, to take order for our subsistence, and to Conduct us with the
soonest to the Court. We lodged that night in a Village called Tzanlu, at the
foot of a Mountain, where we found excellent Gardens, and abundance of
fruit trees, but no Wood for firing, insomuch that we were forced to make use
of Cow Dung, Hors-dung, and Camels-dung. We sent away that day our Forrager, to
take up Quarters for us at Ardebil.

The 8. having broke our fast, we got on Hors-back, and after we had traveled
three leagues along the Mountain of Tzizetlu, we came to the River Karasu,
which rises out of the Mountain of Bakru, in the Country of Kilan. We crossed
it near the Village of Samajan, over a very fair stone bridge, containing six
noble Arches, which were in all thirty eight fathom in length. About half a
league thence, we came to the end of that day's journey, to a Village called
Thabedar, two little leagues from Ardebil, where we stayed that night. The next
day, being Easter Day, we saw how the Inhabitants dawb the VValls of their
Houses with Dung, that the Sun may the sooner dry it, and make it combustible:
but we were also in this place terribly persecuted with Fleas and Lice, and
other nasty Vermin, wherewith we were in a manner covered.

The 9. we Celebrated our Easter, beginning the Festival with the firing of our
great Guns, and small shot, which we ordered to be discharged thrice. That
done, we had a Sermon, and did our Devotions.

About noon we were visited by our new Mehemandar, whose name was Netzefbce; he
was a person of an excellent good humor. He came to Complement us upon
occasion of the Festival, and brought us a Present of five fishes dried in the
Sun, a dish, full of Bread, Pomegranates, Apples, and a sort of Pears I had
never seen before, fashioned like a Citron, and full of a very pleasant juice,
and having a sweet scent, pickled Cowcumbers, preserved Garlic, and
Schiras-wine, which is the most esteemed of any that grows in Persia.

April 10. being Easter-Monday: we made our entrance into Ardebil, for the most
part with the same Ceremonies, but with greater Pomp and Magnificence, than we
had done at Scamachie. About noon, we met with a party of Horse, which having
saluted, and taken a view of us, immediately returned toward the City.

Near the Village of Kelheran, The entrance of the Ambassadors into Ardebil.
(which is so noble a place, that viewing, at a distance, its Steeples, or
Towers, whereof there are a very great number, and they make a very great show,
in regard they are built of stones of several colors, we took it for the City
it self, though they are distant one from the other above half a league) we met
with, in the head of a body of Horse, the Calenter of Ardebil, whose name was
Taleb Chan, an aged, and very spare man. Having saluted the Ambassadors, he rid
on one side of them. Having passed by the Village, we saw in a spacious Plain,
abundance of horse and foot, who opened to make us way. Some paces thence, we
saw crossing the fields toward us at the head of a Brigade of above a thousand
Horse, the Governor of Ardebil, whose name was Kelbele Chan. He was a low man,
but of a good aspect and pleasant humor. After the Complements reciprocally
past between him and the Ambassadors, he rode in between them. Before our
Troop, there marched two youths clad in Sheepskins of several colors, upon
their clean skirts, and carrying each of them upon the top of a long and very
slender pole, an Orange. The poles, we were told, were made of a Date-tree.

These youths read and sung, out of a Book, certain Verses made in honor of
Mahomet, Aly, and Schach Sefi. They were Sons or Disciples to a certain
Abdalla, of whom we shall speak hereafter. After them came others, who were
clothed in white, and had a wonderful Art in imitating the Notes and singing
of Nightingales and other birds. On both sides marched the Timbrels and
Hawboies; in some places there were people dancing and singing at the same
time, and at others were some dancing after another manner. Some cast their
caps up into the air, and caught them again with cries and exclamations of joy.
There were some danced with little Garlands about their heads, much like those
we had seen at Scamachie, when they celebrated there, the death of Aly. Near
the City stood the Guards, in two files, having their Bows and Arrows in their
hands, Coats of Mail about their bodies, and their heads covered with little
Caps like Calottes, which they call Aratskin, in which they had placed
abundance of Feathers, the ends whereof, some thrust through their Caps, into
the skin. Many of them were naked down to the waste, and though they had the
flesh of their Arms and Breasts pierced with Daggers or Ponyards, yet did they
not seem sensible of any pain thereat; whence we inferred there might be
something of Charm in it, and that they were Sorcerers, there being abundance
that deserve that name in Persia. There was also a Company of Indians, who as
we passed by, saluted us, after their way, with a low inclination of the head,
putting their hands to their breasts. When we were come somewhat near the City,
there was so great a confluence of people, that we could not get a hundred
paces forward without making a halt; insomuch that they were forced to drive
them away with Cudgels and Bulls-pizzels, so to make them give way. And within
the City, all the Windows, Houses-tops, Steeples, and Trees, were full of
those, who came from all parts to see our passage through it.

The Governor brought us, through a spacious Garden, into a fair Summer House,
to which there were ten stairs to get up, The Governor gives them a Collation.
and treated us with a sumptuous Collation, in a very stately Gallery;
honoring all those who came up with the Ambassadors so far as to present, to
every one of them with his own hands, a Vessel full of Wine, while all the rest
of the Retinue were treated below, in a Tent, which had been purposely pitched
there to that end. The Collation was accompanied with the best Music the
Country could afford, as also with a Dance performed by their Ochtzi, or
Archers, who dancing, in cadence, with their Bows in their hands, represented a
kind of Ball, which their exactness of the observance of time made more
delightful and divertive, than had been the singing of those two youths, the
sons of Abdalla, who with their Orenges in their hands, very seriously
celebrated the praises of their Prophet. After the Collation and Divertisement,
the Ambassadors were conducted to very spacious Lodgings, which had been taken
up for them in one of the noblest parts of the City, which Lodgings had
sometime belonged to Sara Chutza, high Chancellor of Persia. The rest of the
Retinue were Lodged not far from them, in the neighborhood, where they were
well accommodated, by those into whose houses they were received.

This Summer House, being one of the noblest Structures I ever saw, deserves I
should give in this place a more particular description of it. The Chan's House
described.
Sulfagar Chan, the Predecessor of Kelbele Chan, in the Government of Ardebil,
a Person of infinite wealth, had built it, according to a model he had brought
out of Turkey. The figure of it was Octagonal, and it was three Stories, so
raised, that Art had not left any thing to be desired. Every story had its
Fountains, which cast their water higher than any part of the House. The Walls
were built of a sort of Glittering stones, of all Colors, Blew, Green, Red,
and of all sorts of Figures, and all the Floors were covered with the richest
Tapistry the Country could afford. All about the House there was a spacious
Gallery, all built with Marble, and adorned with Painting, representing Flowers
and Leaves. At one of the corners of that Gallery, there was a little Couch or
Chair of State, four foot square, covered with Embroidered Tapistry, having in
the midst a Quilt wrought with Gold and Silk, The veneration the Persians have
for their Prince*
to signify, that the King, passing one day through Ardebil, had rested
himself there; which made the place so Venerable, that, to the end none should
come near it, it was encompassed with an Iron rail. The said Sulfagar Chan had
built also another House of Pleasure or Summer House, in a great Garden, near a
Stone Bridge, without the City; but at the time of our Travels that way, it lay
desolate, as indeed it had been ever since the Death of Sulfagar, who had been
Executed, upon the instigation of Kartzogar, General of the Persian Army. The
other House, which was within the City, had been bestowed by the King upon
Kelbele Chan, to be enjoyed by him during his Life.

The next day after our arrival, Thaberick*
which was April 11. there was brought the Ambassadors from Schich-Sefi's
Kitchen, the Thaberick; which is a certain quantity of Meat, sent in for three
meals, to such great Lords, and other Persons of quality, as come into that
City, according to a pious Institution, which has been observed about the Body
of Schich-Sefi, Author and Founder of the Religion of the Persians, as also
near that of the late King, whose Sepulchers are at Ardebil. Our Thaberick was
brought us in 32 great Dishes or Basins full of Rice, of all sorts of Colors,
upon which the Meat was laid, which consisted of Boiled, Roast, Omelets, and
Pastry, according to their way of Dressing. Those who were appointed to bring
us this Dinner, carried the Dishes upon their Heads, and set them down upon a
Cloth, which was laid upon the ground.

We were not over-pleas'd with this Entertainment, by reason, not only of the
trouble it was to us to sit down according to the Persian way, Is served
without Wine.
but also because we were forbidden to drink any Wine at this Feast of the
Thaberick. However, we ordered our great Guns to be discharged at it, as also
our Trumpets to sound, and would have made a small Present to those who had
brought it; but they desired to be excused, telling us, that the Devotion of
the place permitted them not to receive any Presents.

The next day, there was such order taken for the Provisions of the Kitchen,
that we had all the reason in the world to be satisfied therewith. We were
allowed every day sixteen Sheep, two hundred Eggs, four Batmans (which come to
26 pounds) of Butter, thirteen pound of Raisins of the Sun, six pound and a
half of Almonds, a hundred Batmans of Wine, two Batmans of Sirrup, Meal, Honey;
and Poultry in abundance, besides the extraordinary Presents, which were ever
and anon brought us from the Chan; The expense at Ardebil.
insomuch, that our expense, during our stay at Ardebil, amounted to, In Bread,
1960. Batmans. In Wine, 6250. Batmans. Eggs, 9300. Sheep, 477. Lambs, 472.


April. the 12. The Governors visit
we received the first visit from the Governor, who, with much kindness, came
to make the proffers of his services to the Ambassadors, whereof we afterward
found the real effects, when occasion required. The same day, he sent away an
Express to Court, to give notice there of our arrival, and to receive orders
for the prosecution of our Journey, which yet came not till two months after.

April. 21. The visit of an Armenian Bishop. Christian Churches in Asia.
an Armenian Bishop came to see the Ambassadors. He was but lately come thither
from the City of Eruan, was a Person discoursed very handsomely, and told us
many particulars concerning the state of the Christian Churches in Asia. Among
other things, he told us, that there was near Eruan a Monastery wherein there
were above four hundred Religious men, and that there were in the Mountains,
between Aras and Kur, above a thousand Villages inhabited by Christians, and
that there were, besides all these, near Ca^win and Tauris above two thousand
Families, which made up in all above five hundred Churches. Whereto he added,
that the Turks had, not long before, carried away above fifteen hundred
Christians, and very highly commended the King of Persia, for his care in
preserving their Privileges, and not burthening them with Taxes, as the Turk
does, entreating us to recommend their concernments to the King, when we should
come to Court.

April. 25. Kurban or Sacrifice of the Persians.
which, according to the Arabians, is the 10. day of the month Silhotza, was
the great Bairam, or the Festival which they call Kurban, that is, Sacrifice,
in commemoration of the Sacrifice, which Abraham would have made of his son
Ismael, according to the command of God: for so they understand the History of
the Sacrifice of Abraham. All their Ceremony consists in killing, before day, a
Sheep, or Lamb, in the street, at their own Doors, which being cut into pieces,
they distribute them among the poor, who come to those Doals in great numbers.
They do not reserve so much as the skin; which they do, as they affirm,
according to the example of Abraham, who reserved nothing of the Ram, which he
sacrifiz'd instead of his Son.

It is about this time, The Pilgrimages of the Persians and Turks.
that the Persians go to do their Devotions at Meca, as well as the Turks. They
say that Noah, when he went into the Ark, took along with him seventy two
Persons, and for that reason, it is requisite the Pilgrims of Meca should
amount to the number of seventy two thousand; and that number ought to be so
exactly observed, that if there be either more or less, they must not be
received there, as such, that year. But above all things, it is their main
care, that that great number be complete; for otherwise, as they affirm, the
Angels would be obliged to come in, to make up what were wanting, and it were a
wont of respect to those Spirits to put them to that trouble. The men put on a
particular Coiffure for this Voyage, which is a kind of Turbant of white Wool;
in regard their Law forbids them to wear it of any Color, or of silk at that
time. They call this kind of Turbant Ehharan, and they cover their Heads
therewith, only as they go; so as that one part of it falling down on one side
of the Head, passes under the Chin, and is fastened on the other side.

They commonly take their way through the City of Jerusalem, Particulars of the
Pilgrimage to Meca.
where they do their first Devotions. Thence they pass through Medina, where
they continue them, at the Sepulcher of Mahomet, which they kiss with a
profound Veneration, and then they conclude them at Meca, or Mount Arafat. From
Medina to Meca, they are covered only with a shirt, nay some go naked down to
the waste. In this posture, they march continually, and after a very particular
fashion. For they are obliged to go, after the rate of a trotting Horse, or
rather that of a Camel galloping; and that with such earnestness, that they
hardly take the leisure to eat and drink, or yet to sleep: and all, out of an
imagination, that the Sweat caused by that Violent Motion, and forced out of
their Bodies, carries away with it all their Sins, and cleanses them of all
their filthiness. The Women, who might not be able to bear the inconveniences
of such a march, have the privilege to swath up their Breasts with a Skarf,
which has a particular name, and they call it Scamachtze.

The tenth day of the month of Silhatza, is that of their great Devotion. That
day, all the Pilgrims go to Mount Arafat, which, they say, is the place where
the Patriarch Abraham should have Sacrifiz'd his Son, and there they spend the
whole night in Prayers. Toward the dawning of the day, they come down, and go
to the City of Meca, where their Hetzas, or High Priest, makes a Procession,
conducting through the chief streets a Camel, which is appointed for the
Sacrifice. The Hair of this Camel is a very precious Relick among them; whence
it comes, that the Pilgrims throng, to get as near as they can to the Beast,
and to snatch off some of his Hair, which they fasten to their arms, as a very
sacred thing. The Hetzas, after he has walked the Beast sufficiently leads him
to the Meydan, that is, the great Marketplace, and puts him into the hands of
the Baily, or Judge of the City, whom they call Daroga, who, attended by some
other Officers, kills him with an Axe, giving him many blows in the Head, Neck,
and Breast.

As soon as the Camel is dead, all the Pilgrims endeavor to get a piece of
him, and throng with such earnestness and so confusedly, with Knives in their
hands, that these Devotions are never concluded, but there are many Pilgrims
killed and hurt, who are afterward allowed a place in their Martyrologies.
After all these Ceremonies, they go in Procession about the Mosquey, they kiss
a Stone, which was left after the finishing of the Structure, and they take of
the Water, which passes through a Golden Chanel over the Mosquey, and carry it
away as a Relick, with a little piece of a certain Blackish Wood, of which
^ooth-picks are commonly made. When the Pilgrims are returned from their
Pilgrimage they are called Hatzi, and they are as it were Nazarites, dedicated
to God, in as much as it is unlawful for them to drink Wine ever after.

From this Pilgrimage, and the Sacrifice performed at Meca, we shall take
occasion to insert here, what the Persians and Turks relate of that of Abraham,
as Mahomet has dressed up the story, falsifying the truth of it in all its
circumstances. They say in the first place, that Abraham was the son of Azar,
who was Graver to Nimroth, King of Egypt, and that he married Sara, who was so
beautiful a Woman, that the King having cast his eye on her, Abraham grew
jealous, and carried her away into Arabia; but finding that she bore no
Children, he there bought a Slave, named Hagar, whom he carnally knew, and, by
her, had Ismael. Hagar being near her time, and not able any longer to endure
the ill treatment she received from Sara, resolved to run away. Abraham coming
to hear of her discontent, and fearing she might make away the Child,
especially if she came to be delivered without the assistance of some other
Women, followed her, and found her already delivered of a Son, who, dancing
with his little feet upon the ground, had ^ade way for a Spring to break forth.
But the water of the Spring came forth in such abundance, as also with such
violence, that Hagar could make no use of it to quench her thirst, which was
then very great. Abraham coming to the place, commanded the Spring to glide
more gently, and to suffer that water might be drawn out of it to drink, and
having thereupon stayed the course of it with a little Bank of Sand, he took of
it, to make Hagar and her child drink. The said Spring is, to this day, called
Semsem, from Abraham's making use of that word to stay it. After this Sara
prayed to God with such earnestness, that he gave her her son Isaac.

Some time after Ismael's birth, the Angel Gabriel appeared to Abraham, and
told him, that God commanded him to build a house upon the River, which Ismael
had given the rise to: in answer whereto, Abraham representing, that it was
impossible for him to build any great structure in the midst of a Desert, where
there was nothing but Sand; the Angel replied, that he should not be troubled
at that, and that God would provide. Accordingly, Abraham was no sooner come to
the place appointed him by the Angel, but Mount Arafat forced out of its
quarries a great number of stones, which rolled down from the top of the
Mountain, to the side of the little River, where he built a house, which has
since been converted to a Mosquey, and is the same where the Pilgrims of Meca
do their Devotions. The Structure being finished, there happened to be one
single stone remaining, which began to speak, and to complain that it had been
so unfortunate, as not to be employed in that Edifice. But Abraham told it,
that it should so much the rather be comforted, in as much as it should one day
be in greater Veneration than all the rest put together, and that all the
faithful who came to that place should kiss it. This is the stone we spoke of
before. These people say, it was heretofore all white, and that the reason of
its being now black, is, that it has been constantly kissed through so many
ages.

Some years after, the same Angel Gabriel appeared again to Abraham, who was
grown a very rich and powerful man, and told him, that God intended to make the
highest trial that could be of his affection and gratitude, and that he would
have him, in acknowledgement of so many favors, to sacrifize his son to him.
Abraham immediately consented, and being returned home, bid Hagar call up her
son, and put on his best Clothes, that he might be the better looked on at the
Wedding, to which he intended to carry him. They departed the next day betimes
in the morning, and took their way toward Mount Arafat, Abraham carrying along
with him a good sharp knife, and some Cords. But as soon as they were gone,
Sceithan, that is to say, the Devil, represented himself to Hagar, in the shape
of a man, reporach'd her with the easiness, wherewith she had consented, that
her son Ismael should go from her, and told her, that what Abraham had related
to her concerning the Wedding, to which he was to bring him, was pure forgery,
and that he was carrying him straight to the Shambles. Hagar asked him why
Abraham would use her so, since he had always expressed a great tenderness to
her son. The Devil made answer, that God had commanded it should be so; whereto
Hagar replied, that since it was God's good pleasure to make that disposal of
him, it was but fit she should comply therewith. Whereupon the Devil pressing
harder upon her, and treating her as an unnatural Mother, endeavoring by those
aggravations to bring her into rebellion against God, she pelted him away with
stones. The Devil's endeavor proving unsuccessfull that way, and too weak to
overcome the obstinacy of a woman, he applied himself to Abraham, revived in
him the tendernesses and affection of a Father, represented to him the horror
of the murder he was going to commit, and remonstrated to him the little
likelihood there was, that God should be the Author of so barbarous and
abominable an action. But Abraham, who was acquainted with the subtilty and
artifices of that wicked spirit, sent him away, and to be the sooner rid of
him, cast also a stone at him. The last attempt the Devil had to make, was, to
represent to Ismael the horror of death, and the unnatural procedure of his
Father: but he found the same treatment from him, as he had from the other two,
and had a good stone flung at his head. The Father and Son being come to the
top of the Mountain, Abraham said to his Son Ismael; My Son, I cannot imagine
thou know the occasion of our journey, and the reason why I have brought
thee to this place. It is only this, that God has commanded me to sacrifize
thee: whereto Ismael made answer, that since it was God's pleasure it should be
so, his will be done, only let me entreat thee, Father, to grant me three
things. The first is, that thou have a care to bind me so fast, that the pains
of death may not engage me to attempt any thing against thee. The second is,
that thou whet thy knife very well, and, after thou have thrust it into my
throat, that thou hold it very fast, and shut thy eyes, out of a fear the
cruelty of the action dishearten thee from going through with it, and so leave
me to languish a long time. And the third, that, when thou art returned home,
thou remember my duty to my Mother.

Abraham, having promised to observe all these things, and whetted his knife,
binds his son, directs the knife to his Throat, and, shutting his eyes, holds
it as fast as he could: but finding, when he opened his eyes again, that the
knife had made no entrance, he is extremely troubled, and tries the edge of it
upon a stone, which he cuts in two. He was so astonished thereat, that he
addressed himself to the Knife, and asked it, why, having so good an edge as to
cut a stone, it could not as well cut his Sons Throat. The knife made answer,
that God would not have it so. Whereupon the Angel Gabriel took Abraham by the
hand, and said to him; Hold a little, God would only make trial of thy faith,
Unbind thy Son, and sacrifize this Hee-Goat; and immediately there came into
the place a Hee-Goat, which Abraham offered to God, for a burnt-offering.

They affirm, that the three stones, which Hagar, Abraham and Ishmael cast at
the Devil, are yet to be seen, near the Highway, between Medina and Meca, and
that there are made thereof two great heaps of stones, by the means of the
Pilgrims, who bring every one three stones, to be cast at the Devil, at the
same place where these heaps are, to the end he may not distract them in their
Devotions.

We saw also the same day above five hundred Women, Prayers for the dead.
who were going before day to the Churchyard to weep over the Graves of their
Husbands, and others of their kindred. There were some who had somewhat to eat
at the same time; others had some passages of the Alchoran read to them; and
those of any quality had Tents pitched there, for their reception, that they
might not be exposed to the sight of all that passed by.

This kind of Devotion for the Dead is commonly performed in the time of their
Orut, or Lent.

The Ambassadors were again that day treated out of Schich-Sefi's Kitchen. The
meat was brought in, in six great Copper Vessels tinned over, which they call
Lenkeri, and the Conserves, in nine great Vessels of Porcelain.

The next day, The Chan treats the Ambassadors.
the Chan treated them very Magnificently, at a Dinner he had provided in one
of his Summer-houses.

The 27. in the evening, the Governor communicated to the Ambassadors the good
news he had received from Chan Rustan, Acquaints them with the violent death of
the Grand-Signior.
General of the King of Persia's Army, who had writ to him, that the
Ianizaries, in a mutiny at Constantinople, had killed the Grand Signior, and
impri^^n'd the most eminent Ministers of his Courr. The Persians expressed
their joy thereat, by the fireworks which the Governor ordered to be made, as
also by the Music, which ecchoed all over the City. The Ambassadors did the
like on their part, with their great Guns, causing them to be fired six times
over, and ordering the Trumpets to sound, and the Drums to beat, while from the
roof of their Lodgings they could see all the fires about the City.

The Governor was so well pleased to see that the Ambassadors concerned
themselves so much in the public joy, that he sent them two flaggons of
Schiras Wine, with a Glass-Vessel, full of Sugar-candy'd.

May the first, MAY.
we Celebrated the Birthday of the Ambassador Crusius, which was concluded at
night with a Magnificent Supper, to which we had invited out Mehemander
Netzefbek.

The 4. the Ambassadors received a visit from the son of Saru-Taggi, The
Chancellor of Persia's son visits the Ambassadors.
Chancellor of Persia, who was come purposely from Ispahan, accompanied by some
persons of quality, to see the Ambassadors. We entertained him with our Music,
which he seemed to be much taken with, and treated him with a sumptuous
Collation, during which, the great Guns were discharged, as often as there was
any great health drunk.

May 14. the Persians began to Celebrate a mournful Festival, A particular
Festival of the Persians.
which they call Aschur, which signifies ten, in regard it lasts ten days, and
begins with the Moon of the month Maheram. Of all the sorts and Sects of
Mabumetans, the Persians only Celebrate this Feast, in memory of Hossein, the
youngest son of Haly, whom they account one of their greatest Saints. The
Legends relate of him, that he was killed in the War he was engaged in, against
the Calif Iesied. He was at first (according to their story of him) troubled
with an extraordinary thirst, in regard they had deprived him of all water.
Afterward, he had seventy two wounds, which he received by Arrows, and at
last, Senan ben anessi run him through the body with a sword, and Schemr
Sultzausen killed him outright. That this Feast lasts ten days, proceeds
hence; that Hossein having left Medina to go to Kufa, was, for ten days
together, pursued by his Enemies, who treated him as we related before. During
all that time, the Persians go in mourning, express much affliction, suffer not
the Rasour to come near their heads, though, at other times they make use of it
every day, live very soberly, drink no Wine, and content themselves with Water.
The whole City of Ardebil was taken up in these Ceremonies and extravagant
Devotions. In the day time, the Children and young Lads assembled themselves in
great companies up and down the streets, carrying in their hands great Banners,
at the extremities whereof there were Snakes of Pastboard winding to and fro,
much like Mercury's Caduceus. The Persians call them Eschder. They went to the
Doors of their Metzits, or Mosqueys, and cried one after another ja Hossein, ja
Hossein, that is, O Hossein. In the evening, especially the three last days of
the Festival, after Sunset, men did also meet in several places, under Tents,
with abundance of Torches and Lanthorns, A strange kind of Devotion.
having at the tops of their Poles Orenges, as the Children of Abdalla,
singing, and crying out as loud as they were able, their ja Hossein, and that
with such violence, that it changed the color of their countenances. Having
(...) thus about an hour, they returned to the City, and went in Procession
with their Banners and Torches, through the principal streets. The tenth day
concluded the Devotions of the Festival. In the morning there was an Oration
made in honor of Hossein, with the same Ceremonies in a manner, as we had seen
at the Festival of Aly at Scamachie. These Ceremonies were performed in the
Court of the Mesar of Schich-Sefi, where, near the Chancery, they had planted a
Banner, which, as it is reported, was made by the daughter of Fatima, the
daughter of Mahomet, who caused the Iron-work of it to be made of a hors-shooe,
which had belonged to one of the horses of Abas, A false miracle.
Uncle to Mahomet by the Father side, which Schich Sedredin, the son of
Schich-Sefi, had brought from Medina to Ardebil. They say, that this Banner
shakes of it self, as often as they pronounce the name of Hossein, during the
Sermon which is made in honor of him, and that when the Priest makes a recital
of the particulars of his death, how he was wounded with seventy two Arrows,,
and how he fell down from his horse, it may be seen shaken by a secret
agitation, but withal so violent, that, the staff breaking, it falls to the
ground. I must confess, I saw no such thing, but the Persians affirm it so
positively, that they think it should not be any way doubted.

May 24. about noon, the Governor sent the Ambassadors notice, that they
concluded the Festival that night, and that if they would be present at the
Ceremonies which were to be performed, they should be very welcome, and he
would take it for a great honor done him: but it must be with this condition,
that, complying with the Law of the Mussulmans, they were not to expect any
Wine at the Collation he intended to treat them withal.

In the cloze of the evening, The last Ceremonie^ of the Festival.
the Ambassadors went to the Governor's Palace, who met them at the street
door. And whereas the Ceremony was to be done in the Court, they were entreated
to take their places on the left hand, where they had prepared Seats, covered
with Tapistry, for them, and their Retinue, who would have been much troubled,
to sit as the Persians do. There were set before them, upon a Cloth, wherewith
they had covered the ground, several Vessels of Porcelain, with Suger'd and
Perfumed waters, and, near the Table, brass Candlesticks, four foot high, with
great Wax Candles in them, as also Lamps, filled with rags dipped in Suet and
Naphte. The Governor took up his place at the entrance of the Court, on the
right side of the Gate, and fate upon the ground. Our people had standing
before them great Wooden Candlesticks, or Branches, holding each of them twenty
or thirty Wax-Candles. There were fastened to the Walls thousands of Lamps, of
Plaster, all filled with Suet and Naphte, which cast so great a light, that
the house seemed to be all on fire. They had drawn cross the Court certain
Cords whereat hung Paper-Lanthorns, which gave not so full, but, without
comparison, a more pleasant light, than that of the Lamps and Cresset-lights.
The Inhabitants of Ardebil are distinguished into five quarters, or
professions, who meet each by it self, and entreat some of their Poets, Persian
Poets.
whereof there are a very great number in Persia, to write them some Verses, in
commendation of Aly and Hossein, and making choice of those among them who sing
best, they go and give the Governor a Serenade, who receives kindly, and
bestows a Present of water sweetened with Sugar, on that band, which is most
excellent, either as touts invention or Music.

These Musicians being come into the Court drew up in five bands, in so many
several places, and presented themselves one after another before the
Governor; but, for the space of two hours, they may be rather said to cry out
and roar, than to sing: after which they all came by order from the Governor,
to make a Complement to the Ambassadors, and wished them a happy journey, and
good success in their Negotiation at the Court.

In the mean time, there were dancing at one place in the Court seven youths;
all naked, excepting only those parts which modesty would not have seen by all.
They called that kind of people Tzatzaku, and their bodies, from head to foot,
were rubbed over with Suet and Naphte, insomuch that their black skins being
more shining than jet, they might very well be compared to so many little
Devils. They had in their hands little stones, which they knocked one against
the other, and sometimes they smote their breast with them, to express their
sorrow for the death of Hossein. These Tzatzaku are poor boys, who disguise
themselves in that manner, to get some small matter by it, which is, that they
are permitted, during the time of the Feast, to beg Alms for Hossain's sake. At
night, they do not lodge at their Homes, but ly in the ashes which are brought
out of Schich-Sefi's Kitchen. Some, instead of Suet, rub themselves with
Vermilion, that they may make a more lively representation of the blood of
Hossein: but, at this time, there were not any such. After these Ceremonies,
the Governout entertained the Ambassadors with noble fireworks; which most of
the Persians took very ill at his hands, and thought it not over religiously
done of him, to give such Divertisements to the Christians during the time of
their Aschur, which ought to represent only things conducing to sadness and
affliction.

These fireworks consisted of several very excellent and ingenious inventions,
Fire-work.
as of little Castles, Towers, Squibs, Crackers, etc. The Castle, to which they
first set fire, was three foot square, the Walls of Paper, of all sorts of
Colors. They lighted first several small Wax-Candles about the moat of it,
which discovered the figures painted on the Paper. There came out of it Squibs
and Crackers for an hour and a half, or better, before the Castle it self took
fire. Then they set fire to another invention, which they call Derbende. It was
a kind of Saucidge, about six Inches thick, and three foot long, casting, at
first, at both ends, a shower of fire, and afterward several Squibs and little
Serpents, which falling among the people, set their Cotton Garments on fire;
while they fired several sorts of Crackers, which in the air, were turned to
Stars and other figures. They set fire also to several boxes; but what we most
admired was a great kind of fire-work, which was fastened to the ground with
great Iron Chains, and cast out fire at the mouth, with so dreadful noise,
that we were afraid it would have burst at last, and scatter its fiery entrails
among the company. This fire-work they call Kumbara.

There were some, who carried Paper-Lanthorns upon long Poles, which were also
filled with squibs and crackers: but what diverted us most of all, was, that,
out of those Lanthorns, there came a piece of Linen, which, being folded
together, and tied up in knots, had, in each of those knots, several squibs,
crackers and serpents, which having much ado to get out, made an admirable
show, by the windings which the fire made through all the folds of that piece
of cloth. Others carried in their aprons, a certain composition, into which
some that passed by let fire fall, as it were negligently, whereupon, he who
carried it shaking his apron, there came out a great number of Stars, which
burnt a long time upon the ground.

In these Fireworks, the Persians make use of white Naphte, which is a kind of
Petreolum: but in regard this Drugg is seldom found in Europe, there may be
used, to the same effect, the spirit of Turpentine rectified. We saw also, at a
great distance, in the air, certain flames, which vanished as soon in a manner
as they appeared. I conceive these flames proceeded from a certain Drugg, which
the Muscovites call 'Plaun, which is a yellow powder made of a certain herb,
commonly found upon the ground, in the Forests that are planted with Pines and
Birch, and is properly called in Latin, Acanthus, in French, Branche ursine, in
English, Bears-foot, or Bears-britch. Every stalk of this herb has on it two
Buttons, which are ripe in August, and then the Muscovites are very careful to
gather them, dry them in an Oven, beat them, and keep the powder which comes
from them in Ox-bladders, to be sold by the pound. It is used also in Medicine,
as being a drier, and is administered with good success in Wounds, and the Itch.
But the Muscovites use it for the most part in their Divertisements, putting it
into a Tinbox made like a Pyramid, into which they thrust that end of a Torch
which is not lighted, and by that means make the powder come out, which being
very small, immediately fastens on the flame, and is lighted, and disappears
almost at the same time; so that continually thrusting in the Torch, a man
makes ever and anon a new flame, which is very lively, and makes the nobler
show, in that it is not accompanied with any smoke. This powder will not take
fire, if it be not stirred after the foresaid manner: for if it be cast upon
burning coals, or if a lighted candle be thrust into it, it would not take fire.

These Fireworks entertained us so long, that it was after midnight ere we
came to our Quarters, where we found not any thing colder than the Hearth; for
out of a presumption, that the Governor would have treated us at Supper, there
had been nothing provided at home.

The next day, The enterment of Hossein reprrsented
very betimes in the Morning, before the Sun was to be seen over the Horizon,
the Persians made a Procession, which was to represent the interment of
Hossein. In this Procession there were carried a great many Eschders and
Banners, and there were led several excellent Horses and Camels, covered with
blew Cloth, in which were to be seen many Arrows quilted, as if they had been
purposely shot into it, representing those which the Enemies had shot at
Hossein. Upon these Horses rid so many Boys, who had before them empty
Cossins, upon which they had cast a little Straw, or Hay, and they represented
the great affliction of the Children of Hossein. Upon some of those Horses,
they had set fair Turbants, Cimitars, Bows, and Quivers, full of Arrows.

As soon as the Sun was up, A bloody devotion.
there might be seen in the base-Court, a very great number of men, who let
themselves Blood in the arms, in so great quantity, that a man would have
thought there had been many Oxen killed there. The young Lads slashed and cut
themselves above the Elbow, and clapping the Wounds with their hands, they made
the Blood spurt out all over the Arm, and about the Body, and in that condition
they ran up and down the City. This was done in remembrance of the effusion of
the innocent Blood of Hossein; out of a persuasion, that, by this action, they
expiated some part of their sins; which persuasion is the stronger, in as much
as they are prepossessed with an opinion, that those, who dye during this
Festival, are infallibly saved. They speak also with the same assurance of
their Salvation, who dye during the Festival of Aly, and in their Lent.

As concerning the City of Ardebil, Ardebil described.
which the Turks call Ardevil, and may be found in Maps under the name of
Ardonil, it lies in the Province of Adirbeitzan, by the ancients called Media
Major, the chief Cities whereof are Ardebil, Tabris, or Tauris, Merrague,
Natschan, Miane, Urumi, Choi, Salmas, etc. Ardebil is one of the most ancient
and most celebrious Cities of all the Kingdom, not only by reason of the
residence which several Kings of Persia made there, but also particularly upon
this account, that Schich Sefi, Author of their Sect, lived and died there.
Some are of opinion, that it may be conjectured, from the History of Quintus
Curtius, that it is the City which he calls Arbela. In this City are to be
seen the Tombs and Monuments of the Kings of Persia; and it is a place of so
great Traffic, that it may be justly numbered among the most considerable of
all the East. The Turkish Language is much more common among the Inhabitants,
than the Persian. I found the elevation of the Pole there, to be at thirty
eight degrees, five minutes, and the longitude to be 82. degrees, 30. minutes.

It is seated in the midst of a great Plain which is above three Leagues about,
and compassed of all sides by a high Mountain like an Amphitheatre, the highest
part whereof, called Sabelhan, which lies Westward from the City, is always
covered with Snow. Toward the South-South-West, lies that Mountain of the
Province of Kiban, which is called Bakru. It is from these Mountains it
proceeds, that the Air there is sometimes extremely hot sometimes extremely
cold; insomuch that even in August, they begin to be sensible of the
inconveniences of Autumn, as also to be troubled with those Epidemical
Diseases, which reign there every year, and commonly carry away a great number
of persons. Nor was our Quarters free from them. For besides the great number
of servants who fell sick, the Ambassador Brugman and our Physician lay in of a
Fever, but especially the latter, who was reduced to that lowness, that there
was no hope of Life. In the greatest heat of the day, and exactly at noon,
there rose a kind of a Whirlwind, which filled the whole City with dust; but
it lasted not above an hour. The rest of the day and night is calm, which gave
occasion to the Persian Proverb, Saba Ardebil, Nimrus Kardebil, that is, In the
morning Ardebil, at noon, full of dust.

Yet is it not the cold quality of the Climate, The air not so warm as
elsewhere.
but its Situation that hinders the earth there to produce Wine, Melons,
Citrons, Orenges, and Pomegranates, which are to be had in almost all the other
Provinces of Persia. Apples, Pears, and Peaches thrive very well there. Which
is to be understood of the City it self, and the Plain, in which it is seated:
for the Air is incomparably more hot and more temperate at the foot of the
Mountain; whence it comes; that; thereabouts, The fertility of its soil.
you have all sorts of Fruits, and the Trees, which, in April, do but begin to
bud about Ardebil, were very forward at the Village of Alaru, at the foot of
the Mountain Bakru. This particular of fruits only excepted, the soil
thereabouts is very good, as well for arable Lands as Pastures: insomuch that
the Plain, which is not very great, is able to maintain the Inhabitants of
above sixty Villages, all which may be seen from the City. Besides all which,
the Revenue which is raised for the King, from the Arabian and Turkish
Shepherds, is very considerable, by reason of the Liberty allowed them to feed
their Cattle thereabouts, and to Trade therewith in those parts, after they
have purchased the Schach's Protection, or embraced the Religion of the
Persians. Some of the Clarks belonging to the Farmers of the Revenue assured
me, that within fifteen days before, there had passed over the City-Bridge
above a hundred thousand sheep, and for every sheep, they pay four Kasbeki, or
two pence sterling, for their pasturage, and as much when the owner sells them.
This last duty is called Tzaubanbeki; and the other Abschur Eleschur, or the
duty of Water and Herbage, which the Turks call in one word Othbasch.

The City is somewhat, but very little, bigger than that of Scamachie, but has
no Walls. No House but has its Garden, so that, seen at a distance, it seems
rather a Forest, than a City. Yet are there no other Trees about it than
Fruit Trees, inasmuch as the Country produceing no Wood fit for Building, nor
indeed any for Firing, the Inhabitants are obliged to supply themselves, out of
the Province of Kilan, which is six good days Journey distant from it. Within
a League of the City, Southward, lies a Village named Scamasbu, out of which
rises a little River called Balachlu. Before it comes into the City, it divides
it self into two branches, one whereof divides the City, and the other
compasses it; and is joined again to the other, and so fall together into the
River Karasu. It is so apt to overflow in the month of April, when the Snow
upon the Mountains begins to dissolve, that if the Inhabitants of the Plain had
not the industry to divert it by Trenches, which they make on that side which
is toward the City, it would drown them all.

Of such an inundation, there happened an Example in the time of Schach Abas,
when the violence of the water having broken the Dikes, over-threw in a moment
a great number of Houses; in regard, the Walls, being built only of Mortar and
Bricks baked in the Sun, there is not any able to stand out against the least
inundation: so that the River carried away their Housholdstuff, nay many
Children in their Cradles; as it had also near happened at the time of our
being there, upon the 12. of April, when there were a thousand men at work day
and night in making Channels, and in turning the River by means of a Trench,
which was made in the plain upon the River side, which over-flow'd all the
adjacent fields. The City besides a great number of narrow strees, Its Streets*
has five very fair and broad ones, named Derwana, Tabar, Niardower, Kumbalan,
and Kasirkuste: in all which they have been at the pains of planting both sides
with Elms and Linden-Trees, to have some shade against the excessive heats of
the Climate.

The Marketplace, or Maydan, is large and noble, as being above three hundred
paces in length, Its Marketplace.
and a hundred and fifty in breadth, and having, on all sides, Shops so orderly
disposed that no Merchandise, no Profession but has its particular quarter. On
the right hand as you come into it, you find, behind the Sepulcher of
Schich-Sefi, and the last Kings of Persia, a Metzid or Mosquey, in which lies
interred Iman Sade, or one of the Children of their twelve Saints. Malefactors
and Criminals may retire thither for a certain time, and thence easily get to
the Monument of Schich-Sefi, The S^pulchre of Schich-Sefi a Sanctuary.
which is their great Sanctuary. As you come out of the Marketplace, you come
to a place which they call Basar, where the first thing you meet with is a
great square arched Building, called Kaiserie, where are sold all the precious
Commodities of the Country, as Gold and Silver Brocadoes, and all sorts of
precious stones, and silk stuffs,. As you come out thence, you enter, by three
Gates, into so many streets, covered over head, all beset with Shops, where are
sold all sorts of Commodities. There are also in these streets, several
Caravanseras or Storehouses, built for the convenience of foreign Merchants, as
Turks, Tartars, Indians, etc. We saw there also two Chinese, who had brought
thither, to be sold, Porcelane, and several things of Lacque.

There are also in the City a very great number of public Baths, and Metzids,
the chiefest whereof is that which they call, Its Metzids or Mosqueys.
Metzid Adine, which is seated upon a little Hill, as it were in the midst of
the City, and has a very fair Steeple. There, the greatest Devotions are done,
on holy days, and particularly on Friday, from which it derives the name. At
the entrance of the Metzid, or Church, there is a Fountain, which the late Saru
Chotze, otherwise called Mahomet Risa, Chancellor of Persia; brought to that
place, by a Chanel under ground, from the very source, which is in a Mountain
above a League distant from the City, South-west-ward.

The Sumptuous Monuments of Schich-Sefi, and the last Kings of Persia, are near
the Meidan. The Persians call that place, Mesar, and Kibel-Chan, Governor of
the City did us the favor to let us into them, upon Whitsun-Monday. He sent us
word before hand, that, since we were so desirous to see the holy Sepulcher, we
must be obliged to abstain from Wine that day, and that our Supper should be
brought us out of Schich-Sefi's Kitchen.

The Ambassadors went thither immediately after Dinner, The Ambassadors visit
Sehich-Sefi's Sepulcher.
attended by all their Retinue, and their Guards. The Gate, at which we entered,
to get into the first Court, is a very large one, and above it there was a
great silver Chain, reaching from one side to the other, at which there hung
such another perpendiculary in the middle. It is a Present, which Aga-Chan,
Governor of Merrague, had, out of Devotion, made to the holy Sepulcher. This
first Court is very spacious. and paved all over with broad stones, having on
both sides great Vaults, where there are many Shops, and backwards a very fair
public Garden, open to all.

The Governor, having received us in the Base-Court, brought us to another
Gate, over which there was also a Silver-Chain like the former, and it was an
expression of the Devotion of Mahomed-Chan,, Lay down their Arms at the
entrance.
Governor of Kentza. At the entrance of this Gate, they demanded our Arms,, it
being not lawful to carry any, of any kind whatsoever, to the place where the
Sepulcher is; insomuch that if a Persian were found but with a knife about him,
it would cost him his life. The threshold of this Gate, as also of all the
following Gates, was of white Marble, and round, and notice was given us not to
set our foot upon it, but to step over it, the right foot foremost, out of this
reflection, that having been kissed by so many Millions of Millions of persons,
it were, as they said, very irrational that our feet should profane it. Thence
we entered into another Court, which was at least as long as the first, but
much narrower, and paved after the same manner, having vaults and shops on both
sides as the other. On the right hand, there came out of the Wall, by a
brass-Cock, a fair Fountain (the water whereof was brought a League distance
thence) that they might drink, who retired thither out of Devotion. At the end
of this Court, on the right hand, we were showed a very fair and spacious Vault
arched above, paved without, with green and blew stones, and within, hung with
Tapistry. In the midst of this Vault, there were two fair brass Candlesticks
with lights in them. All along the Walls sat several Priests, clothed in
white, who sung as loud as ever they were able, expressing a great humility,
and an extraordinary Devotion, by a continual moving from one side to the
other; which motion was performed by them all at the same time, and with the
same shaking, and that with so much exactness, that a man would have thought
they had been all fastened to the same Cord, and that they had been all drawn
at the same time. Schich-Sefi's Fast of forty days.
This place is called Thschillachane, in regard Schich-Sefi retired thither
every year, to fast, eating only, for 40 days together, but one Almond a day,
at least if we may believe the Relations of the Persians. Thence, we passed
through a third Gate, over which there hung also a Silver-Chain, bestowed on
the place, by Alli-Chan, Governor of Kappan, in another Court which was less
than the two precedent, and paved all over with little square-stones of several
colors. We entered into the place where the Sepulcher was, by a Gate which was
built like a great Tower, the Clappers whereof were all covered with plates of
silver, and adorned with several Rings of the same Metal, which Gate brought us
into a great Structure. The pavement before the Gate was covered with Tapistry,
to express the holiness of the place; and we were told, that, for the said
reason, it was expected, we should put off our shoes.

The Ambassadors, at first, made some difficulty to render that respect, to a
place, for which they could not have any Veneration, but perceiving, that if
they did it not, they would not have been permitted to go in, they at last
resolved to comply with the custom. The Persians, to let them know, they did
not any thing, that might abate ought of their Dignity, told them, that
Schach-Abas himself, when he came to see the Sepulcher, many times, put off his
shoes when he was come within half a League of the City, and came so far
barefoot; but that they could not expect that Devotion from us. We passed
thence into a very fair spacious Gallery, hung, and covered with Tapistry: and
afterward, we entered by another Gate, covered with plates of Gold, into
another Sumptuous Structure which was Arched all about. Schach-Abas, being upon
the point of his departure, into the War he was then engaged in against the
Vsbeques Tartars, made a vow, and promised, to bestow a Golden Gate on the
Sepulcher of Schich-Se^i, at Ardehil, and another upon Iman Risa's at Chorasan,
if his Armies had the success he expected: which vow he very religiously
performed, immediately upon his return, having had all the advantages over his
Enemies that his own heart could have wished. This Vault was about four fathom
square, and was enlightened by a great number of Gold and Silver Lamps; among
which there were some, above three foot Diameter. On both sides sat twelve
Hasifahns, or Priests, having before them, upon Desks, great books of
Parchment, wherein were written, in Capital Arabian Characters, certain
Chapters of the Alchoran, which they sung, much after the same manner, as our
Monks do their Vespers, but with the same motion as we had observed at the
Tschillachane. Having gone through that Vault, we came to another appartment,
which was divided from it only by a Silver Rail, though raised higher by three
silver steps, to get up into it. The Governor, and our Interpreter Rustan,
having kissed those steps, he went into it with the Ambassadors, who took along
with them four persons of their Retinue. This apartment was much more richly
adorned than any of the rest, and there was at one end of it another place
raised a foot from the ground, the Rails whereof were of massy Gold. It is
behind that Rail or Partition, that the Sepulcher of Schich-Sefi is to be seen,
built of white Marble, and not of Gold, as some have written. It was covered
with Crimson Velvet, and raised three foot from the ground, being about nine
foot in length, and four in breadth. From the Roof, there hung certain Lamps of
Gold and Silver, and on both sides, two huge Candlesticks of massy Gold, in
which there were set great Wax Candles, lighted in the night time.

The Door of that Golden Rail was locked, Laics not permitted to appreach the
Sepulcher.
and though the Ambassadors were very importunate to have it opened, yet could
they not prevail, the Persians telling them, that the Laics, even to the King
himself, were not permitted to come within that place. In the same apartment
where we then were, was to be seen, on the left hand, in a particular Vault,
the Sepulcher of Schach Ismael, the first of that name; as also that of
Scach-Sefi's Wife, and those of some other Queens of Persia: but we were
permitted to see no more of them, than we could discover at the meeting of the
Curtains, which were drawn at the entrance of it: and from what we could judge
thereof, there was nothing remarkable. There came all along after us a grave
old man, who, with a perfuming-pot in his hand, purified the places, through
which we had passed.

Having taken notice of all that was to be seen in that place, A miraculous
Vault.
we were conducted through the same Gallery, toward the right hand, into
another spacious apartment, which was Arched all about and Gilt; where we could
not but admire the manner of its building, which being near as large as a fair
Church, was nevertheless sustained by the strength of the Roof, and without
Pillars. The Library
This Hall is called Tzenetsera, and serves for a Library. The books were laid
in Drawers, shuffled one upon another, without any order, but otherwise well
enough kept. They were all Manuscripts, some, upon Parchment, others upon
Paper, most in Arabic, and some in the Persian and Turkish Languages, but all
excellently painted, richly bound, and covered with Plates of Gold and Silver,
carved, and branched. The books of History were enriched with several
representations in colors. In the Neeches of the Vault, there were above three
or four hundred Vessels of Porcelane; some, so large, as that they contained
above 40. quarts or Liquour. These only are used at the entertainments, which
are brought from the Sepulcher, to the King and other great Lords, who pass
that way: for the holiness of that place permits not that they should make use
of any Gold or Silver. Nay, it is reported of Schich-Sefi, that he, out of an
excessive humility, made use only of Wooden Dishes.

Thence we were brought to the Kitchen, The Kitchen
the Door whereof was also covered with Plates of Silver, and all things within
it were so handsomely ordered, that it was not a little to be admire'd. The
great Cauldrons were all set in a row, and sealed within the Wall, along which
passed a Pipe, which, by diverse Cocks, supplied all the Kitchen with water.

The Cooks of all degrees had every one his place, The Charity of the place.
according to their functions and employments. This Kitchen maintains every day
above a thousand persons, accompting those belonging to the house, and the
poor, among whom they distribute thrice a day, Pottage, Rice, and Meat; to wit,
in the morning at six, at ten, and, in the afternoon at three. The two
morning-meals are upon the account of Schich-Sefi, who, to that end, laid a
foundation of fifty Crowns per diem; and the third is an Alms bestowed there,
by order from the King of Persia. Besides these, there are so many Alms
distributed there upon the account of private persons, that there is not only
enough to maintain the poor, but there is much over and above, which is sold to
those who are ashamed to beg. At the time of these meals or distributions, they
sound two Timbrels, which, as they say, were brought from Medina, with the
Banner of Fatima, by Schach Sedredin.

Going out of the Kitchen, we entered into a very fair Garden, where we saw the
Sepulchers of Sulthan Aider, Sepulchers of the Kings of Persia.
Schach-Tamas, and several other Kings of Persia, which were in the open air,
and without any thing over them, but a smooth stone. The principal Lords, whose
Sepulchers are to be seen in this Meschaich, are, 1. Shich-Sefi, the son of
Seid-Tzeibrail. 2. Schich-Sedredin, the son of Sefi. 3. Schich-Tzinid, the son
of Sedredin, whom some Europaean Authors, erroneously call Guined. 4. Sulthan
Aider, the son of Tzinid, who was flead alive by the Turks. 5. Schich Aider,
the son of Sulthan Aider. 6. Schach-Ismael, the son of Schich Aider. 7. Schach
Tamas, the son of Schach-Ismael. 8. Schach-Ismael, the second of that name; the
son of Schach-Tamas. 9. Schach-Mahomet Choddabende, son of Schach-Ismael. 10.
Ismael Myrsa, brother of Choddabende. 11. Hemsa Myrsa, 12. Schach Abas, sons of
Choddabende.


Schich-Sedredin ordered his Sepulcher to be built, A Fable.
after the death of his Father, by an Architect, whom he had brought along with
him from Medina, and according to a Model which he drew of it himself by
Miracle (for the Persians affirm, that both he and his Father wrought many)
which was, that having commanded the Architect to shut his eyes, he ravished
him into an ecstasy, during which, he gave him a sight of the Model, according
to which he would have that Structure built, and according to which it was
afterward done. Schich-Tzinid, adding thereto the great Court, and several
Houses, augmented it so as that now it seems a very noble and spacious Castle,
whither there comes every day so great a number of persons, to Discourse, or
Walk, that there are few Princes Courts where there are more seen. The
foundations of several Kings, its vast Revenues, and the Presents which are
daily made thereto, do so augment the Wealth of it, that some conceive, its
Treasure amounts to many Millions of Gold, and that, in case of necessity, this
Mesar might raise and maintain a very powerful Army, and that it would furnish
more ready Money than the King could himself. Besides the Farms and Dairies
which depend on it, it has within the City of Ardebil two hundred Houses, nine
public Baths, eight Caravanseras, or Storehouses, that great Vault, which is
called the Kaiserie, all the Meydan, with its Vaults and Shops, a hundred other
Shops in the Basar, and the Marketplaces, where Cattle, Wheat, Salt, and Oil
are sold. The Astasnischin, or Regraters and Hucksters, and those who sell
Commodities in open Market, having neither Shops, nor Stalls, pay certain
duties thereto. It is possessed, about Ardebil, of thirty three Towns or
Villages; and in the Province of Serab, of five Villages. In the City of
Tauris, it has sixty Houses, and a hundred Shops, and two Villages without the
City; several Caravanseras and Baths, in the City of Casuan, as also in the
Province of Kilan and Astara. The duties of Abschur and Eleschur, in the
Province of Mokan belong to it, and one moiety of those of Chalchat, Kermeruth,
and Haschteruth, not accounting what the Tartars and Indians, who make
profession of the Persian Religion send thither, nor the Presents, which are
brought from all parts, in consequence of the Vows, which they are wont to
make, in great Journeys, in their Sickness, nay indeed in any business of
Importance, which they very Religiously perform. Besides all these, there are
so many Gifts, Donations and Legacies made to it, that there passes not a day,
but a man shall see going thither Horses, Asses, Camels, Sheep, Money, and
other things. All these things are received by two Persons, who are obliged by
an Oath to be faithful to that sacred place, and they are called Nessurtzchan,
from the word Nesur, which signifies a Vow, and they have an allowance out of
the revenue of a fair Village, which is within half a League of the City,
called Sultanabath; which was granted by Schich Ismael, to that purpose.
Commissaries for the reception of the profits.
These Commissaries are every day in an apartment on the left hand. as a man
goes into the Metzid Tzillachane, and are set on both sides of a Chest or Box,
covered with crimson Velver, into which they put the Money that is brought
them, as they do also that which arises by the sale of those Horses, Camels and
Asses, which are bestowed on the Sepulcher: for the Oxen and Sheep are killed,
and distributed among the poor. They give those who bring them a small Present,
which is a handful of Anniseed; and they are given to understand thereby, that
their Souls shall enjoy serenity and bliss in the other World.

They also give the Pilgrims who come thither to do their Devotions, a
Certificate of their being there, and of the Prayers they said there; which
serves not only for a Testimony of the profession of their Religion, but also
for a protection against several disgraces and misfortunes. nay, which is more,
for the saving of their Lives. Accordingly, our Interpreter Rustan, having
resolved to leave us, and fearing what might follow upon the complaint which
the Ambassadors should make to the King of him, took three authentic Copies of
such a Certificate, whereof two were found among his Clothes, after his
departure, and presented, at our return, by the Ambassador Crusius, to his
Highness of Holstein, in whose Library, they are still to be seen.

The Persians call these Certificates Sijaretname, and they are given, not only
here, at the Sepulcher of Schich Sefi, but also at Meschet, at that of Iman
Risa, and these latter are as efficacious, and have the same authority as the
former. Now that it may be understood how Certificates are able to save the
Lives, either of a Malefactor, or a person fallen into disgrace at the Court, I
shall here allege an example of it. Not long before the time of our Travels
into those parts, it happened, that Tzirra-Chan, who was a person of quality,
and one so highly in favor with Schich-Sefi, that he concluded a Marriage
between him and one of the Ladies of his Seraglio, coming one day somewhat late
to Dinner, the King asked him the reason of it, and said to him, smiling, that
it must needs be the caresses of his new Married Wife, kept him away so long.
The confidence of a Favorite,
He had the boldness to make answer, that his Majesty had not missed the mark
much, that indeed he had been dallying with a Woman, but that it had been with
the Wife of Agasi-Beg, who was then in the room, and discharged the Office of
Steward, when Tzirra-Chan told the story. The King was so startled at that
insolence, that, blushing, out of vexation and shame together, he knew not how
to lift up his eyes, to look on either of them: which Tzerra-Chan observing,
and inferring thence, that he had said too much, rose from Table and went to
his own House. As soon as the King had taken notice of his departure, he called
Agasi, and said to him, Thou have seen, Agasi, after what manner Tzirra, not
thinking it enough to have dishonored thy House, must needs make ostentation
of his lewdness, and reproach thee with thy infamy, and have the confidence to
do it in my presence: Go thy ways, and bring me his head. Agasi obeyed, and
went his way; but about some two hours after, the King much wondering to find
that Agasi was not returned, sends after him, to know what was become of him.
The King had this account brought him, that Tzirra and Agasi had been found,
like very good friends, making merry, and drinking together. Whereupon, the
King not able to forbear laughing, cries out, ja Kurrumsak, O the poor Cuckold:
but immediately after, reflecting on their procedure, and imagining, that it
was joint design between them to put the affront upon him, Insolence punished.
and that they laughed at him in their sleeves; he Commanded Aliculi-Chan,
Brother to Rustan, Chan of Tauris, Divanbeg, or Judge of the Province, to go
and fetch both their heads. In the mean time, Agasi coming to himself, and
considering that the King never jested in things of that nature, and that he
might well come to repent his neglect in executing his Commission, took leave
of the company and withdrew; but Tzirra, confident of the King's favor, and
presuming on the familiarity there had been between them, was so imprudent as
to stay, as it were expecting the effects of his Prince's indignation, and had
his Head cut off. Agasi, making his advantage of Tzirra's death, went in the
mean time to the Sepulcher of Iman Rise, whence he brought one of those
Certificates, wherewith, some months after, he presented himself before the
King; who, perceiving him coming at a distance, could not forbear laughing, and
said to him, I commend thee for thy wit, my honest kind hearted Cuckold, go thy
ways, I pardon thee for Iman Risa 's sake; come, kiss my foot. Thus did this
Sijaretname or Certificate, save Agasi Bek's his life, who was afterward
entertained again into the Schach's service, not indeed in the quality of
Steward, but only as a Gentleman belonging to his Chamber.

Yet is it not to be thought, but that these Secretaries, of whom such
Certificates are obtained, are gulity of frauds and connivances in the disposal
of them, by delivering them signed and sealed, with blanks to put in the names
of such as may have occasion for them; as may be seen by the Copy which is in
his Highness's Library at Gottorp. Of Schich-Sefi, his Life and Miracles, we
shall give an account hereafter, when we come to treat of the Religion of the
Persians.

In the same Village af Kelheran, about a League and a half from Ardcbil, there
is another sumptuous sepulcher, built in honor of Seid-Tsebrail,, the Father
of Schich-Sefi. He was a poor Peasant, Another Saint's Sepulcher.
who not able to pretend to any thing particular, which might distinguish him
from the other Inhabitants of the place, had also his Burial common with them.
But Sedredin, finding the reputation of his Father's Sanctity so well
established, that it was become in a manner Hereditary in his Person, would
needs have it return backwards to his Grandfather, and to that end, caused his
Relics to be uncovered, and honored them with a Sepulcher, at the place where
it is now to be seen. Some affirm, that in the same Tomb are kept the bones of
Seid-Sala, and Seid Kudbedin, Father and Grandfather of Tzebrail: but others
would have all the honor done to Seid Tzebrail alone. And it is possible they
may be all mistaken, it being very hard, that, after so many years, their bones
and ashes could be distinguished from those of so many others.

The Tomb it self stood in the midst of a large Garden, The Tomb described.
and was built absolutely round, raised ten steps from the ground, adorned all
about with glass of all sorts of colors, which are preserved by Iron-grates,
and had in the midst of its Roof, a great round Tower, built of blew and green
Stones. Those of our retinue, who were desirous to go into it, were forced to
leave their shoes and Boots at the door, as also their Swords and their Canes.
The building within was of admirable Architecture. The Roof, which was Azure
Gilt, was joined by bowing-Pillars, through which the light came in. The floor
was covered with the richest kind of Tapistry, and the Walls, which were open
of all sides, had in them other little Partitions, or Vaults, where they taught
Children to read and sing the Alchoran, so to enable them in time to become
Hasisans, or Guardians of that Holy Sepulcher. We found here and there, upon
little seats, Books lying open, in order to the singing of their Service, after
the same manner as we had seen at the sepulcher of Schich-Sefi. The Tomb was
about a man's height, and an Ell and a half in breadth, of Joyners work, all
the Junctures being done over with little plates of Copper, and all covered
with a piece of green Velvet. Over the Tomb hung four Lamps, whereof two were
of Gold, the other two of Silver, which two Tziragts Chihan, or snuffers, were
obliged to light at the cloze of the Evening, and to keep in all Night. Over
against the Tomb, there was a little Chapel, kept for the Sepulcher of several
other persons of the same Family of Schich-Sefi.

From the sanctity of the place, The Governor of Ardebil administers an Oath
to the religious men belonging to the Sepulcher.
it proceeds, that the Chan of Ardebil, administers an Oath to the Religious
men of the place, for their fidelity thereto, as well as their allegiance to
the King, as being obliged jointly to serve that Holy-sepulchre and the King;
whence it may be inferred, he has a certain spiritual Jurisdiction as well as
the temporal. As a privilege whereof, as also upon the account of the situation
of his City, which is no Frontier, and consequently not subject to the invasion
of the Turk, the Governor is freed of the charge of maintaining that number of
soldiers, which the other Governors are obliged to raise and keep, out of the
Revenue of their Governments.

His Retinue was very well ordered, not exceeding fifty persons, to whom his
own Temperate Life served for an Example. He treated us three several times,
but was guilty of no excess, and seemed to be very temperate in all things,
save that he took abundance of Tobacco, sucking it through a Pipe of Cane which
was put into a glass of Water, according to the Persian mode, and drunk very
much Cahwa, or Coffee, to moderate the insurrections of the Codpiece.

What is most remarkable about Ardebil, Medicinal Waters.
is the sources of Medicinal waters, whereof there is a great number, and of
several sorts, whether in order to Health or Divertisement, to which the Chan
or Governor, proffered to bring us, and would have done it, had not the
Ambassdors indisposition, who was then sick, prevented him.

What we can say of them upon the relations of the Persians, is, that, at the
foot of the Mountain Sebelan, there is a source called Serdebe, over which
Sulfakar-Chan, whom we mentioned before, built a spacious Vaulted apartment.
Its water which is almost lukewarm, and as clear as it is possible water can
be, makes a very pleasant Bath.

Three Leagues thence, on the right side of the same Mountain, there is another
source, the waters whereof are so Sulphurous and so corrupt, Sulphurous
Sources.
that they infect all the circumambient air. It is excellent good for the Itch,
upon which account it is called Abcotur, a word which in the Persian Language
signifies that disease.

Out of the same Mountain, Sources of hot water.
but from another part of it, there arise three other Springs of hot or boiling
water, called Meul, Daudan, and Randau. The first rises out of a little Hill,
between two sources of cold water. Daudau has also not far from it a cold
Spring, the water whereof is used to allay the contrary qualities, by the
mixture of their waters, which are brought by several Conduits into the public
Baths. Serpents discover the wholesomness of the water.
Daudau is admirable for the several effects it produces, being sometimes very
wholesome, sometimes of no use at all. To know when it may be used with success,
they have this observation, that there may be seen in the water Serpents, which
have on their heads other little white Serpents, set round about them like a
Crown. When there are none of these to be seen in it, the water has no virtue,
so that it is to no purpose to bath in it.

About half a League from the City, upon the right side of the Highway, there
is a Pond, or rather a standing Pool, called Schercol, which is covered all
over with great pieces of Saltpeter and Salt, as with a crust of Ice, whither
such as are troubled with the Itch, go and bath themselves.

Having staid two full months at Ardebil, JUNE.
the first of June, came thither a Mehemander named Abasculi-Beg, The King
sends the Ambassadors another Conductor.
with orders from the King for our immediate departure thence, he being charged
to bring us within six weeks to the Court, where he said the Ambassadors were
with much impatience expected. But being himself an ancient man, and
consequently not fit to be over-earnest in traveling, he left with us his son,
whose care it was to conduct us to Ispahan. These new orders obliged Netzefbeg,
who had been our Mehemander from Scamachie, to take leave of us. We requited,
in some measure, his civilities toward us, with a Present of four pair of
Sables, five Else of dark gray Cloth, four Else of green Satin, the like
quantity of blew Satin of Genua, and four bottles of Aquavitae.

Abasculi did all that lay in his power to hasten our departure, and was so
earnest to find us all necessary conveniences, that he caused the Horses and
Camels to be brought to the very Doors of our Lodgings, the more to oblige us
to send away the Baggage. But the Ambassador Brugman, who was resolved to have
the brass-pieces, which he had kept till then, brought away along with us,
would needs, in defiance of all persuasion to the contrary, have carriages made
for them. Which to satisfy him in, the Mehemander was forced to make use of
certain Trees, which were an Ornament to the City, after many remonstrances, of
the impossibility which he told us we should meet with by the way, to draw
Artillery after us. So that we found our selves insensibly engaged to make a
longer stay there than we expected; for, though they used all possible
diligence to make the said Carriages, yet was our journey put off for eight
days longer.

At last, all things being ready, there was sent to the Chan three pair of the
best kind of Sables, whereof the Persians make very great account, a
striking-Clock, a Chest, or Cellar, containing twelve bottles of Ros Solis, and
two pictures, done by our own Painter, representing a Person of quality and a
Lady, dressed after the French mode. He sent back to the Ambassadors, each of
them an excellent Horse, with their Bridles and Saddles, set out with
Silver-plates, two pieces of Satin, one red the other blew, one piece of Gold
and Silver Brocado, one piece of Cotton-stuff, with flowers of silk, and a
piece of Cushion Canvas, with flowers of gold and silver.

June 10. the Mehemander brought a hundred and sixty Horses, They leave Ardebil.
and twelve Camels, as well for the Baggage, as the six pieces of Artillery.
The next day, we sent away both, and on the 12. followed our selves. The
Ambassador Brugman, who was yet weak, though recovered of his Fever, was
carried in a Horse-Litter, and went away about five in the morning, attended by
thirty persons of our Retinue. Most of the Inhabitants, who had no notice of
our departure, and had never seen any Litter before, finding it covered with
Cloth, and compassed by men on Horseback, imagined we were going to celebrate
some Festival in the Country, and that the Litter carried the mysteries of our
Religion. The Ambassador Crusius went away about eight, with the rest of the
Retinue. Kelbele-Chan was gone before to a Garden, without the City, expecting
the Ambassadors, that he might take leave of them, it being not their custom,
no more than it is in some other places, to conduct Strangers at their
departure, with the same Ceremonies as they had received them, withal, it
being, according to their persuasion, an incivility, to bring such as they had
before kindly entertained, out of their Lodgings. Accordingly, after we had
traveled about a League, we met him in the fields, and with him a Sulthan of
Tabris, who being Marshal in the Persian Army, had about him a considerable
number of people, who were all covered with Tygres and Lynx's skins, and by
their countenances discovered the quality of their Master. The Governor
carried the Ambassador Crusius into the Ottaks, or Huts of the Tartarian
shepherds, not much out of the Highway, whither he had brought abundance of
cold Meat, Fruits and Conserves.

Having taken leave of him, The Chan takes leave of the Ambassadors.
we prosecuted our journey, over a high and craggy Mountain, till we came to
the Village of Busum, which lies in a bottom, four Leagues from Ardebil. There
we over-took our Baggage and our Artillery; but the Wheels of the Carriages
were so spent, that the Ambassador Brugman was, with much ado, persuaded, that
it were more convenient to leave the six greater Pieces there, upon the promise
made by the Mehemander, that he would get an order from the King to the
Governor of Ardebil, to have them sent after us, and to that end, he took the
bore and size of them. We took along with us the two little brass Pieces,
weighing each of them 300. weight, and four murchering Pieces.

June the 13. we continued our journey, through very bad way, and over
Mountains with such dreadful precipices, that not thinking it safe to trust
the Beasts with the Litter, wherein the Ambassador Brugman lay, we had it
carried by men. In the Valleys, we found many great Villages and Huts, and
excellent Meadows, all covered with fair Cattle. Having traveled five Leagues,
or better that day, we came at night to a Village called Sengoa, where we found
a Melik, The Province of Chalcal.
or Receiver general of the whole Province of Chalcal, which begins at that
Village, and reaches as far as the River Kisilosein. His name was Baindur, and
he had succeeded his Father in that employment, who had been so much in favor
with Schach-Abas, that with one of the Women of his Seraglio, whom he married,
he gave him two or three great Lordships.

The 14. our way lay still over high Mountains, The corruption of the Persian
Officers.
yet in our way, we passed through three Villages, where our Mehemandar failed
not, according to his custom, to take up Horses, pretending they were for us,
that the Country people might be obliged to redeem them. Having traveled four
farsangs, or leagues, we came into a very pleasant Valley, where we lodged near
a delightful Spring. And whereas we had some occasion to stay there till the
next day at noon, I had the leisure to observe the height of the Sun there, and
found, that we were at thirty seven degrees, Grass-hoppers.
and twenty minutes of the Line. In this place, we saw green Grass-Hoppers,
which were above three Inches in length, and one and a half in compass.

The 15. presently after Dinner, we set forward on our journey, and the
Ambassador Brugman finding himself a little more hearty, got on Hors-back with
the rest. Before we got to the dreadful Mountain Taurus, which the Persians
call Perdelis, we came to a bottom, which presented it self to our view like an
Abyss. We were two hours in getting down to it, and above three in getting out
of it, though between the points of the Mountains, there seemed not to be half
a League distance. It is a most dangerous passage for Travelers, who are
obliged to come in strong parties, for fear of falling into the hands of
Robbers, who discover, at a distance, the number of passengers, and accordingly
judge whether they can engage them, or must let them alone.

There runs through the bottom the River Kisilosein, Kisilosein.
which falls into it through Rocks and Precipices, with an inconceivable
swiftness, and a noise that stuns the passengers. The waters of it are whitish;
whence it comes that in the Province of Kilan, where it falls into the Caspian
Sea, it is, in Talisman, called Isperuth. Schach-Tamas built a very fair Bridge
over it, of Brick, containing nine Arches. The way was planted on both sides
with wild Almond-Trees, Cypress, and Sena-Trees. Having crossed the River, we
came to the Ascent, which was very steepy, though it went still winding till it
came to the top of the Mountain, and it was so hard to get up, that to advance
ought, we were many times forced to step up as if we got up a pair of stairs:
having in the mean time on our left hand, Precipices and Abysses so dreadful
to look on, that the Mule of a Muscovian Ambassador falling down there, was
never after seen or heard of: insomuch that thinking it not safe to ride it up,
we alighted, and led our Horses.

By that time we were got to the top of the Mountain it was night, and that so
dark, that we lost our way, in the absence of our Mehemandar, who had stayed
behind in some Villages in the bottom. We were gotten into very dangerous
ways, and went still a-foot, though the trouble we had been at, (which had put
us all into a sweat) weariness, and the cold, which beat into our faces, might
well have prevailed with us to make use of our Horses. We were three whole
hours, ere we overcame the darkness of the night, and all other imaginable
inconveniences; but at last about midnight, we got to the Village of Keintze,
four Leagues from our last Lodging. We stayed there all the next day, as well
in expectation of our Mehemandar, and to give our Horses a little rest, as to
refresh our selves, after the precedent day's weariness, with the
Divertisement, which Wine, our Music, and the noise of our Artillery could
afford us. The Mehemandars complaint.
We intended to give our Mehemandar a sharp reprehension, and reproach him with
his negligence; but he soon stopped our mouths, telling us, that he could not
but acknowledge himself obliged by his charge, to wait on the Ambassadors, and
that he should not have neglected their service; but that he had not the heart
to hear the injurious, and blasphemous expressions, which fell every foot from
the Ambassador Brugman, which yet should not hinder him from taking order, that
we should be plentifully supplied with Provisions; wherein, to give him his
due, he failed not, and contributed much to the good Cheer we made that day.

The 17. we left Keintze, after the mid-day's great heat was a little over: but
our Mehemandar, instead of Conducting us along the Highway, made us turn on
the right hand, and Lodged us in a Village, called Hatzimir, seated in a
bottom, which was, of all sides, encompassed with Rocks. The Melik, or Receiver
of the place, treated us with certain Basins of fruit, Apricocks and Grapes,
which were not fully ripe, and a sack of Wine, wherewith we made a Collation,
which served us for a Supper: for our Cook, presuming we should have kept the
Highway, was gone before us with all the Provisions.

June 18. we got on Horseback after Sermon, and Dinner, marching after the
rate of a full trot, between two very sleepy Hills, and we came about midnight
to the Village of Kamahl, which is two leagues or better out of the Highway,
and six from our last Lodging, and we were Lodged in several houses, scattered
up and down, upon three hills. They had taken up for the Ambassadors a great
unfurnished house, at the entrance of the Village; but finding there was no
convenienee at all for them, they refused to Lodge there; and having left two
of their Guard upon the Avenues of the Village, to give an account of them to
the rest of the Retinue, they took up other Lodgings, and we after their
example, though the Country People, who were surpised at our unexpected
arrival, and could not so soon get their Wives and Daughters out of the way,
denied us entrance, and put us to the necessity of taking up Quarters by force,
half-dead as we were with cold, and spent with hard traveling. But we were
hardly laid down, hoping to rest our selves the remainder of that night, when
our Trumpet sounding to horse, The Persians set upon the Ambassadors Guard.
made us get out of our Beds, to see what the matter should be. Being come to
the Trumpetter, he brought us to the Ambassadors Lodgings, where we understood
that twenty Persians of the same Village, all horsed, had set upon, abused, and
dis-arm'd the Guard which the Ambassadors had left upon the Avenues of the
Village, and that they had killed them, if our Steward, with the Muscovian
Interpreter, who, by reason of his sickness, had not been able to follow us,
had not come up to their relief, and made the Persians draw back, fearing there
might be others coming after them. There was a Lieutenant with twenty
Musketeers commanded out, to clear the Highways all about, and all the Retinue
were Lodged as near as could be to the Ambassadors.

The 19. we continued in the same place, where we caused Tents to be pitched.
Here our Secretary fell sick of a burning Fever.

The next day, being the 20. we departed thence about two in the mo^ning, and
marched all the Fore-noon, which was extremely hot, through a vast Plain, where
we saw only barren and heathy grounds. The City of Senkan.
About noon we came to the little City of Senkan, six Leagues from Camahl. The
City is not enclosed with a Wall, but is otherwise sufficiently well built.
Within half a League of the City, we received from the Governor of Sulthanie,
who was then in the City, a Present of certain Dishes of Apr^cocks and
Cowcumbers, which were a great refreshment to us, in that excessive heat and
sultriness of weather.

At the extremity of the Suburbs we were met by thirty persons on Horseback,
well mounted, who received us in the name of the Governor of Sulthanie, whose
name was Sewinduc Sulthan. A Horseman had neither hands n^r feet.
Among these Gentlemen there was one, who, though he had neither hands nor
feet, yet made a shift to guide his horse, with as much skill as any of the
rest. He was son to one of the principal Inhabitants of the City, who had been
heretofore much in favor with Schach-Abas, the Grandfather of Schach-Sefi,
for his Poems, and other excellent Productions of his Understanding; upon the
account whereof, he was so well respected at Court; that the King not only
granted him the life of his son, who for some Crimes had deserved death, but
would also continue him in his favor, contrary to the custom of the Country,
according to which all the relations of a Malefactor, or unfortunate person,
participate of his disgrace or misfortune. The young man had been guilty of
strange debauches and extravagances, even to the Ravishing of Maids and Women
in their houses, so often reiterated, that they became at last insupportable;
so that the Schach ordered him, to have his hands and feet cut off, and caused
the stumps of his arms and legs to be thrust into boiling Butter, to stop the
blood. He had wooden hands, crooked at the extremities, wherewith he made a
shift to hold his Bridle.

The City of Senkan was heretofore of a considerable bigness, Senkan destroyed
by Tamberlane.
and famous for its Trading, before Tamberlane destroyed it: but what reduced
it to the condition it is in now, is the Turk, who has taken and plundered it
several times. Yet are there some very handsome houses in it, and those well
furnished, in which we were entertained with much civility, and our sick people
extremely well accommodated. The Sulthan came to visit the Ambassadors
immediately after their arrival, and made his excuses that he had not met them;
which was upon this score, that having been wounded in the shoulder at the
siege of Eruan, and the wound being lately opened, he could not have waited on
us in person. We sent to him our Physician and Chyrurgeon, who dressed him;
which he looked on as so great a kindness, that he thought it not requital
enough to send us a Present of several excellent Fruits, but he also doubled
the ordinary allowance of our Provisions.

All about this City, there are only Barren and Sandy grounds, which bring
forth only Briars of about the height of a man's hand.

About half a League from it, A branch of Mount Taurus.
there may be seen a branch of the Mountain Taurus, which they call Peydar
Peijamber, and reaches from North to South, toward Kurdesthan, where may be
seen, as they affirm, the Sepulcher of one of the most ancient Prophets, from
whom the Mountain derives its name. At the foot of this Mountain there is a
very pleasant Valley, which is checkered up and down with a great number of
Villages.

June 21. having stayed till the great Heat were over, we left Senkan after
Sunset, taking our way, Sulthanie.
by Moonlight, through a Plain of six Leagues, at the end whereof we came,
with the Sunrising, to Sulthanie. It had been so calm and cold in the Night,
that we had hardly the use of our Limbs, so that we had much ado to alight.
This sudden change, from extreme cold, to the excessive heats of the next day,
occasioned the falling sick of fifteen persons of our retinue at the same time,
all of a violent burning Fever, the fits whereof were very frequent,
accompanied with a benumd'ness of all the Members: but that misfortune hindered
not but that they were set on horseback, and though to avoid the heats of the
day, we afterward traveled only by night, yet were they so far from
over-mastering their former weariness, that they were brought lower and lower.
Two of our Guards took occasion to fall out at this place, and fought a Duel,
wherein one of the two, who was a Scotch-man, named Thomas Craig, was run into
the Lights, near the Heart, of which VVound he lay long sick, but at last was
Cured.

As to the City of Sulthanie, Its situation.
it lies at eighty four degrees, five minutes Longitude, and at thirty six
degrees, thirty minutes Latitude, in a spacious Plain, which is not, as Mr.
Cartwright writes, encompassed of all sides with a great Mountain; but it has
indeed on both sides, especially on the right hand, the Mountain of Keidar. It
makes a great show at a distance, by reason of some very sumptuous structures,
and a great number of steeples, and great Pillars, which dazzle the eye on the
outside; but within it is in a manner desolate, and when a man comes near it,
he finds the Walls almost even with the ground. It was heretofore one of the
greatest, and noblest Cities of all Persia, being above half a League in
length, as may be yet seen by the marks upon the way of Hamedan, half a League
or better from the City, in a gate which has belonging to it, Built by
Chodabende.
and a Tower, which some affirm was heretofore part of the City Walls. Sulthan
Mahomet Chodabende, having joined to his other Territories some part of the
Indies, as also of the Vsbeques, and Turkey, built it out of the ruins of the
ancient City of Tigranocerta, and made it the seat of his Empire, from whom it
derives the name of Sulthania: inasmuch as heretofore, the Kings of Persia were
not called Schachs, as they are now, but they assumed the quality of Sulthan,
as the Grand Seigneur does. Chotza Reschid, King of Persia, whom Ios. Barbarus
calls Giansam, destroyed some part of the City of Sulthania, upon a Rebellion
of the Inhabitants, and what he had left, Tamberlane made an end of. We saw
there the ruins of a very fair Castle, which had served the King for a Palace,
and the City for a Citadel, there being yet standing some part of its Walls,
all built of square pieces of freestone, and adorned with a great number of
quadrangular Towers. The noblest buildings in it, or Emerat, is the Metzid or
Mosquey, where is to be seen the Sepulcher of Mahumed Chudabende. It has three
gates, very much higher than those of St. Marks at Venice, and are not of Brass
or Copper, as Bizarrus relates, but of Steel, polished, and wrough Damask-wi^e.

The greatest of the three gates, which is over against the Meydan, or
Marketplace, would not open, as they affirm, even though twenty of the
strongest men could be chosen should endeavor all they could to thrust it
open, if they do not pronounce these words, Beask Aly Bukscha, A likely story.
that is, be opened for Aly' s sake, and then the Gate turns to and fro upon
its hindges, with so much ease, that, no Child but may open it. The whole roof
which grows narrower and narrower up toward the top, is built with white and
blew stones, which, in several places, have very fair Characters, and excellent
Figures done upon them. One part of the structure was divided from the other by
a brass Grate or Rail, for the Sepulcher of Mahomet Chudabende, making a kind
of Quire, where we saw several old Arabic Books, above half an Ell square,
having Letters as long as a man's finger, and black and golden Lines
alternately. I made a shift to get some of the Leaves, which I still very
carefully keep in the Prince's Library. A Paraphrase of the Alchoran.
It is some part of the Paraphrase upon the Alchoran, which they call Serats
Elkulub, or Candle of the Heart, and begins with a Fable, the relation whereof
the Reader may happily think worth his reading. He says then, that God banished
the Devils, and had shut Heaven Gate upon them, yet had they still a desire to
know what the Angels did, and what they said of the good or ill fortunes of
men, that they might give them notice thereof, by the means of Fortune Tellers
and Sorcerers. To dive into these secrets, they thought the only way was to get
up on one another shoulders, till such time as the last could put his Ear to
Heaven Gate. God perceiving their temerarious attempt, darted on the head of
the foremost of them a Star, which is called in Arabic Schihab, which striking
through all the Devils immediately reduced them to ashes: But that this
judgment hinders not, but that sometimes the Devils make use of the same
means, to endeavor to dive into the secrets of Paradise, though they are often
punished for it. Thence is it, that when the Persians see one of those Meteors,
which to our sight appear as Stars, The superstition of the Persians.
and seem to fall down to the earth, they rejoice thereat, and pronounce these
words.

Chodanike dascht mat a es schitan,
H^me busuchtend we ma Chalas sehudim.
That is to say, God of his goodness keep us from the Devil; they shall all be
reduced to ashes, and we shall be delivered from them.

The Sepulcher of Sulthan Mahomed Chodabende is to be seen through a grate of
admirable workmanship, at the end of the Temple, on that side where the Meherab
or Altar, stands. This grate is certainly one of the noblest things that are to
be seen all over Persia, being made of Indian Steel, polished and wrought
Damask-wise, the Bars being about the bigness of a man's arm, and so neatly
wrought that the Junctures are hardly discernable. Nay some affirm it is all of
a piece, and that there were seven years spent in the doing of it, at the end
whereof Chodabende had it transported from the Indies, together with the Gates
of the Mosquey, to the place where they are now to be seen.

There were in the same Emerat, Artillery.
twenty brass Guns and a Mortar-piece, and among the rest, four pieces of
Battery, the others Culverings, all set upon carriages with four wheels. The
Mortar-piece was marked with a spread Eagle, above which were these two Letters
A. and Z. and under it an A. The Balls were of Marble. The Tower was built in
the form of an Octogone, and compassed about with a great Gallery, which had
eight little Towers, up to which there was an ascent by eight low steps. At the
entrance of the Mosquey there was a square Fountain, into which the water was
brought from a Spring rising out of the Mountain Keider. There is also
belonging to it a very fair Garden, and a Summe-house.

There is in the same City another fair Mosquey, founded by Schach Ismael, the
first of that name. The entrance into it is through a very fair and large Gate,
over which there is a round Tower: and the first thing offers it self to your
view is a noble Pyramid, somewhat decayed at the top, having about it eight
fair Pillars of Marble. Then is it that you come into the Mosquey it self,
which is very high and well arched, having a great number of Pillars which
up-hold the Roof, with pleasant Galleries, and in the midst a rich Pulpit. This
also has a fair Garden belonging to it, in the midst whereof there is a Tower,
whose point ends in a Pyramid.

These structures do in some measure oblige us to credit what Paulus Iovius
says, Tamberlane had a respect for the Mosqueys.
in the 14. Book of his History; as also what F. Perodin confirms, in the Life
of Tamberlane, to wit, that that barbarous Commander, who overran all that lay
in his way like a Torrent, yet expressed a certain respect for those things,
which were, though out of superstition, accounted sacred.

Near this Mosquey there is also to be seen another great Gate, of freestone,
between two Pillars, twenty fathom high, which seems to be antique, and had
been built at the Ceremonies of some Triumph; but it begins now to decay.

The City has about six thousand Inhabitants, who wondered very much to hear us
relate, that some of those who have published their Travels into Persia, would
make the World believe, that the cold weather forced them in the Winter time to
forsake the City, and change their Habitations. For, it is so far from being
true, that there are many places in Persia, where the cold obliges the
Inhabitants to change their Habitations, that, on the contrary, it is an effect
ordinarily caused there by the Heat.

True indeed it is, that there are some places in that Kingdom, where the cold
is very incommodious, by reason of the scarcity of firing, as for instance,
near Eruan, at a place called Deralekes, as being seated between two Mountains,
and especially at the Village of Arpa. But it is not so great as to oblige the
Inhabitants to change their Habitations: for they only quit their upper Rooms,
and retire into Cellars, built very deep under ground, not only to serve them
for a place of retirement in the Winter time, against the cold, but also in
Summer, against the heat.

June 25. we left Sulthanie, The Women travel in great Chests
after we had staid there three days, which were spent up and down the
Country, in getting us fresh Horses and Camels. The sick persons, who by reason
of their weakness, were not able to ride on Horseback, were disposed into such
Chests, as the Women make use of when they travel. The Persians call them
Ketzawhea, and they are put on Camels backs, like Carriers packs. The Physician
and my self were set upon the same Camel, whereby we were put to two great
inconveniences, one proceeding from the violent Motion caused by the going of
that great Beast, which at every step, gave us a furious jolt; and the other,
from the insupportable stink of the Camels, whereof there being but one Boy to
guide eight or ten, they were tied one to another, and went all in a file,
insomuch that the infectious smell of all that went before, came full into our
Noses.

We departed two hours before Sunrising, and traveled that day six Leagues,
through a very fertile Country, all arable and pasture Lands, leaving, on the
left hand, the little Mountains called Tzikitz^ki, where the King of Persia's
best Race-Horses and Mares for breed are kept. About noon we took up our
Lodging at the Village of Choramdah, which lies on the side of a little River,
having so many Trees and Gardens about it, that it is not without reason that
name is given it, which signifies, a place of Pleasure.

The 26. we departed thence in the night, and traveled five Leagues or better,
over Mountains and Valleys.

The 27. we departed at midnight, and, having traveled five Leagues, we were
got, by Sunrising, near the City of Casuin, or Cashan; but that the Daruga, who
had the Command of it, might have the leisure to set his affairs in order for
our entrance, our Mehemander carried us to a Village were we staid above two
hours till such time as the Daruga came to receive us. This entrance was not
accompanied with the same Ceremonies as we had seen in other places, in regard
the Governor, having not the dignity of Chan, could not express the same
Magnificence. Yet was it handsome enough, in as much as the Daruga came attended
by five or six hundred men, horse and foot. There came also to meet us an
Indian Prince, accompanied by some Gentlemen on horseback of his own Country,
and followed by a great number of Lacqueys and Pages. He came in a kind of
Chariot, having one other person with him in it. The Chariot was drawn by two
white Oxen, which had very short necks, and a bunch between the two shoulders,
but they were as swift and manageable as our horses. The Chariot was covered
above, and laid over two Wheels, which instead of an Axletree, turned upon a
piece of Iron, made so crook'd at the middle, that it bore the weight of the
whole Chariot. The Charioteer sat before, and guided the Oxen, fastened to a
Beam, which was made fast to the Horns, with a Cord drawn through their
Nostrils.

Being come within 500. paces of the City, we met with fifteen young Ladies,
excellently well mounted, very richly clad in Cloth of Gold and Silver, etc.
having Neck-laces of great Pearls about their necks, Pendants in their ears,
and abundance of other Jewels. Their faces were to be seen, contrary to the
custom of honest Women in Persia. Accordingly, we soon found, as well by their
confident carriage, as the account given us of them, that they were some of the
Eminent Curtezans about the City, who came to entertain us with the
Divertisement of their Music. They marched before us, and sung, to the sound
of certain Hawboyes, and Bag-pipes, that went before them, making a very
extravagant kind of Harmony. And that we might be sure to see the City, we were
carried quite through it, and Lodged on the other side thereof.

As we passed through the Meydan, we saw several persons playing on Timbrels,
and Hawboyes, who, joining with the other Musicians, accompanied us to our
Quarters. The people came also thither in great numbers, some of them having it
put into their heads, that there were in the Ketzawehas, some great Beauties,
whom we carried as ^^^ents to the King: but when they saw sick persons with
great beards coming out of them, they hung down their heads, and made all the
haste they could away.

I found this City, The situation of Caswin.
conformably to the Calculation of the Persians and Arabians, at 85. degrees
Longitude, and at 36. degrees, 15. minutes Latitude. It is one of the principal
Cities of the Province of Erak, which is the ancient Parthia, wherein is
comprehended as well Sulthania, as all the other Cities, Is the ancient Arsacia.
froth this place as far as Ispahan. It was anciently called Arsacia, and it is
seated in a great sandy Plain, having, within half a days journey of it,
Westward, the great Mountain of Elwend, which reaches toward the South-west,
as far as Bagdat or Babylon. The City is a farsang, or good German league in
compass, but has neither Walls, nor any Garrison kept in it, Has above
100000. Inhabistants.
by reason it lies at so great a distance from the Frontiers. Yet has it, with
these disadvantages, above a hundred thousand Inhabitants, whereof, if there
were occasion for them, a good part might be put into Arms. Their Language is
the Persian, but somewhat different from the common Dialect, Its Language.
whence it comes that it is not so intelligible to the other Persians, being
much after the rate that the German Language is to the Hollanders. The houses
are all of Brick baked in the Sun, according to the Persian way, having not any
Ornament without, but within, they are very well furnished, as to Vaults,
Wainscoats, Paintings, and other Household Stuff.

The Streets are not paved, whence it comes, that, upon the least wind, the
City is filled with dust. It has no other water than what is brought by
aqueducts from the Mountain of Elwend, into Cesterns, wherein it is preserved.
No house almost but has a particular place for the keeping of Ice and Snow,
for the Summer. We were forced to get into these, to avoid the excessive heat.

Heretofore, The ancient residence of the Kings of Persia.
the Kings of Persia had their ordinary residence at this place, at least, ever
after Schach-Tamas transferred the Seat of the Empire from Tauris to this City.
Some attribute that translation to Schach-Ismael, though the continual Wars he
was engaged in, suffered him not to stay long in any one place. But it is not
questioned but that he built the noble Palace which stands near the Maidan,
which has belonging to it a fair Garden, adorned as well without as within,
with Guilding, Painting, and such other embellishments as are in use among the
Persians.

There was another Garden opposite to this Palace, Its Palace.
which was above half a league in compass, and had several little Structures
within it. This was one of the most pleasant Gardens that I ever saw, not only
by reason of the great number of all sorts of Trees, as Apples, Pears, Peaches,
Apricocks, Pomegranates, Almonds, and other Fruit Trees, but also by reason of
the fair walks of Cypress, and the Trees called Tzinnar which gave us a very
pleasant Prospect.

This City has two great Marketplaces. Cartwright names the bigger of the two
Atmaidan, and says, that, in the Persian Language, it signifies a Horse-market.
I could never find, that in any part of Persia, Markets.
there was a Market, purposely for the buying and selling of Horses: whereupon,
considering with my self that the Persians, who call, by the general name of
Maidan, all those Markets, where all things are indifferently sold, I imagine,
that Author's mistake proceeded hence, that, being ignorant of the Arabic, he
read Atmaydan, for Almaidan, al, being the Article, without which the Persians
and Arabiaas never pronounce the word Maidan. The greater of these Maidans, or
Marketplaces, is somewhat longer, but not so broad as that of Ardebil, and
has, on the South Side, several great places, built by some of the Chans and
Persian Lords. The most magnificent amongst them are those of Allawerdi-Chan,
Governor of Schiras; that of Aliculi-Chan, President of Justice; that of
Mahomet-Chan, Chan, or Governor of Kentze; and that of Sehich-Achmed-Chan, who
was great Provest in the reign of Schach-Abas. The other Marketplace is called
Senke-Maidan, and is toward the West part of the City. In both the
Marketplaces, as also in the Bazars, or Shops and Storehouses, which are in
the covered streets, there may be seen a great number of Merchants, and
abundance of Commodities, which are to be bought there at a very reasonable
rate.

I my self bought Turqueses there, which they call Firuse, and are found in
great quantities near Nisabur, Turqueses and Rubies vary cheap.
and Firusku, of about the bigness of a Pea, nay, some as big as little Beans,
for two shillings, or two and six pence at the most. Rubies and Granates were
also very cheap there.

In the Evening, after the shops are shut, there is, on the East Side, another
kind of Commodity exposed to sale, to wit, a considerable number of the
Cabbeha, or common Traders, who there prostitute themselves to any that will
take them up. They all sit in a row, having their faces covered with a Veil,
and behind them there stands a Bawd, whom they call Delal, who has by her a
bed, and a quilted coverlet, and holds in her hand a Candle unlighted, which,
when any Customer comes, she presently lights, that he may look the Wench in
the face, and order her to follow him, whom he likes best among them.

On the East Side of the City lies the Churchyard, The Sepulcher of Hossen^
Son*
where there is to be seen, in a fair Mosquey, the Sepulcher of Schahesade
Hossein, one of the sons of Hossein, at which the Oaths taken in Law-sutes are
administered; a custom which is also observed in all other parts of Persia, at
the places where there are any Sepulchers of Saints, or those of any of their
kin^ed. Whence it comes, that the Persians, when they make some difficulty of
crediting what is said to them, immediately ask, Scahe Sade Hussein, pile
Musef; that is, dare thou affirm that upon the Saints Sepulcher, or upon the
Alchoran? Besides this Mosquey or Metzit, there are about fifty more, (...)
whereof is that which they call Tzame Metzid, where they assemble on Fridays
(...) prayers.

There (...) the City of Caswin many Caravanseras, Caravanseras.
for the convenience of foreign Merchants, and a great number of public Baths.
There is one behind the Garden belonging to the King's Palace, which they call
Haman Charabe. It is now half destroyed, and there is a story told of it, which
I conceive pleasant enough to deserve insertion into this Relation. They say,
that there lived heretofore at Caswin a very famous Physician, The fabulous
story of Lokman.
named Lokman, a black Arabian, who had acquired so great reputation, not only
by the Books he had written in Medicine, but also by many other excellent
productions of his understanding, that the Inhabitants have still a very great
Veneration for his memory. Nay it is to be found in their Kulusthan, that they
gave him the surname of Wise, when in the 2. Book, chapter 16. they say, Lokman
hakimra kuftendi Aedebeski amuchti? Kust, es biedbahn. Herstze ischan kerdend,
men pertis Kerdem. That is, that the wise Lokman, being asked one day by what
means he had attained so great Learning and Knowledge, he made answer, it was
by means of the ignorant and uncivil, for he had always done what was contrary
to what he had seen them do. This Lokman having attained a great age, and being
upon his deathbed, sent for his Son, and told him, that he would leave him an
inestimable Treasure, and having commanded to be brought him three Glasses,
full of certain Medicinal waters, he said they had the virtue to raise up a
Dead man to Life, if they were applied before the body began to corrupt. That,
casting upon the Deceased the water which was in the first Glass, the Soul
would return into the Body, that, upon the pouring of the second, the Body
would stand upright; and that upon the third, the Person would be absolutely
alive, and should do all things as before; that however he had very seldom
made use of this Experiment, out of a fear of committing a sin, by undertaking
to intermeddle with that which is reserved to God alone; and that out of the
same Consideration, he exhorted him to be very careful how he made use of it,
as being a secret rather to be admired, than put often to experience. With
these exhortations Lokman dying, his Son was very mindful of the advice he had
given him, and ^^cending the same tenderness of Conscience as his Father had
expressed before him, he reserved the Glasses till he might have occasion to
make trial of them upon himself. Accordingly being at the point of Death, he
commanded a man that waited on him, to make use of those Glasses, as his Father
had taught him. The man having caused his Master's Body to be brought into the
Bath we spoke of before, poured upon it the two first Glasses, which wrought
the effect, which Lokman had promised they should; insomuch that the Master
sitting up, and impatient to return to Life, cries out, bris, bris, that is to
say, pour, pour; at which words the fellow was so frightened, that he let the
third Glass fall down to the ground; so that the unfortunate Lokman Sade was
forced to lie down again, and take the Journey which all other Mortals do. The
Persians confidently affirm, that, near this ruinous Bath, that Voice af bris,
bris, is still many times heard. They relate several other stories of this
Lokman, but I shall forbear any account of them, thinking it enough to have
produced one, to show the vanity of all the rest.

Some years since, in the time of King Abas, a certain man named Risa, began to
take upon him the quality of Schich, Risa a false Prophet.
or Prophet, and to broach a new Doctrine, imagining he might in time, acquire
the same credit and authority, as had before raised Schich-Sefi to so great
reputation. The humor of the Persians, who are extremely addicted to novelty,
brought after him, in a short time, above thirty thousand men, who, cajoll'd by
the apparent sanctity of this new Prophet, were become followers of him.
Schach-Abas, fearing this novelty might disturb the quiet of his Country, sent
for Risa, making him believe, that he was desirous to be instructed in the
particulars of his Doctrine: but when he was come, the King commanded him to
confirm it by miracles, which Risa not able to do, he put him to death as an
Impostor.

It will not be amiss here to give some account how the Indian Prince came to
live at Caswin, The History of the Indian Prince*
when we came into those parts. The great Mogul, who lived in the time of
Schach-Abas, left, at his Death, two Sons: The elder, who succeeded the Father,
soon after died, leaving behind him only that Myrsa Polagi, whom we found at
Caswin, who was but very young when his Father died. Choram, youngest Son of
that Mogul, and Uncle to young Polagi, took his advantage of that Conjuncture,
to usurp the Crown, and accordingly he was King of Indosthan at the time of our
Travels into Persia. The cruelty of Choram's reign, and the mild nature and
inclinations of Polagi, who in the mean time was arrived to a considerable age,
drew upon him the affections of the People, and the hatred of his Uncle. In so
much, that Choram, perceiving that it was the design of the Indians to bring
his Nephew into the Throne, would prevent them, by dispatching Polagi out of
the way, who having notice of his Uncles wicked intentions against him, retires
into Persia, and puts himself under the Schach's Protection. All the time
before, his Residence had been at Ispahan, where the King allowed him a pension
of 12000 Crowns per an. but he was obliged then to retire to Caswin, by reason
of a solemn Embassy, which the Mogul sent to the King of Persia, purposely to
demand him; though that during the space of three years that the said
Ambassador had been there, he had not prevailed to have him delivered up.

The Kings of Persia live in perpetual jealousy of the Indians, with whom they
never have any assured peace, by reason of the Frontiers of Candahar, which
finds Exercise for both sides, as those of Babylon do on the Turks side:
insomuch that the Persians take their advantage of any occasion, to foment the
discontents of the Grandees, as they do any other distractions tending to Civil
War. Whence it comes, that they never deny their Protection to the Indian
Princes, who are willing to retire into Persia, to oblige by that means the
Mogul to assist them against the Turk, and to continue the Commerce, which the
Persians have with the Indians, from which Persia derives so great advantages,
that the obstruction thereof would be an infinite loss to it. There are several
instances of these Protections under Schach-Ismael, and Schach-Tamas. Under the
reign of the latter it happened, that Selim, who, as eldest of the House, had
succeeded his Father, died soon after, leaving only one Son, very young, named
Humajun. Tzelaledin Ekber, younger Brother to the Deceased, who slighting the
infancy of his Nephew, takes possession of the Scepter, and the more to assure
himself thereof, he had a design to murder the right heir of the Crown.
Humajun had notice of it, and got to Persia. Tzelaledin hearing of it, sent to
demand him, with this message to the King of Persia, that if he sent him not
back, he would come and fetch him away with all the forces of his Kingdom.
Schach-Tamas, who was then engaged in an open War against the Turks, not
thinking it prudence to disoblige so powerful an Enemy, Schach-Tamas's evasion.
caused Humajun to be hidden, and that he might not make a false Oath, when he
was to give an answer to the Embassy of Tzelaledin, he put him into a Cage, and
caused that to be hung in a Tree, while he was to give Audience to the
Ambassador, to whom he protested, that, Humajun nist der chakimen; Humajun is
not upon my Lands, and dismissed the Ambassador with that answer. But having,
afterward, made a Peace with the Turk, he sent Humajun with a powerful Army,
commanded by Mehediculi Sulthan, against Tzelaledin, who was so startled to
find himself set upon by so strong an Enemy, that he was forced to run away.
Humajun desirous to requite the services of Mehediculi, bestowed on him
Lordships and great wealth in the Province of Kulkende, where he settled
himself, with the consent of Schach-Tamas, and where his Posterity still live
in much credit and authority.

The Ambassadors sent some of the retinue to visit the Prince Polagi, who
received them, sitting on a cushion of Velvet, near a Fountain, about the
border of whose Basin there was cast pieces of Tapistry, The Ambassadors send
to visit the Indian Prince.
the groundwork Gold and Silver, and he had about him a great number of
Servants and Domestics. He took this for so great a civility and kindness from
the Ambassadors, that he thought it not enough to express how sensible he was
thereof in words, but would needs treat those that had been sent to him with a
Collation of Wine and Fruits, and told them, that being not in a condition to
entertain them, as he wished, out of his own Estate, he was forced to borrow of
the Kings favors to make them that treatment. The Ambassadors intended to have
given him a personal visit, but the Persians would by no means permit it,
alleging it was against the custom of the Country; where Ambassadors are not
permitted to make any Visits before they have had audience of the King.

July 2. JULY
the Daruga invited the Ambassadors to a Divertisement, The Governor gives the
Ambassadors a Divertisement.
which he had appointed to be made on purpose for them. It was to be seen in
the great Maidan, or Marketplace, where he had caused Tents to be pitched, to
keep off the heat of the Sun, and some part of it to be sprinkled with water,
to avoid the inconvenience of the dust. Having disposed the people into a ring
all about the place, and seated the Ambassadors on high seats, there came in,
first, certain persons who were excellent at Vaulting and showing feats of
Activity. After them came in three pair of Wrastlers, most naked, having
nothing covered about them, but what nature would have to be so. Only two among
them had Leathern drawers on, done over with Oil, who discovered a miraculous
activity and strength of Body. After these had shown all could be expected from
persons of their quality, there were brought in two Rams, which run very
furiously one at the other; as also two Birds, somewhat bigger than Parrots,
which fought with great animosity. After these, there came in, with the noise
of Timbrels, eight Wolves of extraorginary bigness, fastened to long Ropes,
which they let out five or six times one after another among the people, but
drew them back ere they did any hurt. And at last came in a man covered with a
thick Mattress, who went boldly to one of the Wolves, took him up by the Body,
and carried him away.

The Prince Polagi would have given us the Divertisement of his Elephant, which
he sent for to be brought thither; but he being then at Grass, it was so long
ere they could bring him, that the Ambassadors, who were already weary of a
Divertisement, which had lasted but too long, and found themselves prejudiced
by the heat, went home to their Quarters. Some days afterward, Elephant*
we had a sight of that Elephant, at the Prince's Lodgings, and we were not a
little astonished at his monstrous bulk, which exceeded the height of any two
men, as being indeed without comparison much bigger than any of those we
afterward saw at Ispahan, where there was a great number of them. His legs
were bigger than any man about the waste, and his ears came down along his
head, half an ell in length, or better. He could do many tricks, and was
governed by a little Boy, who by touching him in the forehead with a little
pole-axe, very sharp at the point, guided him, and made him lie down and rise
up as he pleased. Whence may be corrected the Error of the ancients, An error
of the Ancients.
who were of opinion, that the Elephant could not lie down, as (...) joints in
his Legs, and that that natural defect was the occasion of his taking, when
coming to rest himself against Trees half sawn asunder, his weight forced them
down, and that falling with them, he was not able to rise again. Those, who
have written of the affairs of the Indies, have given an account of the manner
how they are taken, and therefore we shall forbear troubling the Reader with it
here.

The City of Caswin has, toward the South-South-west, the Mountain of Elwend,
which is a branch of Mount Taurus, The Mountain of Elwend.
and the most considerable Mountain of any in Persia, for its vast and noble
quarries, out of which white Marble is gotten, whereof there is such abundance,
that there is enough to supply the whole Kingdom. The Persians relate a
pleasant story of a thing, which, were it true, would be very remarkable; but
admitting it is not, we shall nevertheless insert it here, as we have it from
them, upon occasion of this Mountain.

They say then, A pleasant story.
that, heretofore, a certain King of Persia named Suhak Maran, who was much
pleased in taking journeys up and down, would needs once find out some means to
have made in the open fields, some Iauchas, which is a kind of baked paste,
used by the Persians instead of Napkins. The Devil, desirous to make his
advantage of this irregular desire of the Kings, presented himself to him in
the shape of a man, made him an Oven, which a Camel might easily carry, and
desired of him no other reward, than that he might kiss the King's shoulder.
There was no difficulty made to grant him a thing of so little consequence; but
the Devil, instead of kissing the King's shoulder, applied his teeth thereto,
takes away a piece of it, and immediately vanishes. Out of the wound, there
came two Serpents, which were perpetually biting at the head and ears of that
miserable Prince, to get out his brains; and though they were often cut off,
yet there immediately starrted up others in their room. The Devil, who had done
all the mischief, having disguised himself like a Hakim, or Physician, went and
made proffer of his service at the Court, and prescribed a remedy, which was as
bad, if not worse, than the evil it self. He said, that since those Serpents
were so desirous to feed on the brains of a man, and that, as it should seem,
it was their only sustenance, the best course were, every day, to kill two men,
and to feed them with their brains. One of the chiefest Grandees about the
Court, moved with compassion, to see daily so much innocent Blood spilt, and
considering, that by the means of so many murders, the number of the King's
Subjects would be infinitely diminished, ordered that there should be two men
brought to the Stake, as they were wont before, but that only one should be
killed, and that with the man's brains, those of a Sheep, then also new killed,
should be mixed, and that that should be the allowance of the Serpents. Which
project took so successfully, that the said Lord perceiving, that the Serpents
were not sensible thereof, he, at last, caused the two men to be conveyed out
of the way, and made use only of sheeps brain. Among those who had most
contributed to the nourishment of these Beasts, a Blacksmith, named Churdek,
was one, by which means almost all his Children had been upon that account
destroyed; so that, of seventy six Sons, that he had had, only two were left.
Growing desperate upon so great a loss, he represented to the other Inhabitants
of the City, that it was impossible for them to endure that Tyranny long; that
there was no likelihood nature should have brought them all into the world, to
be sacrifiz'd to the appetite of one particular man; that it were better to rid
themselves of the Tyrant, and in regard the State could not be without a
Governor, that it was his advice, they should bring in Kechosrow ben Fridun,
who had been put out by Suhak, and was then Living, in the Deserts of the
Mountain of Elwend. This Counsel was approved by the people, who desirous to
have it put in Execution by the person who had given it, entrusted the
Blacksmith with the management of that great enterprise, who, having fastened
his Leathern apron to an Iron hook, led on the rest of the Malcontents, and
seized the Person of Suhak. They went afterward to the Mountain of Elwend,
where they found Kechosrow among the wild Beasts, and restored him to his
Throne. The first request that Kechosrow made to the people was, that Suhak
might not be put to death; which was granted, but they carried him to the
Mountain of Demawend, which reaches from that of Elwend, toward Teheran, where
they made him go into a Cave, and hung him up by the feet. They say, he is
there Living to this day, and that the place of his punishment is known by a
sulphurous stink that comes out of it. Whereto they add, that when a stone is
cast into the Cave, there comes out a voice* which says Tzira miseni mera?
that is, Why do thou fling stones at me? They say also, that Kechosrow so
regulated his expenses, during the whole time of his Reign, that he gathered
vast Treasures together, and that he put it up in the Mountain Bakru in the
Province of Kilan, hiding it so safely, by the means of a Thelesmat or
Talisman, that, till there happen a Conjuncture of the same Stars, it will
never be discovered. They say the place is known, but that when any come near
it, there arise certain winds, which not only blow out the lights, but also
overturn the men who bring them.

But the truth of all this story, is, that there are many Sulphurous Mines in
those Mountains, and that the winds, which reign there, are very natural, and
ordinary, as well there as in several other Provinces of Persia; as we had
observed before at Ardebil. Nor is it unlikely that there may be a mystical
sense of this relation, and that the Persians, who are much addicted to teach
their Morality under Fables, would, by this fabulous History; ^demn those
Princes, who, to satisfy their irregular passions, are apt to hear flatterers,
who being ever guilty of wicked intentions, never give any good advice, and, to
prevent the inconveniences arising thereby, apply remedies that are much more
dangerous than the evil it self, and such as not only are destructive to the
people, but also putting them into despair, animate them into rebellion against
their Princes, who are, by that means, brought to great misfortunes.

July 13. we left Caswin; The Ambassadors leave Caswin.
the sick persons and the Baggage were sent away in the evening, the
Ambassadors followed the same night. The next day, the 14. having traveled
through a Plain of three Leagues, we came to the Village of Membre, whereof all
the Houses were covered like Vaults, so that looking on it at a distance, the
whole Village seemed to consist of so many Ovens. The Ambassador Crusius, the
principal person of the Embassy, began, at this place, to complain of some
indisposition: insomuch that, not being able any longer to ride on Horseback,
he was for some days following carried in a Litter. Our Minister was grown so
weak, that, not able to endure the jolting of the Horse, he alighted ever and
anon, and lay upon the ground, thinking by that means to get some ease.
Monsieur Mandelslo was the only person, who had no touch of any sickness all
along our Travels; whence it came, that he had the more convenience of
observing all the particulars thereof; which he has done with so much
exactness, that his Notes might make a considerable Volume.

We traveled that night seven Leagues, and were got the next day, being the
15. very betimes in the morning, to a fair Village, named Araseng. We found
there, in a Garden which was seated on the right side of a Torrent, good store
of Pomegranates and Almonds, which were a great refreshment to us. In the
evening, we prosecuted our travels, and got six Leagues further, over a very
smooth Mountain, and Lodged the 16. in the morning, at a Caravanscra, named
Choskeru. It was all built of Freestone, and had several Vaults and Chambers,
disposed all about a spacious Court, in the midst whereof there was a Well,
compassed by an Iron-rail. Upon the Walls of several Rooms, were to be seen the
names and devises of several persons of most Nations, who, it seems, had been
desirous to leave there behind them some marks of their passage that way. We
departed thence about four in the afternoon, and traveled, that night, nine
leagues.

The 17, we came betimes in the morning, in sight of Saba, but in regard the
Sun was not yet up, we made a halt at some distance from the City, to give them
time to come out and receive us.

The Persians put this City at 85 degrees Longitude, The situation of Saba,
and 35 Latitude; but I found it at 34 degrees, 56 minutes. It is seated in a
spacious Plain, within sight of the Mountain of Elwende, which may be
discovered thence, by reason of its height, which reaches in a manner to the
Clouds. The ruins of the City of Rhei are under the same parallel with that of
Saba, from which it is a good days journey distant, toward the East. The
ground thereabouts is of a reddish color, and brings forth neither grass nor
fruit.

The cause of that barrenness they attribute to the Malediction, which was
pronounced against it, upon the account of Omar Saad, who was one of the
principal Military Commanders, in the time of Hossein. This Omar, who had, at
first, professed friendship to Hossein, proved the only person who would serve
Iesid Peser against him; upon this score, that Hossein, being of the blood of
Mahomet, and having acquired a great reputation of Sanctity, not one Captain of
Medina would take up Arms against him, but only this Omar, who engaged in a war
against him, upon promise, that there should be bestowed on him the City of
Rhei, with the Territories belonging thereto, which, long before, he had been
very desirous of. But the death of Hossein, who was killed in that War,
brought upon the Country, the Curse, which, according to their saying, is
still visible there, in the color and barrenness of the ground.

The City of Saba is of no great bigness, Excellent fruits at Saba.
though it be numbered among those, which make a fair show on the outside, by
reason of its Towers, and other public structures. The Walls of it are but of
earth, and its houses in a manner all destroyed: but it has, in requital, very
fair Gardens, and rare and excellent Fruits, especially Pomegranates, and
Almonds. Near the City, at the foot of the Mountain, there grows abundance of
Cotton and Rice, which are the greatest Commodities they have to Trade in. We
stayed there only that one day, and departed thence in the evening, traveling
the night following six Leagues or better, so that, the 18. by Sunrising, we
were got to a Caravansera, called Schach Ferabath. The heat was so excessive
that day, that though we were all in our Drawers, yet could we not possibly
avoid the inconveniences thereof.

We ordered our Tents to be pitched abroad, Excessive heats.
so to have the advantage of the coolness, and the wind, which came from the
adjoining Mountain; but, about noon, the Sun so heated the Wind it self, that
the hot blasts which come out of an Oven could not be hotter; insomuch that we
were forced to retire into the Caravansera, where the heat was somewhat more
moderate. Nay, the ground it self, which, in those parts, is only Sand and
Heath, was so hot, that a man could not go five or six steps, without burning
his feet. About this time, both the Ambassadors were very sick: but their
indisposition giving them altternately a little ease, the weaker of the two
made use of the Litter, and the other rode on Horseback.

The 19. we traveled five Leagues, The City of Kom.
and got in the morning before the City of Kom. The Daruga received us within
five or six hundred paces of the City, accompanied by fifty Gentlemen on
Horseback, and certain Tumblers, among whom there were some, who went upon
Stilts before the Ambassador Brugman, whose chance it was that day to be alone
on Horseback, and showed a thousand tricks of activity, all the way to the
Ambassadors Lodgings. As we passed through the Marketplace, we found a great
number of Timbrels, Hawboyes and Fifes, which made a kind of Music after their
way, and their Inhabitants had watered the streets, which being not paved no
more than those of Caswin and several other Cities of Persia, the dust had
otherwise troubled and annoyed us very much.

The Persians place this City at 85 degrees, Its situation.
40 minutes Longitude, and at 34 degrees, 45 minutes Latitude; but after I had
made a more exact observation thereof, I found on the 20. of July, precisely at
noon, that the Sun was 74 degrees, 8 minutes above the Horizon, and that the
Declination, taken upon the same Meridian, was 18 degrees, 35 minutes; so that
the elevation of the Pole, could be but 34 degrees 17 minutes.

The City of Kom is very ancient. Is Ptolomy's Guriana.
Prolomy calls it Guriana, and heretofore it was of a great extent, as may be
seen by the ruins of its Walls, and other buildings, which are a great way
without its present compass.

It lies in a Plain, on the right hand of the Mountain of Elwend, which is
discovered at a great distance by the whiteness of its Sand, and by the
extraordinary height of its points. In this Mountain, there rises, from two
several Springs, a little River, which making but one Chanel at the entrance of
the City, runs through some part of it, and is one of the chiefest conveniences
belonging thereto: but about three years before our Travels that way, the
little River, overflowing by reason of the Snow, which the precedent heat of
the Spring had melted, broke down and carried away above a thousand Houses.

There are in the Gardens, Its fruits.
whereof there is a great number, as well within as without the City, all sorts
of excellent fruits; among others, a kind of Melons, which they call Scammame
much about the bigness of an Orange. There are upon the rind spots of several
colors, and they have an admirable scent: but they are more lushious in taste
than the other Melons, which in sweetness exceed all those I ever cat any where
else.

There are also some of these Melons at Ardebil, Melons.
where, by reason of their scent, they commonly carry them in their hands; but
they told us, that they were brought from the Village of Alaru, where there
grows abundance of them. The learned Golius, Professor of the Oriental
Languages in the University of Leyden, gives a large account of them in his
Arabic Lexicon, page 1309. There is also in the same place a kind of
Cowcumbers of extraordinary largeness, being above two foot long, and as thick
as a man's Arm, which they call Chunchiar that is, crooked Cowcumbers, as having
the form of a bended Arm.

These the Persians pickle with Vinegar, without any Salt, but the taste of
them is not very pleasant, especially to those that are not accustomed thereto.
The ground about these parts is very fit for Tillage, and produces all sorts of
Grain, as also Cotton in abundance: but the principal Trading of the
Inhabitants consists in earthen Pots, Its Trafsick.
and Sword-blades. Those blades which are made in this City are accounted the
best in the whole Country, and are sold sometimes at twenty Crowns a piece. The
Steel, of which they are made, comes from the City of Niris, within four days
journeys of Ispahan, where there are found in the Mountain of Demawend very
rich Mines of Iron and Steel. The Pots also made in the City of Kom, are very
much esteemed, especially the S^eans, or great Pitchars; as well by reason of
the excellency of the workmanship, as for this reason, that it is conceived,
they will keep water fresh and sweet, even in the greatest heats of Summer.

The Inhabitants of this City are somewhat light-finger'd, and apt to find any
thing lies in their way. The Inhabitants inclined to thesi.
We had hardly alighted, but our Pistols were taken away, and what was not
locked up immediately vanished. In this City some of our people began to be
troubled with bloody fluxes, occasioned by their excessive eating of Melons and
other sorts of fruits, and drinking water after fruit, and in the greatest
heats.

July 21. we left Kom, an hour after Sunset, They leave Kom.
and traveled that night five Leagues. The next, the 22. We stayed in a great
Village, called Kasinabath, where all the Houses of one whole street were built
so as that they made altogether but one continued Vaul., or kind of Cloister.

The 23. we got seven Leagues, to the Village of Sensen, where we found
abundance of Provisions and fruits, which the Mehemander had appointed to be
brought ^nither from Karschan, a place five Leagues distant thence. In this
Village died one of our Interpreters for the Persian Language, whose name was
Gregory. He was by birth a Muscovite, but had been Circumcised; upon which
score, we left the body to those of his own Religion, to be buried after their
manner.

The 23. in the evening we departed thence, and the night following, we lost a
Muscovian servant, who died of the bloody Flux by the way. We kept the Body to
have it buried at Katschan, Come to Katschan.
with that of another Muscovian Servant, who died two hours after the former.
We got thither the 24. but so betimes in the morning, that we were forced to
stay above two hours, before the Daruga could come to meet us, in order to our
reception. He was accompanied by fifty Gentlemen on Hors^ back, and had
appointed to be led several excellent Horses covered with Lynxes skins; nor was
the ordinary Music of the Country wanting. At the entrance of the City, he
showed us two Indian Oxen, very black, and of great height and bulk, which had
Bells about their necks, and Plumes of Feathers in their heads, and at their
Cruppers. The Daruga's advancement
This Daruga had some time been a Footman to Schach-Sefi, when being very
young, they were forced to hide him from his Grandfather Schach-Abbas; and
Schach-Sefi having no money to live upon, sold the Footman for fifteen
Tumains, which amount to seventy five French Pistols. But coming afterward to
the Crown, he caused him immediately to be redeemed, and, with the quality of
Sulthan, bestowed on him the Government of Katschan.

The Persians put this City of Katschan at 84 degrees longitude, and at thirty
four distant from the Line. The situation of Katschan. Its bigness
After an exact Observation of three days, I found that it is distant from it
thirty three degrees and 51 minutes, that is, nine minutes less. The City is of
a great length, reaching from East to West, above half a German League. Its
Walls and bastions are of a kind of Potters day, and it lies in a great Plain,
the ground of which is good enough for Tillage, and there may be discovered
from it, on the right hand Mount Taurus, which the 'Porsians call Elwend. As
you come to the City, you pass through a place appointed for tilting and
running at the Ring, which has on both sides several Pillars, and in the
midst, a high Pole for shooting at the wooden Parrat. On the left hand of that
place or Carriere, you leave the King's Garden, wherein there is one
Summer House, standing in the midst of it, and another near it upon the
Highway. We were told that the former has a thousand Doors belonging to it, A
House with a 1000. Doors.
comprehending in that number the Windows, through which they pass into the
Galleries and Balconies. It is to be observed withal, that there is no Door
but has its Counter-door, in regard the Wall being above two foot thick, there
is a Door on each side of it: so that the number is not so great, as it seems
to be at first. In this House, the King is Lodged, when he comes to Katschan.

The City, is no doubt, one of the most populous and most eminent for Trading
of any in Persia, and the best Built of any we were yet come to, whether in
regard of its private Houses, or its Palaces and Caravansera's: but the Basar
and Maidan, and the other public structures, which have all their
Storehouses, Galleries, and Rooms for the Merchants, as well such as live
within the Kingdom, as Foreiners, are the noblest I met with in all my Travells
into those parts. There is, in this City, at all times, a great number of
foreign Merchants, and above all, Indians, who are assigned there a particular
place for their Habitation and Traffic; as are also all the other Merchants.
Tradesmen, especially such as make Silk-stuffs, and Weavers of Gold and Silver
Brocadoes, work in open places, where all the World may see them.

The Valleys are very fruitful in Wheat, Wine and Fruits, which grow in such
abundance there, that I find no difficulty to acknowledge, what Cartwright
says of these parts, to wit, that the poorest, and most indigent of the
Inhabitants, have not only what is requisite for their subsistence, but also
somewhat of delicacy, and that what they most stand in need of is fresh water.
For there is not any to be had without digging very deep into the Earth, and
what there was so got we thought very distasteful to the Palate, and so corrupt,
that had there not been an extraordinary necessity, we should have been much
troubled to swallow it. I must withal confess, that I could not observe that
excellent order and commendable policy, which Cartwright says he had seen
there in the Institution of Youth, nor that they are more careful there than
in other places, to accustom it timely to pains-taking, so to avoid idleness,
and the inconveniences consequent thereto. True it is, that the great number of
Children, which are ordinarily to be found there in Families, which by reason
of Polygamy are very numerous, obliges the Parents to be the more careful for
their subsistence; but the Persians, for the most part are so little inclined
to pains-taking, that, commonly, you shall either see them walking in the
Maidan, or discoursing in the Shops, while they leave most of their work to be
done by their slaves. Which happens hence, that being themselves very
temperate, and content with little, and on the other side, Provisions being
very cheap, they conceive they ought not to take much pains for what is
superfluous, and those things whereof there is no great necessity. So that
there are even in these parts idle Persons, and Beggars, as well as in other
places.

What the same Cartwright says concerning the Scorpions, Venomous Creatures.
and other venomous Creatures, is very true. For of these, there are, about
Katschan, more than at any other place of Persia, and such as are so dangerous,
that they have occasioned that Malediction, Akrab-Kaschan be destet senet: may
the Scorpion of Kaschan pinch thee by the hand. We found some of them in our
Lodging, as black as cole, about the length and compass of a man's finger, and
we were told, that these were the most dangerous of any sort of them.

They are somewhat like our Crabs or Crevisses, save that their Bodies are
shorter, they go faster, and they have their tails always sticking up. Whence
it comes that the Inhabitants never lay their Mattresses, or Beds, upon the
ground, as they do in other places; but they set them upon a kind of Trevets,
or Frames, which they call Tzarpay. They affirm also, that these Beasts have a
certain respect for strangers, and that to prevent their stinging, they are
only to pronounce these words, Menkaribem, I am a stranger. But for my part, I
am of opinion, that strangers, who stand more in fear of them than the
Inhabitants, are only the more obliged to themselves for the care they have of
their own safety; though I never could hear, that those who are stung by them
dye of it. For they have a present and easy remedy against this kind of
poison, A remedy against Scorpions.
by applying a piece of Copper to the place affected; for which Cure they
ordinarily make use of that Money, which they call Pull, and thence it comes,
that they carry some of it always about them; and having left that piece, for
the space of 24. hours upon the part stung, they take it off, and put on the
Wound a Plaster made of Honey and Vinegar.

It was my misfortune to be the only man of all our retinue that had occasion
to make trial how venomous this Creature is. The Author stung by a Scorpion.
For lying down upon my Bed at Scamachie, in our return from Ispahan, a
Scorpion stung me in the throat, where it made immediately a swelling about the
length of my finger, which was attended with insupportable pain. As good
fortune would have it, our Physician, who lay in the same Chamber, immediately
applied thereto the Oil of Scorpion, gave me some Treacle, and put me into a
sweat: which delivered me from the greatest of my pains at the end of three
hours, but I had still some pain for the two days following, but by intervals,
and it was as if I had been pricked with a Needle: nay indeed for many years
afterward I have been troubled with the same pains at certain times,
especially in Autumn, much about the Sun's entrance into Scorpio.

There is also in these parts another sort of insect of a making much like a
Spider, Another venomous insect.
about two inches in compass, and marked with several spots. This insect is
commonly found lodged in stony places, under a kind of Herb, which the Persians
call Tremne, and the Turks, Iauchschan, which is like Wormwood, or Absynthium,
but the leaves are much larger, and the smell much stronger. The Persians call
this insect Enkurek; and it is that animal which, in Latin, is called Stellio,
and kind of insect, which the Italians and Spaniards call Tarantola. This
Creature, instead of stinging or biting, Its venom, and the effect of it.
lets fall its venom like a drop of water, which immediately causes
insufferable pain in the part where it fastens, and suddenly making its way to
the Stomach, sends up Vapor into the Head, and these put all the Members of
the sick party into such a profound sleep, that it is impossible to awake him,
save by this only remedy, which is, to crush one of these Creatures upon the
wound; The remedy.
out of which all the venom is by that means drawn out.

But if there cannot any of the same Creature be found; there is another remedy
may be used. The sick person is laid upon his back, that he may swallow down as
much Milk as may be. Then he is put upon a thing made like a bier, which, by
cords fastened to the four corners, is hung up to a beam, and having turned the
bier about, till the cords are all twisted, they let it go of a sudden, that
the cords coming to untwist by a violent Motion, may make his head turn, and
force out of his stomach all the Milk he had swallowed. It comes from him all
Greenish, as is also the cruds which come forth at his yard, but with great
violence and extreme pain. This remedy does in some measure Cure the sick
person; yet so as that it hinders not, but that, at certain times, especially
at the same season of the year, he must expect to feel much pain. This Creature
is to be found only in the Country, so that those who live in Cities fear it
not, there being none there, Sheep eat these insects.
unless they are, through negligence, brought in the stubble, wherewith they
cover their Houses. But what is most to be admired in this animal, is, that the
Sheep seek after it, and feed on it.

The Inhabitants of Katchan relate, that Omar ben Alchitabi, the third
Successor of Mahomet, The Fable of Schutza Adin.
being very desirous, one day, to go and see his Mill at Medina, the Miller,
whose name was Schutza Adin, entreated him to bless his Labor, and his Mill,
by putting both his hands under one of the Millstones which was raised up;
which Omar having done, the Miller let it fall and set the Mill a going, by
which means having crushed his hands to pieces, he afterward killed him.
Whereupon going to Aly, who by that Death was to succeed in the Empire, he
desired a reward for the Murder he had committed. Aly gave him a Letter
directed to the Casi of Kaschan, ordering the Casi to give him his Daughter in
Marriage. The Miller, though well satisfied with the recompense, yet thought it
too much to take so great a Journey a-foot; so that Aly, to make a further
acknowledgement of the service he had done him, lent him his Horse Duldul,
which carried him in one night from Medina to Kaschan, which places are above
two hundred Leagues distant, and immediately vansh'd. The Miller Married the
Casi's Daughter, but died soon after, and was buried without the City, at a
place where now there are several banks of Sand, which the story says, were
brought thither by the Wind, since the Millar's Death; lest the Friends and
Kindred of Omar should take him up to be burnt. Hassan Kaschi an Arbian Author.
Molla Hassan Kaschi, who has left this story in Writing, has made a Proverb
of it, which, with several other spiritual adages, he has inserted into the
Kullusthan, where he says, Men besamen, ohn schahemsia, Kickscheb duldulesch
es Medine Ascabani bekaschan aured: that is, I serve the King of Kings, whose
(Horse) Duldul, in one night, carried the Miller from Medina io Kaschan.
Elmacini another Arabian Author.
Tzurzei Elmakin, or George Elmacini, another Arabian Historian says, lib. 1.
chapter 3. of his History, that Omar was killed, as he was saying his Prayers, by
Abululu, the servant of Mukir, who hated him for his Tyranny.

The heats were indeed excessive at Kaschan; The Ambassadors leave Caschan.
however, that the sick persons might not be put^ too hard to it, we continued
there for some days, and departed not thence till the 26. of July* as soon as
the Moon was up, which was then at the full. That Night we traveled six
Leagues and came the next morning to Caravansera, called Chotza Kassim: but in
regard it was very narrow, and withal very nasty, we lodged our selves in a
Garden not far from it, in the shade of abundance of Cypress Trees and
Pomegranate-Trees, upon the side of a pleasant Rivulet, which, making a gentle
murmuring noise, contributed much to the repose, which, after the precedent
night's Travel, was but necessary to us. In the Evening, we continued our
Journey, and traveled that night six Leagues or better, through Deserts and
Barren grounds, and came, the 28. about four in the morning, to a little City,
called by the Inhabitants of the Country Natens, Come to Natens.
and by Contarini, in his Travels, Nethas. We took up our lodging in a
Caravansera, within the City, which is handsome enough, furnished with several
Springs of fresh water, and well stored with all sorts of Fruits. As you come
into the City, you leave on the right hand two very high and picked Mountains,
one whereof has on the top of it a great Tower, built by Schach Abas, in
memory of the advantage, which one of his Falcons had in that place over an
Eagle, which he set upon, overcame, and killed, after a very sharp engagement.
All of our Retinue being either sick or overcome with weariness, only Monsieur
Mandelslo had the curiosity to get up the said Mountain with his two servants,
and to take a view of that structure. He found it built of Brick, and that
toward the foundation it was in an Octogonal form, being about eight paces
Diameter; but that as it went higher and higher, it by degrees lost that form
and bigness, and that above, near the top, it had so many windows, that the
light came in of all sides. The greatest Miracle of all is, how they could
carry so many materials up to so high a place, to get to which, that Gentleman
had spent above three hours, and at least as much to get down again, with great
pains and hazard.

The 29. we got four Leagues further, Contin^e their journey.
passing over a great Mountain, and lodged in a Caravansera, called Dombi,
whither some of the Inhabitants of Ispahan came to visit us, as they said, from
the Chancellor. There came thither also certain Dutch Merchants, clothed in
Persian habits; but they made no discovery of themselves.

The night between the last of July and the first of August, AUG.
we traveled four leagues further, and came the next day to a Village called
Kuk. We were lodged in the house of the Kaucha, or Judge of the place, where we
continued all that day, and the night following.

August 2. we departed thence two hours before day, the Moon shining bright,
and got but two leagues further, to one of the Kings houses, where we took up
our quarters in a very fair Garden, which was our last nights Lodging in our
passage to the City of Ispahan. For, very betimes the next morning being the
third of August, horses were sent us, to make our entrance into the Metropolis
of the Kingdom. Within a quarter of a League of the City, we found one of the
principal Officers of the Court, named Isachan-beg, in the head of 200 horse,
and some paces thence, two great Armenian Lords, named Sefaras-beg, and
Elias-beg, who conducted the Ambassadors to their Lodgings The dust, which the
horse, and the people who came to meet us, had raised, was so thick, that we
were got to the Gates, before we imagined we could have seen the City. Not only
the streets and windows were full of people, who out of curiosity were come to
see our entrance into the City, but also the tops of the houses were covered
with them.

We were conducted through several streets, Are lodged among the Armenians.
through the Maidan, and before the Kings Palace, to that part of the Suburbs
which is called Tzulifa, where we were lodged in the Quarter of the chiefest of
the Armenian Merchants, who are Christians, and have their habitations there.
We had hardly alighted, ere there were brought us from the King's Kitchen the
ordinary Presents of Provisions, for our welcome thither. They laid upon the
floor of the Ambassadors Room a fine silk Cloth, on which were set one and
thirty Dishes of Silver, filled with several sorts of Conserves, dry and
liquid, and raw fruits, as Melons, Citrons, Quinces, Pears, and some others,
not known in Europe. Some time after, that Cloth was taken away, that another
might be laid in the room of it; and upon this was set Rice of all sorts of
colors, and all sorts of Meat, boiled and roasted, to wit, Mutton, tame Fowl,
Fish, Eggs, and Pyes, in above fifty Dishes of the same metal, besides the
Sallet-dishes, great Porrenge^s, and other lesser Vessels. Are visited by the
Dutch Factor.
Presently after Dinner, the Commissary or Factor for the Dutch Commerce, whose
name was Nicholas Jacobs Overschle, who was afterward Governor of Zeilan, for
the East India Company, came to visit the Ambassadors, who being then looking
upon the unlading of the Baggage (though that should have been the employment
of their Steward or some other Officer) would have waved the visit upon that
pretense. But the Dutchman would not be put off his visit, wherein he
ingenuously acknowledged, that he had received Orders from his Superiors to
oppose our Negotiation; but that nevertheless, as to what concerned the
Ambassadors themselves, he should do them all the civilities they could expect
from him. He seemed desirous to drink, and we had the Compliance to give him
his load ere he went away.

The joy we conceived at our having, A quarre. with the Indian Ambassadors
Domestics.
at last, arrived to a place, where we hoped to put a period to our
Negotiation, was soon disturbed by a most unhappy accident, and the
Divertisements intended us, were within a few days after our coming thither,
changed into a bloody Contestation with the Indians, occasioned by the
insolence of one of the Domestics belonging to the Mogul's Ambassador, who was
Lodged not far from our Quarters, with a Retinue of three hundred persons, most
of them Vsbeques. One of their Domestics standing by, and looking on our
people unloading and putting up the Baggage, our Mehemanders servant, named
Willichan, said to him jesting, that it would speak more good nature in him, to
come and help them, than to stand as he did with his Arms across; whereto the
other making answer somewhat too snappishly, as he conceived, the Persian
struck him over the pate with his Cane. The Indian incensed at the affront, ran
to some of his Camerades, who were lying hard by under the shade of a Tree, and
made his complaints to them of the injury he had received; upon which they all
got up, and fell upon Wellichan, whom they wounded in the head with stones.

Our Domestics perceiving this tumult, brought our Steward notice of it, who
taking along with him five or six Soldiers, and some others of our servants,
charged the Indians (whole number was augmented to hear thirty) so home, that
they mortally wounded one, and pursued the rest to their Quarters: but what
most troubled the Indians, was, that, in this engagement, they had lost a Sword
and a Poniard, whereto a little Purse was faste'd, in which there was some
small money, which our People brought home as a sign of their Victory. The
Industhans, at that time, thought it enough to threaten how highly they should
resent that affront, and that they should take occasion to revenge their
Camerade. Nor indeed were they unmindful of their threats; for the Ambassadors
having resolved to change their Lodgings, by reason of the great inconvenience
it was to them, that their Domestics were scattered up and down the Suburbs,
and quartered at a great distance from them, and having appointed the seventh
of August for their removal, the Indians took their advantage of that occasion,
to be satisfied for the affront they imagined they had received.

We had sent before a Lacquey belonging to our Steward, and some of our Seamen
with part of the Baggage, to be, by them, conducted to the Lodgings we had
taken up, which were within the City, a quarter of a League or better distant
from the former. Certain Indians who were lying under Tents to keep their
Master's Horses, which were then feeding between the City and Suburbs, knew
him, as having seen him in the former engagement, set upon him, and, though he
gallantly defended himself with his Sword and Pistol, at last killed him with
their Arrows; which done, they cut off his head, tossed it up and down in the
Air, and bound his body to his Horse-tayl; which dragged it to a certain place,
where the Dogs devoured it. The news brought us of this Murder was enough to
assure us, that the Industhans would not think that revenge enough, but that
they were resolved to set upon us with all their forces. Whereupon the
Ambassadors sent out Orders, that all of their Retinue should stand upon their
Guard, and come with all expedition to their Lodgings. But, before this Order
could be put in Execution, the Indians had already possessed themselves of all
the Avenues of their Quarters, which they had in a manner blocked up: in so
much that none could get in, without running the hazard of being killed.
However, reflecting on the imminent and inevitable danger it was to lie
scattered up and down in several quarters, most of the Domestics thought it
their safest course, though with some danger, to make their way to the House
where the Ambassadors were, which was in the corner of a narrow street. Most of
them escaped the fury of the Indians, but some were mortally wounded, and I my
self came very near it, for I was no sooner got within the door, but an Arrow
came grazing through my hair, and was shot into one of the Posts. All their
Arrows were made of Canes, having a sharp and cutting piece of Iron at the end,
and so light, that the least strength sent them away with incredible swiftness,
and they pierced where they lighted, as dangerously as a Bullet from a
Fire-lock. Which is the more to be observed, in opposition to that passage of
Quintus Curtius, where he says in the eighth book of his History, Binum
cubitorum sunt sagittae (Indis) quas emittunt majore nisu quam effectu; quippe
telum, cujus in levitate vis omnis est, inhabili pondere oneratur. But besides
these Arms, they had also Muskets, and Arquebuses, according to the Persian
way, which are of a very small bore, wherewith they shot very exactly.

Our Lieutenants did all that could be expected from persons of courage and
conduct, setting their Soldiers in Order at the Door of the Ambassadors
Lodgings, and causing several Volleys of Musket Shot to be discharged at the
Indians. But the Indians made their advantage of a Wall, which served them for
a Parapet; and they had made several holes in it, that they might shoot with
less danger to themselves, and more annoyance to us. On the contrary, our
people, instead of following their example (whom some would have accounted
Barbarians, but who will not be found such) and making their advantage of the
Chests, and the Baggage, which were in the street, had no other Parapet, than
their own Breasts, which were exposed to all their Volleys. One of our
Canoneers, as he was going to level a small Piece at the Indians, was killed.

Sergeant Morrhoy, a Scotchman, seeing the Canoneer fall at his feet, took up
his Musket, and set himself in a posture of revenging his Camerades death. He
was so fortunate as to kill five or six Indians, but at last an Arrow takes him
just in the breast, which, not at all troubled at, he plucked it out, and,
having charged his Musket once more, killed another man, and then fell down
dead upon the place,

The Armenians living thereabouts, who were Spectators of this engagement,
could help us no otherwise than with their tears, whereby they expressed the
a^fliction it was to them to see the death of so many poor Christians. At last,
the number of the Indians increasing still, the Muskets played so fast, that
the Ambassadors were forced to command their people to come into the house,
and, remaining in the Court, to keep the Indians from getting into the house.
But they making their advantage of our retreat, fell upon the Baggage, and
ransacked it, and not content with that, they forced their way into the next
house to us, and because the Master of it would have kept them from coming in,
they cut off one of his hands, and afterward killed him. By which means
getting up to the top of it, they could look into our Court, and so forced our
people to abandon it. Some of ours got up to the top of our house, and making
their advantage of the Parapet, no Indian appeared but they shot at him, and no
shot but did execution. M. Mandcislo, The Indian Leader killed.
who had an excellent faculty in the handling of Firearms, killed the Leader
of the Indian party with a Pistol-shot. His death made them all fury, insomuch
that they got out of the place where they were, with a design to force our
Gates: which resolution of theirs obliged the Ambassadors to think of some
retreat, and to break down the Walls of the adjoining houses, where the
Armenians, who lived in them, joyfully received us, and brought us Ladders to
get down into a fair Garden. We all got down into it, but the pleasaniness of
the place, took us no more than a delicious Dish of Meat would do a Malefactor,
that were going to his execution, in regard we expected death there every
moment.

While we were thus out of all hope of escape, The King inter p^ses his
Authority.
one of the (...): shals of the Court came to us from the King, to bring us
news of a Peace. He was come some times before, with the same orders, but ^he
heat (...) engagement had hindered us, as well as the Indians from hearing what
message he brought: for, the Inhabitants of Ispah^n, perceiving the noise
increased, and fearing a greater disorder, which might be of dangerous
consequence among a people who had never seen any thing of that nature, the
King sent thither a hundred Soldiers well armed, in the Head of a good number
of the Inhabitants, but as soon as the Indians perceived that Body coming
toward them, they dispersed themselves. We were told, that the King hearing of
the Murder, which was the Prologue to all this Tragedy, and withal that the
Indian Ambassador had Co^niv'd thereat, had Commanded his Head to be brought
him; but that the Chancellor had moderated that sally of his Passion, by
representing to him, that both the Ambassadors were Strangers, and his Guests,
and that it belonged to their Masters, and not to him, to punish them.

This peace brought us also the liberty to go into the Streets, where we found
our Chests broke open, and all the Baggage plundered, unless it were certain
Sawcidges, Neats-Tongues, and Gammons of Bacon, which the Indians, as being
Mahumetanes, had thrown by. Our loss upon this occasion amounted to above four
thousand-Crowns. The King demanded a particular of it, and would have defrayed
us; but that kindness of his had not its effect, for reasons but too well known
to all the Retinue.

In the foresaid engagement, which lasted above four hours, we lost five men,
and had ten wounded. The Indians, according to the Informations we received
from the Persians, lost therein about four and twenty men, The Indian
Ambassador dismissed.
and had many more hurt: but the Indian Ambassador had, some few days after,
orders sent him to be gone. This was the most unhappy accident we me^ with in
all our Travells: for, after we had escaped all the dangers, which we might
well have fallen in (...) the way, and the injuries might have been done us by
the most Cruel and Barbarous people, through whose Territories we passed, this
sad accident happened to us in the chief City of the Kingdom, where we thought
to find rest after all the hardships we had endured.

As to this Indian Ambassador, he was a Myrsa, or Indian Prince, and had been
sent to the Court of Persia, by Choramscha, King of the Indies, whom they call
the Great Mogul, and not, as he is commonly called, Mogor. He had a very noble
Retinue, and was ordinarily carried in a Litter, according to the Indian
making, more fit to lie down in, than to sit, which was carried by several
Slaves, it being hanged at a great Iron-barr made crooked in the middle. The
King of Persia, who knew on what occasion he was sent Ambassador to him, made
him stay three whole years, His abode at Ispahan
before he gave him audience, ordering him in the mean time to be magnificently
treated, insomuch that some few days before our arrival, the King had sent
him, besides many before, a Present of three thousand Tumains, which amount to
fifty thousand Crowns; the Ambassador himself, it seems, defraying the expense
of his Housekeeping.

The Ambassador, on the oath other side, demeaned himself suitably to this
magnificence; for he spent the three first days after his audience in
bestowing the Presents he had brought along with him. His presents.
Those he made the first day, were in the name of the Great Mogul: those made
the second, in the name of the Prince his Son; what he did, the third, was upon
his own account. We were credibly informed, that the Presents made by him
amounted to above a hundred thousand Crowns. The occas^on of the Embassy*
His business was, to entreat the King of Persia, to put into his hands the
Myrsa Polagi, Prince of the Blood, and Nephew to the Mogul, who had been forced
to retire into Persia to save his Life, which he was in danger to lose, as he
had done his Kingdom. The King excused himself, and generously made answer,
that it were a breach of the Laws of Hospitality, to deliver up a Prince, who,
out of an assurance of his friendship, had taken refuge in his Kingdom; that
he was obliged in honor to treat him as a Friend, and a Guest, and to give him
entertainment as long as he should think fit to stay in his Country.

This was all the Answer the Ambassador could get, He departs*
in relation to the Embassy; but that he might be assured, they had no great
kindness for himself in particular, secret orders were sent to Hassan-Chan
Governor of Herath, which is the most considerable of any place toward the
Frontiers of the Indies, that he should stop, in their passage, four or five
hundred Horses, which the Ambassador had bought, and sent away by small
parties, that, at his coming* he might find them ready upon the Frontiers: for
the Indian Horses are small and ill-shap'd, whence it comes, that the Indians
are so desirous to have some of the Persian breed. The Ambassador stormed,
alleged his quality, and urged it as an affront done his Master in his person,
and, that the King of Persia, who knew he had bought them, and had permitted
him to do so, was, no doubt, willing he should take them along with him. But
Hassan-Chan made answer, that he was King in his own Province, that if he did
ought prejudicial to the King's service, his Life should answer for it, and
that he would not suffer any Horses to go out of the Country, it being to be
feared they might afterward be brought to serve in the Wars against his
Majesty, to whom he was to give a strict account of all his actions. So that
the Ambassador was forced to leave the Horses behind him, and to sell them at
such rates as the Persians would give him for them. As for the Indians in
general, they are good Natured, Civil, Friendly, and their Conversation not
unpleasant, provided they be not injured; but so apt to resent any thing of
affront, that they are never satisfied without their Blood, by whom they are
offended, We know it otherwise than by hearsay.

The next day after this unhappy engagement, to wit, the 8. of August, we
changed our Lodgings, and, to prevent any disorder that might happen,
especially upon the account of the Indians, the King caused prohibitions to be
made, that not only any of the Ambassadors Retinue, but also, of the other
Indians, nay even the Merchants of that Nation, whereof there are above twelve
thousand in Ispahan, should, upon pain of Death, be seen in the streets, till
we were gotten within the City. And that we might be the more secure, we found
attending near our Lodgings, some of the Guard, who went along with us to our
new Quarters, which we were permitted to fortify at the weakest places,
against any attempt might be made by the Indians, who might easily and with
advantage have assaulted us in our Quarters, by reason it was of a vast extent,
they having openly threatened to do it.

The Structure comprehended four great Courts, The Ambassadors change their
quarters.
through two whereof there ran a Rivulet twenty five foot in breadth, planted
on both sides with that delightful Tree called Tzinnar, which made two very
pleasant walks. The same Rivulet ran through some of the Halls and Galleries,
and went under ground, under the main part of the Lodging; which was designed
for the appartment of the Ambassadors. There was in the midst of it, and below,
a spacious Hall, built eight square, with a fair Fountain, and at every side of
the Octagone a Door, which led into several Chambers. The first Story had the
same appartments, but this over and above, that the Windows served for Doors,
some whereof led into Galleries and Balconies that looked into the Garden, some
toward the Hall; so that a man might, out of any Chamber, see what was done in
the Hall. In the midst of the Hall, there was a Fountain, the Basin whereof was
of Freestone.

During our abode at Ispahan, we were supplied with all things upon the King's
account, being allowed, The King treats them still.
every day, sixteen Sheep, a hundred of all sorts of tame Fowl, two hundred
Eggs, and a hundred Batmans of Wine, with Fruit and spice in such abundance,
that we might have made very good Cheer, had it not been for their ill
management thereof, who had the disposal of them, and who squandered away the
Provisions, not only by Connivence, but also by the express order of one of the
Ambassadors, I mean him of Hamborough, who sent them to them Armenians, and,
many times, to common prostitutes. Whence it came, that some times our people
made but one meal a day, nay some days, the servants and others had no cloth
laid at all.

Aug. 10. the Ambassadors sent some of the Retinue to Alexis Savinouits,
Ambassador from the Duke of Muscovy, to treat with him concerning their common
affairs; and in regard the Persians were not well pleased to see us in our own
Clothes, we put our selves into the Muscovian fashion, They go into Muscovian
habits
as coming somewhat nearer their mode. About this time, dyed some of our
people, who had been Wounded, in the Engagement with the Indians, and, among
others, one of our Guard, who had been hurt in the knee, with a poisoned Arrow.
Our Harbinger died also the same day, but it was of a Bloody Flux, which took
him after he had been sufficiently shaken by a Tertian Ague, and dispatched him
in a few days. We buried them both in the Churchyard of the Armenians, in
that part of the Suburbs, which is called Tzulfa.

August the 16. the Ambassadors had their first audience of the King, who sent
them word, that they should also have the honor to dine with him, Their first
audience.
and to that end, sent them forty gallant Horses out of his own Stables, the
Saddles and Harnesses whereof were adorned with great plates of Gold.

The Ambassadors made use only of two, The Presents made in the Prince's name.
and also ordered the Gentlemen and the principal Officers to ride on
Horseback, but the rest went a-foot, in the following order.

First, marched three men or Horseback, two whereof were in complete arms,
having Flowers, and other Workmanship of Gold. The third was armed only as a
Horseman, with Back, Breast, and Pot, yet all very rich.

After him marched forty Persons, having every one a Case of Pistols, the best
that could be had in the Low Countries, with their Holsters, the laps whereof
were Embroidered.

Next, four men, carrying two rich Cymitars, the sheaths whereof were of yellow
Amber, garnished with Gold, in very rich Cases.

Next, two men, with Walking staves, done about with Amber, which the Persians
esteem above Gold, in very rich Cases.

Four men, carrying so many great Candlesticks of Amber.

Two others, carrying a Cabinet of white and yellow Amber.

Four others, carrying a Cabinet of Ebony, garnished with Silver, having within
it, in Golden Boxes, several Druggs, Essences and Magisteries, and the
coverings thereof beset with fine stones, which signified what Magistery there
was in every Box.

And whereas it is the custom of the Country, The Ambassadors Presents.
that Ambassadors are obliged to make some Presents from themselves, and upon
their own account, the Ambassador Crusius sent in an Arquebuss, the stock
whereof was of Ebony, which cocked it self by letting down the Cock; A vessel
of Rock Crystal, done about with Gold, and beset with Rubies and Turqueses; a
Cabinet of Amber, and a small striking Clock. The Ambassador Brugman presented
the King with a gilt brass Candlestick, that had thirty branches, having a
striking Watch within the body of it; a pair of gilt Pistols, in very rich
Holsters; a very fair Hourglass; a Watch in a Topaze case; a Bracelet of
Diamonds and Rubies; and, a Writing, whereby were presented the two pieces of
Canon, which we had left at Ardebil.

Every one had his place assigned him, The Persians observe no Order in their
Ceremonies.
to the end that all things might be presented to the King with the observance
of some Order; but the Persians never observe it in any Ceremony: insomuch,
that they were no sooner got into the street, but they were all in disorder,
and marched with such ^onfusion, that the Ambassadors Retinue could not make
the Procession they expected.

First, there should have marched three Sergeants with Halberds, in the Head of
fifteen Musketeers. After them the Mashal, or Steward, alone, in the Head of
the Gentlemen, who marched three a breast. Then, three Trumpeters, with silver
Trumpets, and after them marched the Guards, four abreast, immediately before
the Ambassadors, who had on both sides eight Halberteers, and behind them the
two Interpreters. The eight Pages followed, on horseback, in very rich
Liveries, and after them the rest of our people, marching three abreast, and
eight deep.

The Ambassadors being come in this order, attended by a great number of
Kisibachs, and Persian Gentlemen on Horseback, whom the King had sent to them,
through the Maidan, to the Gates of the Palace-Royal, they were there received
by Iesaul Senhobet, who is as it were the Introductor, The reception of the
Ambassadors.
or Master of the Ceremonies. He commanded those who carried the Presents to
make way for the Ambassadors, whom he conducted into a Hall, where the
Divanbeki, or Judges, are wont to meet, for the Administration of Justice, and
entreated them to rest themselves, till he had acquainted the King with their
arrival. About half an hour after, several great Lords came to give the
Ambassadors notice, that the King expected them. We were brought through a
spacious Court, which was of greater length than breadth, and in which there
was on both sides, about six paces distance from one Wall, another lower Wall,
built close to a row of Tzinnar-Trees; and all along that lower Wall, stood the
Musketeers, and the other Guards, in a file on both sides.

The Guards were distinguished from the Musketeers, by the Coiffure they wore
about their heads, which was pointed, and set out with plumes of Feathers, of
several Colors. They call this kind of Courts or Walks, Cheywan, and they
afford a very delightful prospect. At the end of this Court, there was a great
Hall, having light coming in of all sides, which was the place designed for our
audience. The Hall for audience.
It is called Diwan Chane, as being the place, where the King administers
Justice in Person: there being a great difference between the Custom of Persia,
and that of Muscovy; where the Great Duke has a particular Hall, wherein he
gives audience to Ambassadors; whereas the King of Persia does it in those
places where he accidentally is, either about other business, or for his
Divertisement. Near the said Hall, and under those Trees, between the two
Walls, there were to be seen fifty excellent Horses, with their
covering-Cloaths of Brocado, or Embroidered with Gold and Silver, and among
those some Arabian Horses, ready to be backed, with their Saddles and Harness,
covered all over with plates of Gold, and beset with abundance of precious
stones. All the Horses stood in the open Air, fastened by one of the hinder
feet to a stake struck in the ground, and they were most of them of an Isabella
Color, about the Belly and Legs. There stood hard by Pails of Vermilion Gilt,
Silver Pails to water horses.
for the watering of them. Not far thence, there were two great Cisterns four
foot square, for the cooling of Wine.

This Hall was raised three steps from the ground, and was eight fathom broad,
and twelve in length. There was at the entrance into it a Partition, like an
Alcove, with Curtains drawn before it, of red Cotton, which were taken up and
let down with silk strings. When they were drawn up, they rested upon the
Chapters of certain wooden Pillars, made Cylinder-wise, Embellished with
Branch-work, Painted, and Gilt, as were also the Walls. On the left hand, as
you came in, there were some pieces of Painting, done in Europe, and
representing certain Histories. The floor was covered all over with Tapistry,
whereof the groundwork was of Gold and Silver, and in the midst of the Hall,
there was a Fountain, and in the Basin of it abundance of Flowers, Citrons,
Orenges, Apples, and other Fruits, which swom upon the water. About the sides
of the Basin, there were a great number of Gold and Silver Flaggons, and
Bottles, which either had Garlands or Flowers about them, or posies in their
Mouths.

The King sat upon the ground, The King's age.
having a satin Cushion under him, behind the Fountain, with his back to the
Wall. He was about seven and twenty years of Age, handsome Bodied, having a
graceful Aspect, and of a clear and smooth Complexion, somewhat Hawk-Nos'd, as
most of the Persians are, and he had a little black Hair upon the upper lip.
There was nothing extraordinary in his Habit, save that his Clothes were of
Brocadoe, and that, at his Coiffure, there was a Plume of Heron-Feathers,
fastened with a bracelet of Diamonds. He had also upon his Kurdi, that is, a
kind of Coat without Sleeves, which the Persians wear upon their Garments, two
Sable Skins hanging at the Neck: but for ought we saw afterward, other Persian
Lords wore the like. The Cymitar he had by his side glittered with Gold and
Precious Stones; and behind him, upon the ground, there lay a Bow and Arrows.

On his right hand there stood twenty Pages, who were, most of them, as we were
told, the sons of Chans, and Sulthans, Governors of Provinces, among whom
there were some Eunuchs.

They were all very handsome, as to their Persons, but it seems, they had made
choice of the handsomest among them, to hold the Fan, wherewith he incessantly
gave the King air. These Fanns are made of a certain Sea-Creature, which they
call Maherikutas, and it is like a Horsetail. Near the Pages stood the Meheter,
or Groom of the Chamber, who has the oversight of them. Before the King stood
Elschick agasi baschi, or the Lord Chamberlain of the Household, having in his
hand a Staff covered all over with Gold, as was also the great Button or Apple
at the top of it. Within four paces of the King, and on his left hand, sat the
Chancellor whom they call Ethemad Dowlet, and about him, the Chans, and great
Lords of the Privy Counsel. At the entrance of the Hall, on the left hand, sat
the Ambassadors of an Arabian Prince, who had been sent to desire the King's
Protection against the Turk; and the Poslanick of Muscovy, Alexei Savinouits;
and somewhat lower were placed the King's Music.

The Ambassadors were received at the entrance of the Hall, The Ambassadors
bro^ght in to audience
by the Prince Tzani-Chan, Kurtzi Baschi, of whom we spoke before, and by
Aliculi-bek* Divanbeki, who took them under the Arms, one after the other, and
brought them to the King. These Conductors, as they led the Ambassadors along,
laid such fast hold on their hands, that they had not the use of them
themselves.

This Ceremony is very necessary, and must now be looked on as a particular
honor done the Ambassadors, though it be said, and that very probably, that
with the same labor, they secure the Prince's Life, against the attempts there
might be made against it. But I would not have any to credit what some affirm,
to wit, that this Ceremony has not been observed in Persia but since the Reign
of Schach-Abas, and that it was occasioned by the design which some Turkish
Ambassadors had to kill him. For this custom is also observed in the Grand
Seignor's Court, as well as in Persia; nay it is my opinion, that it is for the
same reason, that the King does not give his Hand, but his Knee to strangers to
kiss, to his own Subjects thinking it enough to present his foot.

The Ambassadors, as they came near the King, made a low Reverence, which he
civilly answered with a little Inclination of the Head, and a smiling and
obliging Countenance. They were immediately led away, and entreated to sit
down, on low Seats, which had been placed near the Lords of the Council. The
same honor was done to fifteen of the Retinue, but they were forced to sit
down a little more on the left hand, and upon the ground. The ground. The
Pages, and the rest of the Retinue, were conducted into the Court, where they
were seated, near thirteen VVomen-Dancers, who were very handsome Women, and
very richly Clothed, and sat upon Tapistry, whereof the groundwork was Gold
and Silver.

Some of our people were persuaded they were the ordinary Dancing-women
belonging to the Court, and gave that account of them in the Relations they
have made of their Travells; but it is certain, they were some of the
handsomest Curtezans of the City, who, besides the Tribute they yearly pay the
King, are obliged to come to Court, to divert the Prince, when ever he sends
for them. We were told, that a man might have had his choice of them for a
Tumain.

The Ambassadors having rested themselves a little, the King sent the Lord
Chamberlain to them, to know the Prince's name, by whom they were sent, and the
occasion of their Embassy. Which message obliged them to rise up, and to go
near the King, with their Interpreter, to deliver their Credentials, which they
accompanied with a Complement, which was so much the shorter, in regard the
Persians, who are no Lovers of long Speeches, would have those that approach
their King to do it with respect, and to express that respect by a Discourse of
few words. The Chancellor received the Credentials, and after the Ambassadors
were seated again, the Wakaenuis, or Secretary of the Chamber, came and told
them, that the Schach would order their Credential letters to be Translated;
that as soon as it were done, his Majesty would give them a second audience,
for their affairs, and that in the mean time, he desired them to Divert
themselves as much as might be. This done, the Presents were brought in, which
were carried, close by the King, into an appartment designed for the Treasury,
on one side of the Hall, at the entrance of the Palace.

While the Presents were carried in, the Cloth was laid, that is, all the
floor of the Hall was covered with one piece of Cotton Cloth, on which were
set all sorts of Fruits and Conserves, all in great Basins of Gold, Gold Plate.
whereof there was so great a number, that there was hardly place left for
three hundred great Flaggons of the same Metal, which were dispersed here and
there, only for Ostentation sake: so that which way soever a man looked, there
was nothing to be sent but Gold. All the Plate was plain and smooth, save only
the Flaggon and Cup out of which the King himself drunk, which two pieces the
Persians call Surhahi, and Piali, which were beset with Rubies and Turqueses.
With these conserves, we had excellent Schiras-wine, Schiras- wine.
and they gave us the Divertisement of a fellow that showed tricks of
Legerdemain, who did beyond any thing I ever saw of that kind before. About an
hour after, the Conserves were taken away, that the Meat might be brought in*
The floor was laid with another Cloth; which was of a Gold Brocado, and there
came in ten men laden with Meat in great Vessels of Gold, made like the
Milk-pails in France, which some carried upon their Heads, some upon a kind of
Barrows, which were also covered with plates of Gold.

The Suffretzi, The Carver.
that is, the Carver, having placed the Meat, sat down in the midst of the
Table, or floor of the Hall, took the Meat out of those Vessels, and disposed
it into Dishes, and sent them, first to the King, then to the Ambassadors, and
afterward to the Lords, and the rest of the Company. They understand not what
it is to entertain with several Courses, but set down all upon the Table at
once, and think they treat their Guests very well. All the Dishes were filled
with Rice of all sorts of Colors, and the Carver put the Meat upon the Rice,
to wit, Mutton, boiled and roasted, tame and wild Fowl, Omelets, Pies, Spinach,
Sow^-cruds, etc. insomuch, that many times, there was five or six sorts of Meat
in the same Dish. This is done by design, Their manner of sitting at meat.
and for their own convenience; in regard, that, not sitting at a Table
opposite one to another, but all of a side, as the Monks do, and consequently
one man being not able to reach to several Dishes, they are served several
sorts of Meat in the same Dish.

But as we imitated the Monks in our manner of sitting, Silence at meats.
so were we as silent as they are at Meals: for there was not a word spoken all
the time we were at Meat; unless it were that the King himself whispered twice
or thrice to the Chancellor. But there was not that silence observed at two or
three other Entertainments we had at the Court afterward: for then, the King
was pleased to fall into some discourse with the Ambassadors, concerning the
affairs of Europe, and particularly concerning the Wars of Germany.

We had also, Music.
while we were at Dinner, the Divertisement of their Music, and the Activity
of those Curtezans. The Music consisted of Lutes, Violins, Flageolets,
Hawboies, and Timbrels, which he who played upon the Timbrel, accompanied with
a wretched inharmonious Voice, which disordered the little Consort there was in
their pretended Consort. The Dancing of the Women was more regular, and though
it was not consonant to the Music, nor the way of Dancing among the
Europaeans, yet was it not undelightfull, but had its cadences and exactness as
well as ours.

While we were at Dinner, there lay hid, in a Door which was covered by the
Hangings, over against the place where the Ambassadors sat, a Persian, who
understood the Portuguez and Italian, to observe their Demeanor, as also what
discourse they might have with their Interter, that he might give an account of
what they said concerning the fashions and manners of that Court. The relation
he gave in to the King of what the Ambassador Brugman had said of the Pictures,
and the Entertainments, and the manner of Life of the Persians, proved to his
disadvantage and Prejudice. Our Interpreter was a Portuguez, an Augustine
Friar, about forty years of age. His name was Father Joseph, of the Rosary, a
good natured man, obliging, and complaisant, and a person that understood
himself very well; inasmuch, as, having lived four and twenty years in Persia,
he was excellently well skilled in the Language, and thoroughly acquainted with
the humor and customs of that Nation. In his discourse with the Ambassador
Crusius, he made use of the Latin Tongue, and spoke Portuguez to the Ambassador
Brugman.

They sat at Dinner about an hour and a half, and then the Cloth being taken
away, there was warm water brought to wash their hands. Which done, the Lord
Chamberlain cried aloud, Suffer Hakine, Scahe douletine, Kasiler Kuwetine, alla
dielum; that is, Make us thankful for this repast, prosper the King's affairs,
give his Soldiers and Servants courage; this we pray thee, O God: whereto all
the rest answer their Alla, Alla. Grace being thus said, they rose up, and went
out of the room one after another, without speaking a word, according to the
custom of the Country. Our Mehemander came also to tell us that we might
withdraw when we pleased; as we immediately did, making a low Reverence to the
King.

After this first audience, we were permitted to receive the Visits of all
other Nations, who have any Commerce at Ispahan, as the French, Spaniards,
Italians, English and Dutch. They came often to see us, and contributed much to
our Divertisement, during the abode we made in that City, The English were the
first that gave us a Visit. Their Factor, whose name was Francis Honywood, came
to our Quarters the 18 of August, accompanied by a considerable number of
Merchants, who, to express the affection they bore us, had all put themselves
into the German fashion, though otherwise they went according to the mode of
their own Country. The Factor was an excellent good natured man, and
excessively civil. He immediately made proffers of his service to us, and
afterward made them good upon all occasions, and kept us company most part of
that day.

The 22. The King sent the Ambassadors a Present of Fruits, as Melons, Apples,
Pears, Grapes, Quinces; and others, and, along with it, thirty great Flaggos of
most excellent Schiras-Wine.

The 24. the Ambassadors had their first private audience, The first private
Audience.
concerning their Negotiation, at which was the King himself in Person,
attended by the Chancellor, and a great number of the Lords of the Council.
This conference was not had in the Divan-Chane, but in another apartment, into
which we were brought, through a spacious Gallery, and afterward through a
fair Garden, where those of our Retinue found their Divertisement* while the
Ambassadors, with their Interpreter, were employed about their affairs. The
King had the patience to stay there two hours and better, and as we came out
thence, Dinner was going in, whereto all the Company was invited, all being
placed, and treated in the same manner as we had been before.

Aug. the 28. Celebrate the Festival of St. Augustine.
the Augustine Friars came to entreat the Ambassadors to honor them with their
Presence the next day, at the Celebration of the Festival of their Patron St.
Augustine. They desired the same favor of the Muscovian Pos^anick, Alexei
Savinouits,, as also of an Armenian Bishop, and the English Merchants, who,
though of a different Religion, and that in Europe they would have made some
difficulty to be present at the Ceremonies of the Roman Catholic Church, live
like Brethren and true Christians, among their common Enemies.

There were in the Monastery in all, but six Spanish Monks, and yet they had
built a very vast Structure, with a very fair Church belonging to it, which had
two Steeples, but somewhat low, a stately Cloister, several Cells, and a large
Garden.

The Ambassadors went thither on Horseback, in regard that, though the
Monastery were within the City, yet was it above a League from our quarters;
and the Religious men, who received them at the entrance of the Monastery,
conducted them straight to the Church, which was adorned with abundance of
Pictures, and Gilt in several places. They presently began Mass, during which
we had pretty good Music, for one of their Monks had some skill upon the
Organ, and our Musicians had brought thither their Lutes and Violins. After
Mass, we were carried into the Garden, near a Fountain, and under the shade of
a Tree, the branches whereof were so full of Leaves, and so woven one within
another, that they compassed the Fountain, and in several places reaching down
to the ground, they made convenient seats. The Clock striking twelve, Dl^e in
the Monastery.
we were brought into a fair Hall, where we were feared at three several
Tables, which were placed all along the Walls, after the same manner as may be
seen in the Monasteries of Religious men in Europe.

The Tables were covered with all sorts of Fruits, in dishes of Porcelane, and
the Cloth was all strewn with Flowers. Every one had his dish of Meat by
himself, plenty of all things, and all very well dressed, yet not without some
respect to frugality. After Dinner, which lasted not so long as we had been at
the entertainments of the Persians, or those we were invited to by some foreign
Merchants, we returned into the Garden, where we passed away the remainder of
the day, under the shade of the same Tree.

With the beginning of September, SEPT.
we began to be sensible of a change of the weather* The great heats were so
much abated, that the Nights began to be tedious and troublesome, Two Armenian
Lords visit the Ambassadors.
especially to those who had not been careful to provide themselves good
Coverlets.

About this time Seferas-beg, Governor of Armenia, accompanied by his two
Brothers, came to see the Ambassadors, with a design to make acquaintance, and
contract Friendship with them. They were all three persons of an excellent good
disposition, free in their Conversation and Civil, which gained so much upon
the nature of the Ambassador Brugman, who loved people of that Kidney, and was
himself of a free Humor, that he presented the two Elder, each of them, with a
handsome Fowling-piece, and the younger with a Case of Pistols. They took those
Presents so kindly, that, to express their gratitude, they resolved to make an
Entertainment for the Ambassadors, for which they appointed the 18 of
September, and entreated them to bring all their Retinue along with them. They
sent us Horses to bring us, and some of the Armenian Merchants to accompany us.

We brought along with us two Portuguez Monks, the Prior of the Augustines, and
our ordinary Interpreter. Seferas-beg received the Ambassadors at the entrance
of the Church, in the Suburbs called Tzulfa, where he had the service said by
the Patriarch of the place, who had about him a Cope of Cloth of Silver, with
flowers of Gold, beset with great Pearls, and a Mitre of the same Stuff,
covered all over with round Pearls. The Body of the Church was adorned with
several large Pictures, the floor was covered with the Tapistry of the Country,
and they had placed benches all along the walls for our more convenient
sitting. They had also a kind of wretched Music. Having done our Devotions, we
got on horseback again to go to the place where the entertainment was
prepared for us. Seferas-beg, having received the Ambassadors with much
respect, and done his civilities to the chiefest of the Retinue, conducted
them, through a spacious arched Gallery, into a great Garden, at the end
whereof we found an open hall, according to the fashion of the Country, where
we were entreated to sit down on the ground. The Cloth, which was of Gold and
Silver Brocado, was covered with all sorts of Fruits and Conserves, and we
drank of a certain prepared water, much like Ros Solis, but incomparably more
delicate, and more precious. Having taken away the Fruits, they laid an Indian
Cotton cloth, and the Meat was brought up, in silver Dishes. It was
excellently well dressed, according to the Persian way of dressing, with this
difference only, that at this entertainment there was brought in Pork, and some
other sorts of flesh, for which the Persians have an aversion. We had hardly
eaten so much as allayed our first hunger, ere we were forced to rise from the
Table, to be conducted through a very noble apartment, into another hall, which
looked into the Garden. It was arched all about, and there were on the Walls
certain Pictures representing the Women of most Nations in the World, dressed
according to the mode of their several Countries. The floor was covered with
rich Tapistry, on which were laid Cushions of flowered Satin, the groundwork
thereof Gold and Silver. In the midst of the hall, there was a Fountain, the
Basin whereof was of white Marble; the water was covered with Flowers; and it
was beset all about with Flaggons, and Bottles of Wine.

We were invited to sit down, and to eat of the Fruit and Conserves, which were
brought in, during which we had the Divertisement of Music and Dancing. And as
a further honor to us, Music.
the Patriarch was sent for, who came in immediately, having about him a
Cassock of watered Chamlet of a Violet Color, and attended by two Priests clad
in black, with Caps on their Heads. He was no ill Company: but the second of
the two Brethren, whose name was Elias-beg, made the best sport of any in the
company. For, to heighten the Divertisement of the Ambassadors, he would needs
play on the Tamera, which is an Instrument used by the Persians instead of the
Late: and then he called for seven Porcelane Cups, Porcelane Music.
full of water, and striking them with two little sticks, he accorded them with
the Lute. While we were harkening to this Music, Seferas-beg told us, that he
would give us a kind of Music, which should be as delightful as the other; and
thereupon rising up, he ordered to be brought him, by two Pages, in two great
wooden Dishes, several Crystal Glasses, which he distributed among the
Company, to whom he began the King of Persia's health. The whole day was spent
in these divertisements, The magnificence of an Armenian Lord.
till that the Ambassadors perceiving night approach, took leave of their
Hosts; but these, pretending to conduct us out of the house, brought us to the
other side of the Garden, into a Gallery, where we found the Cloth laid, and
covered with all sorts of Meat, Flesh, Fish, Pies, Fruits and Conserves, for
the Collation. We sat down again, but it was only out of compliance, for it is
not to be imagined we could have eaten ought. Nor indeed can I believe, that he
by whom we were entertained had any other design therein than to show his
Magnificence, and the Gallantry and Freedom of his Nature, especially in his
Conversion of the darkest Night to bright Day. The Hall was all full of Lamps,
which hung by a string fastened to the Roof, there being so great a number of
them, and those so near one the other, that their Lights were so confounded, as
that they made but one. There was also in the Garden, a great number of Torches
and Candles, which wrought the same effect there.

Having, with much ado and many Complements, taken our leave, we could not by
any means put off the second Brother out of a humor had taken him to accompany
us to our Lodgings, where he made a shift to get perfectly drunk, with
Aquavitae and Ros Solis. And thus we concluded that day, which I confess was
one of the most pleasant we had had in all our Travels, having been better
treated, than we had been by the King himself.

The 19. The Ambassadors had their second private audience, which the King gave
them in another apartment, at the end of a Garden, and which lasted not above
half an hour; in regard the Council took time to consider of the Memorials they
received in writing from them. The second private Audience.
It is ordinary to stay and Dine at the Court after the Conferences; therefore
I shall forbear repeating the Circumstances, unless something in particular
oblige me thereto: as it happened this day, in that the King having heard that
the Ambassadors had Musicians in their Retinue, he sent them word, that he
would gladly hear their Music. It consisted of a base Viol, a Tenor, and a
Violin, which played about half an hour, till the King sent us word, that that
Music was not ill, but that he thought that of the Country as good as it.

The 25. of September, The Ambassadors treated by the English.
the English made an entertainment for the Ambassadors and all their Retinue,
which, in Magnificence, surpassed all the rest. Their House or Lodge, was in
the Basar, near the Maidan. The Structure was of great extent, divided into
several appartments, and had a very fair Garden. We were at first brought into
a Gallery, where we found Fruits and Conserves laid upon the floor, which was
covered with Tapistry, according to the custom of the Country; and having done
there, we passed into a great Hall, where we found the Table furnished and
served after the English fashion.

They forgot not to drink the healths of most of the Kings and Princes of
Europe, and we had the Divertisement of Music upon the Virginals. After
Dinner, we were brought into an open Hall, which looked into the Garden, where
we found a Collation of Conserves, with the best Wine the Country could
afford, And whereas we had often seen the Dancing-women of the Country, Indian
Dancing-Women.
they sent for some Indian Women of the same profession. There were brought six
young Women, whereof some had their Husbands with them, who also either Danced
or Played upon Violins; some came in alone. They were all somewhat of an
Olive-colour, but had excellent good Features, Handsome and well shaped.
a delicate smooth Skin, and very handsome Bodies. They had about their Necks
much Gold and Pearls, and in their Ears Pendants of Gold or Silver, glittering
with Jewels and Spangles.

Some of them had Bracelets of Pearl, others of Silver, but they had all Rings
on their Fingers, and among the rest, they had upon the Thumb, upon which, in
the place where the Stone should be, there was a piece of Steel, about the
bigness of a Crown-piece of Silver, and so well polished, that it served them
for a Looking-glass. They were Clothed after a particular manner, Their habit
having on a kind of Stuff, which was so thin, that there was not any part of
the Body but might be seen by the Company, save only what was hidden by the
Drawers which they wore under their Petticoats. Some wore Caps on their Heads,
others had them dressed in Tiffany, and some had silk Skarfs, wrought with Gold
and Silver, which crossing their shoulders reached down to the ground. Some
were barefoot, others were shod after a very strange manner. They had above
the instap of the foot a string tied, with little Bells fastened thereto,
whereby they discovered the exactness of their Cadence, and sometimes corrected
the Music it self; as they did also by the Tzarpanes, or Castagnetts, which
they had in their hands, in the managing whereof they were very expert. Their
Music consisted of Timbrels, according to the Indian way of Playing on them,
Tabors, and Pipes.

The Indian Timbrels are two foot long, but broader in the middle than at the
extremities, much after the fashion of our Barrels. They hang them about their
Necks, and play on them with their fingers. The postures of these Indian Women
in their Dancing are admirable. Their hands and feet are always in action, as
is also their whole Body: and many times, they address themselves to some
particular person of the Company, either by an inclination of the Body, or to
get the little Present they expect, which they very handsomely beg, either by
stretching out their hands, yet so as that it seems to be done without any
affectation, but as a necessary consequence of the Dance. They are much more
pleasant in their Conversation than the Women of the Country. All these
Dancing-women are common prostitutes, and very free to show all their postures
for money, nay to do beyond what might be expected from them. It was far-night
ere we got away, which obliged the English to bring us home to our Lodgings.

The French Merchants made also an entertainment for the principal persons of
our Retinue, and treated them, with some of the English Merchants, at a
Caravansera, very handsomely.

The first of October, OCTOBER.
the Ambassadors made a great Feast, whereto were invited the Muscovian
Ambassador, The Ambassadors make a feast.
the Governor of Armenia, and his two Brothers, the chiefest of the English
and French Merchants, the Spanish Monks of the order of St. Augustine, and some
Italian Carmelites. They treated them after the German way, with three several
Courses, each consisting of forty Dishes. The Music consisted of Violins,
Trumpets, and Timbrels, which made a goodly Noise, as did also our Cannon, when
any Prince's health was drunk.

The Prince of Armenia, was taken, above all things, with certain services of
Paste and Sugar, according to the German fashion, which were brought to the
Table, rather to divert the Eye, than to sharpen the Appetite: and thought them
so good, that having spoken of them at Court, the King would needs see some.
Whence it came that the Ambassadors ordered some of them to be made by our
Cook; as also some Florentines, and other pieces of Pastry of that kind, which
he took very kindly, and presented them to some Ladies about the Court, who
thought them excellent good Meat.

In the afternoon they had the Divertisement of seeing some run at the Ring,
Running at a Ring.
at which M. Mandelslo got the prize, which was a great Silver Goblet, and the
Ambassador Brugman did the best next him, and got a drinking Cup Vermilion
gilt. Every time any one put into the Ring, one of the Brass pieces was fired.

The next day the Prior of the Augustines came to the Secretary of the Embassy,
The scandalous Life of one of the Ambassadors.
to complain to him of the debauched Lives of some of our Retinue, nay one of
the chiefest among us, naming particularly the Ambassador Brugman, and
discovered that there were some among us, who, after the example of the
Armenians, had married Women of the Country. He told him, that they had
conceived a great joy and comfort, at the first news of our Embassy's coming
thither, out of a hope, that our Lives would be an example to the Christians of
the Country, who living among Mahumetans, were apt to fall into their vices and
filthiness; but that, to his great regret, he found the contrary: entreating
the Secretary, to speak of it to those in whose power it was to take some
course therein, so to prevent the scandal which was given to others, the injury
done to the name of Christ, and the infamy which must fall on the Prince, from
whom the Embassy was sent. The Secretary went, with a resolution to give the
Ambassador Brugman an account of these Remonstrances of the Priors, and to
entreat him that some course might be taken, that the Domestics might reform
their Lives; but it was his misfortune, that coming into the Ambassador's
Chamber, he found him in the company of an Armenian Woman, named Tulla. But the
Ambassador Brugman imagining the Secretary's design had been to surprise him,
was so incensed thereat, that having sworn he would resent that affront, the
Secretary, who had experience of his Revengefull and Irreconcilable
disposition, retired to the Monastery of the Augustines, with an intention
absolutely to quit his Relation to the Embassy, and to accept of the proffer
which the Carmelites made him, to give him directions how to go for Babylon,
and so by Aleppo into Italy, and thence into Germany. But the Ambassador coming
to hear of the course he intended to take, sent him word, that if he did
prosecute it, he would have him killed wherever he were met: which he might
the more easily have effected, in that the Caravans having their appointed
places for Lodging, he might have found out a Persian, who, for a small matter,
would have murdered him. This apprehension, and the advice of some friends
obliged the Secretary to entreat the Prior of the Augustines, to intercede for
him, and to make his peace with Brugman; whereupon he returned to the
Ambassadors quarters, after he had staid thirteen days in the Monastery.

About this time, Ceremonies of Marriage among the Armenians.
I went to the Suburbs of Tzulfa, with an intention to visit some Armenian
Merchants, with whom I had had occasion to make acquaintance at the
entertainments which had been made us. Coming near their Church, I saw going
thither one that was to be Married* whom I had the curiosity to follow,
purposely to see the Ceremonies of the Marriage. In the front of the Procession
marched their ordinary Music, consisting of Timbrels, and Tabors, and after
them went a Youth of about twelve or fifteen years of age, who had a wax Candle
in his hand. The Bridegroom, who immediately followed the youth, was on
Horseback, clad in flowered Satin, of several colors, and had on both sides
of him two Men, handsome Persons, and very richly Clothed, as were also the
other four who followed them, in two ranks. After them were carried two dishes
of Meat, two pitchers of Wine, and so many dishes of Apples. The Bridegroom
being come to the Church, sat down with those who were come along with him,
and called for the Meat and Fruit to be brought and set before him; but did not
eat of either. Those who had accompanied him fell to it, but eat not much, and
the rest was saved for the Priest, who was to bless the Marriage, save only the
Wine, which was all drunk off. The Bridegroom having taken notice of me; rose
up, and taking, on his right hand, a young Lad, and, on the left, one of those
Men, who had accompanied him thither, came straight to me, saluted me, poured
out himself of the Wine into an earthen Cup, and entreated me to drink, but he
himself would not taste of it. In the mean time, the Bride came into the
Church, having, on the right hand a young Maid, and, on the left, a Married
Woman; all three with their faces covered with a thin Lawn. The Priest, having
brought them near the Altar, read several Prayers, and blessed the Marriage, by
holding a wooden Cross over the Married couple, who in the mean time gave one
another their hands, and joined their heads together, yet so, as that the
Bride's head touch the Bride-groom's breast, to whom, by that action, she
acknowledged her self bound to submit, mutually promising fidelity and loyalty
one to the other, under the Cross, that is, in misfortunes and afflictions.
That done, the Priest gave them the Communion, delivering to each of them a
piece of the Consecrated Host steeped in Wine.

I say, of the Host, inasmuch as the bread of the Eucharist is not here
leavened as in Muscovy, and other places, in the Greek Church, but is made of a
paste without Leaven, about the bigness and thickness of a Crown piece of
Silver. While the Communion was administered, they sung, and played on certain
great Cymbals, which the Armenians call Hambarzon. They never communicate
without that kind of Mnsick, which they believe to be so much the more
necessary, in that they say our Savior, when he was to feed four thousand men
with seven Loaves, went first up into the Mountain, where he offered his
Prayers in Sacrifice to God, and that while he prayed, two Angels came down
from Heaven; and played upon that kind of Cymbals. After the Communion, they
cast Rose Water upon the new-Married couple, and all the company, and tied a
Scarf about the Bride's right hand, by which the Bridegroom draws her after him
to the Church door, where all the company get on Horseback, to go to the
place where there is a Feast prepared for them. For the three first nights
after the Marriage, the Married couple touch not one another.

Coming out of this Church, I passed by another, where hearing a great noise, I
went into it. The Baptism of the Armenians.
The noise was made by striking with a great stick upon a deal board that was
hung up, which the Armenians are forced to make use of instead of Bells, the
Persians, it seems, not permitting them to make use of any. I found that this
Ceremony was performed in order to the Christning of a Child. There were in the
Church, only the Priest and his Clark, an aged Woman who had brought the Child
thither: and stood in a corner of the Church, and a young man, about eighteen
years of age, who presented the Child to be Baptized. After the Priest had said
certain Prayers, and made several Questions to the Godfather, this latter
carried the Child to the Woman, who unswath'd it, and then the Priest, Clark
and the Godfather went into the Sacristy, where the Font stood within the
Wall, being made like a little Trough, half an ell in length, and a quarter in
breadth. The Priest, having consecrated the Water, and put into it some
consecrated Oil, put the Child, naked, into the Font, and Baptized him, in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, pouring water three several
times upon his Head. Then he poured water all over the Body, and made the sign
of the Cross in his Forehead, with consecrated Oil. The Armenians Christen not
their Children, till they are full eight days old, unless they be weak; for in
that case, they do it before, out of a belief, that the children, who dye
without Baptism, are damned; whence it also comes, that they bury them not in
the Churchyard, no more than they do those aged persons, who have not
communicated once within a year.

The 3. of October, The Tragical History of a Clock-maker.
there was put into Prison a German Clock-maker, a menial Servant of the King
of Persia's. His name was John Rodolph Stadler, born at Zurich in Switzerland.
He was aged about 38 years, and had Married the sister of that Tulla; whom we
spoke of before. He had been five years in the King's service, and growing
weary of being so long among in^idels, he was desirous to take the opportunity
of our Embassy to return into his own Country. He had, to that end, desired his
Majesty's leave, to depart the Kingdom, and the King, who had an affection for
him, had promised him a Present of four hundred Crowns, to oblige him to stay
two years longer in Persia: but that was so far from prevailing with him, that,
on the contrary, he continued his importunities for his departure, and, to that
end, got the Ambassadors to intercede for him. In the mean time, a
House-breaker coming one night into his house, out of a hope to find there the
four hundred Crowns, the Clock-maker, who perceived him, fell upon him, got him
down, and having hurt him in several places, thrust him out of Doors.
Afterward, upon second thoughts, repenting himself, that he had suffered him
to escape so, he took a Pistol, run after him, and killed him. The friends of
the Deceased went immediately to the Ecclesiastical Judge, and made complaints
of the Murder, committed by a Stranger and an Infidel, upon one of the
Faithful, demanded Justice of him, and desired, that the Murderer might be put
into their hands, in order to his Execution. The Clock-maker who little thought
he should be troubled for the death of a Robber, got on horseback the next day
to go to the Court; but he was taken in the street, and immediately put into
the Palenk, which is a wooden Instrument, which comes about the Arms and the
Neck, and very cruelly handled. The Ambassadors used much solicitation on his
behalf, but the animosity of the Relations, and the authority of the Spiritual
Judge, whom they call Mufti, carried it against him, so that he was condemned
to dye; with this Proviso nevertheless, that if he would be circumcised, and
embrace the Religion of the Mussulmans, it should be in the King's power to
pardon him.

Most of the Lords, who had a great respect for him upon the account of his
Profession, wherein he was Excellent, pressed him very much to change his
Religion, at least in outward show, and for a time, promising him those
advantages which he could not expect in Germany. He was two several times
conducted to the place of execution, in the Maidan, before the Palace-Gate,
that he might see the horror of death before his eyes, out of an imagination;
that would oblige him to renounce: but he equally slighted both promises and
threats, his constancy could not be shaken, and he waved all they said to him,
with so resolute a courage, that it is not to be doubted but it was
supernatural, and that his death was a kind of Martyrdom. He told them, that
the King's favor should never make him lose that which Jesus Christ had done
him, by redeeming him from eternal death, by his blood: That being entertained
into the King's service, his Majesty might dispose of his body, but that he
would render up his Soul to him by whom it was created, that he might be
therein glorified both in this World and the next. The Augustine Monks, and the
Carmelites, endeavored all they could, to oblige him to make profession of the
Roman Catholic Religion; but he continued firm to his former resolution, and
would die in the Reformed Religion, which he professed, and wherein he was
perfectly well instructed.

At last, Is execute^*
the Persians, finding it impossible to overcome his courage, either by fair or
foul means, left him to the Relations of the deceased, who had the execution of
him. He among them who went out to give him the first blow with the Cimitar,
missed him, and wounded his next neighbor the Leg; the second struck into the
Palenk, which they had left about his neck; the third struck him upon the neck,
and smote down that Martyr of Christ, who afterward received three other
blows, ere he expired; the first in the head, and the other two, in the face.

The Ambassador Brugman, who, as I said before, had a great kindness for this
German's sister-in-law, was so enraged at this execution, that being at a loss
of all judgment, and not knowing what to do for madness, he would needs divert
himself by running at the Ring, in the presence of two or three Gentlemen, and
the Canonier, causing, in the mean time, the great Guns to be fired above a
hundred times. The body lay all that day exposed to the sight of those that
passed by, in the place where the execution had been done; till that in the
evening, the Ambassador Brugman, with the King's permission, caused it to be
brought to our Lodgings, with an intention to have it buried the next day. But
the King having appointed that day to go a-hunting, and invited the Ambassadors
to that Divertisement; it was put off; so that the Ceremonies of the enterment
could not be performed till the 22. His enterment.
The Muscovian Ambassador, the Governor of Armenia and his brothers, most of
the Armenians, and those of the Sect of Nessera, of which the Widow of the
deceased made profession (and whereof we shall discourse hereafter, as also of
the other Europaean Christians) honored his Funeral with their presence.

The Hunting, The King takes the Ambassadors along with him a-hunting*
we spoke of before, began the 17. The night before, the Mehemandar came to
acquaint the Ambassadors, that his Majesty had, for their sakes, appointed a
Hunting, that should last several days, and that it was his pleasure, they
should have notice of it, that they might be ready against the next morning. It
was imagined this was done out of design, that the Ambassadors might not be in
person at the interment of the Clock-maker, but that hindered not the Ambassador
Brugman from giving order that the body should be kept till his return.

The 17. betimes in the morning, there were Horses brought for the Persons, and
Camels for the Baggage. The Ambassadors got on Horseback, with Father Joseph,
and about thirty persons of their Retinue. The Mehemandar conducted them into a
spacious Plain, whither the King came soon after, attended by above three
hundred Lords, all excellently well mounted, and s^mptuously clothed. The King
himself was in a Vestment of Silver Brocado, with a Turbant adorned with most
noble Heron's Feathers, and having led after him four Horses, whereof the
Saddles, Harness, and covering Clothes were beset with Gold and precious
Stones. The King at his coming up very civilly saluted the Ambassadors, and
ordered them to march near him on his left hand.

The other Chans and great Lords marched after the King, An Astrologer.
with so little observance of order, that many times the Servants were shuffled
in among their Masters. There was, among the rest, in the King's Retinue, an
Astrologer, who always kept very close to him, and ever and anon observed the
position of the Heavens, that he might prognosticate what good or ill fortune
should happen. These are believed as Oracles. We rode up and down that day
above three Leagues, the King taking occasion often to change his Horse and
upper Garments, which he did every day while the Hunting lasted. The morning
was spent in Hawking, the Hawks were let out at Herns, Cranes, Drakes, nay
sometimes at Crows, which they either met with by chance, or were set purposely
upon. About noon, we came to an Armenian Village, where we found a great number
of Tents of diverse colors, pitched after an odd kind of way; which yet made a
very pleasant Prospect. After the King had been brought by his Grande^s into
his Tent, they came for the Ambassadors, who with some of their Gentlemen and
Officers Dined with him. There was nothing extraordinary; Fruits and Conserves
were brought in first, and afterward the Meat, upon a kind of Bier, or Barrow,
which was covered all over with plates of Gold, and it was served in Dishes of
the same metal.

In the afternoon, the Mehemandar carried the Ambassadors to be Lodged in
another Village, about a quarter of a League from the place where the King had
his Tents. The Inhabitants of those Villages are Armenians, and they are called
Desach, and Werende, from the Country, where they lived before, near Iruan,
whence they were heretofore translated by Schach-Abas, to the end, that, living
near Ispahan, they might be employed about the Vines. When they understood we
were Christians, they entertained us much more kindly, and made us several
Presents of Fruits and Wine. Scferas-beg, and some other Lords gave the
Ambassadors a Visit, to be merry, and participate of a Collai^^on with them.
They brought along with them two of those fallow Deer, which the Pesians call
Ahu's and some Herns, which we sent to Ispahan. The King coming to hear that
the Mchemandar had Lodged us in another Village, was very much displeased at
it, and commanded that we should be brought the same night, to be Quartered in
the next house to that where he was Lodged himself; which was accordingly done,
and our Supper was brought us out of the Kings Kitchen, in Dishes of Gold.

The 18. betimes in the morning, the King sent the Ambassadors word, that he
would go with very few persons about him, Crane-hunting.
a Crane-Hunting, entreating them that they would bring along with them only
their Interpreter, out of this respect, that the Cranes might not be frightened,
by the great number of people, and that the pleasure of the Hunting might not
be disturbed by too much noise. The Ambassadors took only Father Joseph along
with them: but the sport was no sooner begun with the day, ere they sent for
all the Retinue. They had made a great secret way underground, at the end
whereof there was a field. about which they had scattered some Wheat. The
Cranes came thither in great numbers, and there were above fourscore taken. The
King took some of their feathers, to put into his Mendil, or Turbant, and gave
two to each of the Ambassadors, who put them into their Hats. That done, they
rode up and down the fields, and spent the time in Hawking, till that drawing
toward noon, the King went to take his repast in the same house, where he had
Dined the day before, and was in a very good humor. They had sent for his
Music thither.

At night, he sent to entreat the Ambassadors to come only with six persons
along with them, to the hunting of the Drake and Wild-Goose, Drake, and
Wild-goose-hunting.
at a place, half a League from the Village. They all alighted within two
hundred paces of the place where they expected the sport, and went into a great
Hut built of Earth, near which they had hidden the Nets upon the side of a
small Brook, where there is abundance of fresh water Fowl. The King caused us
to sit down all about the walls of the Hut, and obliged us to help him off with
some Bottles of excellent Wine, which was all the Divertisement we had that
day. For, not so much as one Bird appearing, we returned to our quarters, where
the King sent us cold Mutton, boiled and roasted, sour Sheeps milk, which they
account a great delicacy, Cheese, and several Vessels full of Citrons, and
other Fruits, raw and preserved.

The next day was our greatest day for sport, Leopards.
the King having ordered to be brought to the field, a great n^mber of Hawks,
and three Leopards taught to hunt: but very few Dogs. Having spent some time in
beating the bushes up and down, and found nothing, the King carried us into a
great Park, which was above two Leagues about. The Persians call it
Hazartzirib, that is, a place where a thousand bushels of Wheat may be sown. It
was compassed with a very high Wall, and divided into three Partitions. In the
first were kept Hearts Wild-Goats, Deer, Hares, and Foxes. In the second were
kept that kind of Deer, which they call Ahu's; and in the third* Wild Asses,
which they call Kouhrhan. The King first commanded the Leopards to be let in
among the Ahu's, and they took each of them one, Thence we went to the wild
Asses, and the King seeing one of them at a stand, spoke to the Ambassador
Brugman to fire his Pistol at it, and perceiving that he missed it, he took an
Arrow, and though he Rid in full speed, shot it directly into the breast of the
Beast. Another he took just in the Forehead, and afterward he wounded others
in several places. He never failed, though he always shot Riding in full
speed. He was as well skilled at his Sword as at his Bow; for perceiving one of
the wild Asses could hardly go, he alights, and going directly to the Beast,
gave it a blow with his Sword over the Back, with which single blow he cleft it
down to the Belly. He struck another with his Cymitar over the Neck, with so
much strength and slight, that there wanted not an inch of his having cut it
clear off. One of the Chans took the King's Sword, wiped it clean, and put it
into the Scabbard. Then we all went to another small Partition, that was in the
middle of the Park.

At the entrance of this enclosed place, the King commanded one of the two
Huntsmen who carried his Fowling-piece after him, to shoot at a wild Ass, which
had before been wounded with an Arrow. The antienter man of the two thinking it
a disparagement to him, that the command was directed to the younger, would
needs prevent him, shot at the Beast, and missed. The company laughed at him,
which put him into such madness, that suffering the King to go on, he returns
to his Camerade, drew his Sword upon him, and cut off the Thumb of his right
hand. The wounded party makes his complaints to the King, who immediately
commanded the others head to be brought him: but upon the Mediation of several
of the Grandees, his punishment was changed, and he had only his Ears cut off.
The Executioner, I know not upon what inducement, A Persian Lord turns
Executioner.
cut off but some part of the Ear; which the Grand-Master, Mortusaculi-Chan
perceiving, and thinking the man had foul play done him to have ought of his
Ears left, alighted, took out his own knife, and cut off what the Executioner
had left; to the great astonishment of all us, who were not accustomed to see
Persons of that quality turn common Executioners.

Within the enclosed place I spoke of, there was a little building much after
the fashion of a Theater, into which the King brought us, to a Collation of
Fruits and Conserves. That done, there were driven into the place thirty two
wild Asses, at which the King discharged some shots with the Fowling-pieces,
and shot some Arrows, and afterward permitted the Ambassadors, and the other
Lords to shoot at them.

It was pretty sport to see those Asses run, having sometimes ten or more
Arrows shot into their Bodies, wherewith they incommodated and wounded the
others when they got in among them, so that they fell a biting one another, and
running one at another after a strange manner. Having knocked down all those
that were wounded, Wild-Ass^^esh much esteemed in Persia.
there were let in thirty wild Asses more, which they also killed and laid them
all in a row before the King, to be sent to Ispahan, to the Court Kitchen. The
Persians so highly esteem the flesh of these wild Asses, that they have brought
it into a Proverb in their Kulusthan.

This kind of Hunting being over, Presents from one of the Ambassadors to the
King
Dinner was brought in at the same place. Here it was, that the Ambassador
Brugman was pleased, upon his own account, to present the King of Persia, with
his Highness the Duke of Holstein's Picture, in a Box all beset with Diamonds,
as also with a very fair Steel Looking-Glass, polished on both sides, and
embellished with several Figures, engraved by that famous Artist, John Dresde,
and done after an Excellent way, whereof he himself had been the Inventor.

After Dinner, we retired into some houses thereabouts, to take our Mid-dayes
repose. The King sent us thither ten Ahues, and a very fair Stagg, the horns
whereof had twelve browancklers: but ere we were well laid down, word was
brought us, that the King was got on Horseback, in order to some further
sport. We immediately followed, and found him a Hawking. He soon gave over that
sport, and taking along with him nine persons of his own Retinue, and six of
ours, he went into a spacious low Walk, at the end whereof there was a place
for the keeping of wild-Dacks: but instead of hunting, he must needs fall a
Drinking, and was so disposed to mirth, that the noise we made, kept the Ducks
and Geese from coming near the place. The King did Monsieur Mandelslo the
favor, to permit him to present him with a Glass of Wine, and after he had
drunk, and that Mandelslo had kissed his knee, he presented him with an Apple,
which is an expression of so particular a kindness, that the whole Court began
to look on him, from that time, as a Person very much in the King's favor.

The Kerek jerak, or ordinary Steward of his Majesty's Household, whose name was
Mahumed Aly-beg, who had filled the King his drink during this Debauch, and had
not forgot to take off his own, was grown so drunk, that, sitting at the
entrance of the Walk, he made such a noise, that the King sent one to bid him
get thence, and perceiving no entreaties would prevail with him, he commanded
him to be dragged thence, and set on horseback.

Aiy-beg could not hinder their dragging of him thence, but they were not able
to set him on horseback, nay he abused and struck those that should have done
it. The King goes out of the Gallery, and would have persuaded him to get on
horseback, but he was no better treated than the rest, so that laying his hand
on his Sword, he made as if he would have cut off his head. The fright which
that put the Steward into, made him cry out so loud, that the whole company
concerned themselves in the fear he was in.

He was very much in his Prince's favor, but knew him to be a person not to be
jeasted withal, and he had* so many sad examples of it before his Eyes, that
the terrors of Death did, in a moment, disperse the Vapors, which had unsettled
his Brain, and bestowed wings on those Feet, which the Wine had made unable to
go. He immediately got on horseback, and rid away as fast as his horse could
carry him, and so made a shift to escape that time. The king who was got into a
pleasant humor, only Laughed at it; he came very merrily in to us; but
withdrew soon after, and we went and were lodged in our own quarters.

The 20. there was no hunting at all. We dined with the king, who was that day
served by a hundred young Men, very handsome Persons, and richly Clad, who
always stood before him. Many of our Retinue would rather have kept those
Gentlemen company, and waited, than have been among the Guests, by reason of
the trouble it was to them to sit according to the manner of the Country. This
entertainment was made in a pleasant Summer House that stood in the midst of a
Garden, upon the waterside. In the afternoon, we went to another Village,
about a League and a half from the City, and, in our way, took a white Heron.

The 21. the king sent betimes in the Morning to invite us to go a
Pidgeon-hunting. Pidgeon-Hunting.
We were carried up to the top of a great Tower, within which there were above
a thousand Nests. We were placed all without, having in our hands little sticks
forked at the ends. The king commanded our Trumpets to sound a charge, and
immediately there were driven out of the Tower or Pidgeon-house, great numbers
of Pigeons, which were most of them killed by the king and those of his
Company. This was the end of that kind of hunting, after which we took our way
toward the City: but ere we got into it, the king carried us into one of his
Gardens, called Tzarbach, which is no doubt the fairest of any we have seen in
Persia, where we had another Manificent treatment. As soon as we were got to
our Lodgings, there were brought us, from the King, twelve wild Drakes, and as
many Pigeons; but they were provided, it seems, only for the Ambassador
Brugman and his Ladies.

Somes days afterward it was published by the Tzartzi or public Crier, all
over the City, that all should keep within their houses, and that none should
presume to come into the street; the King being to go that way abroad, to give
the Court Ladies the Divertisement of Hunting.

The custom of the Country is, that the King's Wives and Concubines should not
go abroad, unless it be in certain Chests or Cabinets, which are covered all
over, and carried by Camels. All which notwithstanding, they permit not, that,
while they are passing by, there should be any one in the Streets, or that any
men should come within Musket Shot of the field where they are, upon pain of
present Death. The King goes before, and the Ladies follow about half an hour
after, accompanied by their Women, and a great number of Eunuchs. When they are
come into the field, they get on Horseback, carry Hawks on their fists, and
use their Bows and Arrows as well as the men.

Only the King and the Eunuchs stay among the Women; all the rest of the men
are about half a League from them, and when the sport is begun, no man is to
come within two Leagues of them, unless the King send for him by an Eunuch. The
Lords of the Court in the mean time hunt some other way. The King returned from
this Hunting, Nov. 26. so Drunk, as were also most of his Lords, that they
could hardly sit their horses. They made a halt at the said house called
Tzarbach, and had engaged themselves into that Debauch, upon a great Bridge
which is at the entrance of the Park, where the great Lords had danced in his
Presence, and found him such excellent sport, that those who did best, had
great Presents bestowed on them. It was observed to be his particular Humor,
that he was very liberal in his Debauches, and many times gave away so much,
that the next day he repented him of it.

Some eight days after this great Hunting-match we had an example of his
Liberality in that kind. The King liberal in his Debauches.
For, one day, being desirous to drink in the afternoon, and most of the
company having left him, there being with him only the Eahtemad dowlet, and
some Eunuchs, he caused a great Cup to be filled, which he ordered to be
presented to the Chancellor, with a command, that he should drink his health.
The Chancellor, who was not given to those Excesses, would have excused
himself, but the King drew out his Sword, set it by the Cup, and bid him take
his choice, either Drink, or Dye.

The Chancellor finding he had the Woolf by the Ears, and not knowing how to
avoid drinking, takes the Cup in his hand, and was going to drink; but
perceiving the King a little turned about, he rises and gets away. The King was
extremely incensed thereat, and sent for him, but upon answer brought, that he
was not to be found, he gave the Cup to an Achta or Eunuch. He would also have
excused himself, pretending he had not Drunk any Wine for a good while before,
and that if he took off that Cup, it would infallibly be the Death of him; but
the King was not satisfied with those excuses, and taking up his Sword would
have killed him, if a Mehater, or Gentleman belonging to his Chamber had not
prevented him, yet did he not do it so clearly, but that he himself was hurt in
the Leg, and the Eunuch in the hand. The King, who would have his will, finding
all had left him, addressed himself to one of his Pages, the^^ on of
Alymerdan-Chan, Governor of Candahar, who was a very handsome young Lad, and
asked him, whether he had the courage to venture at the drinking off of that
Cup. The young Lad made answer, that he knew not what he might be able to do,
and that he would do his endeavor, whereupon kneeling down before the King, he
took several draughts of it. At last, thinking it too great a task to go
through, and finding himself animated by the Wine, and the King's obliging
expressions, who still egged him on to Drink, he rises, cast his arms about the
King's neck, kisses him, and says, Patscha humse alla, taala menum itzund'
Ischock jasch wersun; that is, I pray God grant the King a long and happy Life:
and the Prince was so much taken with the action, that he sent to the Treasury
for a Sword, whereof the Handle, Scabard, and Belt, were beset with precious
stones, and presented him with it; and bestowed on another Page, who had helped
off with some of the Wine, another very rich Sword, and a great Golden Cup. But
the next day, he was so cast down, and so Melancholy, that Riding abroad into
the Country, he was not able to hold his Bridle. They put him into a better
humor, by getting from the Pages the best Sword and the Golden cup, giving
them some Tumains in ready Money.

The 19. of November, The Chancellor treats the Ambassadors.
the Eahtemad Dowlet, or Chancellor, made a great Feast for the Ambassadors, in
a most fair Hall, which as soon as a man came to the entrance of it,
wonderfully charmed the Eye. For in the midst of the Vestibulum, there was a
great Fountain, out of which came several spouts of water. The Hall it self had
on the upper part of it, toward the Roof, A Hall set all about with Looking-
Glasses
several Pourtractures of Women, clothed in several Modes, all done after some
Europaean Copies; and under them the Walls were set all about with
Looking-Glasses, to the number of above two hundred, of all sizes. So that when
a manstood in the midst of the Hall, he might see himself of all sides.

We were told, that in the King's Palace, in the appartment of his Wives, there
is also a Hall, done all about with Looking-Glasses, but far greater and much
fairer than this. The entertainment which the Chancellor made us was very
Magnificent, all the meat being served in silver Dishes. We had the
Divertisement of the King's Music and Dancing-women all the time we were at
Dinner, during which they behaved not themselves with the same respect and
reserv'dness as they had done in the King's presence, when we dined at Court,
but showed tricks much beyond any thing they had done before, one whereof I
observed, which I think almost Miraculous. One of these Women having placed in
the midst of the Hall a Vessel of Porcelane two foot high, and taken several
turns about it, took it up between her Legs, with such slight, that not any
one of us perceived it, and kept on the Dance with the same ease, and with the
same slight returned it to the same place, not making one wrong step all the
time.

These Women are calllled Kachbeha's, The Persian treatments have all Diversions
and they are employed not only in this Divertisement, but it any other that
may be expected from Women. Those who entertain their Friends, what quality
soever they be of, will not have them want any Diversion they can desire; and
the Persians, who are great Lovers of Women, will not omit at their treatments
that sport which they most delight in. Whence it comes, that there is no great
Feast made in Persia, at which these Dancing-women are not brought in, as a
necessary part of it. The Master of the Entertainment proffers them to his
Guests, and he who has a mind to any one of them, rises from the Table, goes
into a private room with her whom he most fancies, and having done his work,
comes to his place again, and the Woman goes to the Dance, without any shame on
the one side, or notice taken of it on the other. Those who make some
difficulty to venture themselves with such common Ware, refuse the Master's
kindness with a Complement, and thank him for the honor he does them. There is
but one City in all Persia, to wit, that of Ardebil, where this custom is not
suffered; which is done upon the account of the Sanctity of the place, which is
so great, that Schach-Abas thought himself obliged to banish thence all the
public Women.

Dinner being ended, the Music and the Dancers withdrew, and the Ambassadors
with the Chancellor, made some Progress in their Negotiation, and in the mean
time we were carried a walking into the Garden, where they treated us with
Fruit and Conserves.

As to this Eahtemad dowlet; The Chancellors name, age, and fortune.
his name was Tagge, and he was about sixty years of age, having one eye black,
the other blew, a full face; but yellowish or inclining to an Olive, and very
high colored; whence it came, that he was ordinarily called Saru Tagge. He
wore no beard, as being an Eunuch; and upon that occasion we shall here give a
short account of him and his fortunes, which we think may deserve insertion in
this place, though there are various relations thereof.

Some affirm, that Saru Tagge, being yet very young, and his employment being
to Copy out Writings in the City of Keintze, he fell in love with a young Boy,
and not prevailing with him to consent to his brutality, he forced him. The
Boy's Father made his complaints to Schach-Abas, then King of Persia, who
commanded that Saru Tagge should have his Syk, (so they call the privy parts)
with all its dependences, cut off. Others relate, that Schach-Ahas condemned
him to die, and that Tagge coming to hear of it, cut off, himself, those parts
with a Rasour, sent them to the King, with this request, that having himself
punished the Members which had offended, his Majesty would be pleased to let
his head alone, which had done no more harm, and might, one time or other, be
serviceable to him; and that the King astonished at the strange resolution of
the man, conceived an affection for him, and finding him an understanding
person, made him Secretary in his Court of Chancery. Schach-Sesi having with
his own hands killed Taleb-Chan, this man's Predecessor, sent Tagge the Golden
Ink-horn, which is the Badge of the Dignity of Chancellor.

The 21. following, A second conference with the Chancellor.
the Chancellor invited the Ambassadors to a second entertainment, by express
order from the King, that they might make some further progress in their
Affairs. They had a very long conference together, after which we were treated
at dinner, but not with the same Magnificence as the time before.

The 29. the two Brothers, Seferas, and Elias-beg, came to visit the
Ambassadors, who would needs have them stay Dinner, Elias-beg endeavored all
he could to be merry himself, and to make others so, but we easily found it was
done with some violence, and that his heart answered not his outward demeanor.
The reason of it we understood from his elder brother, who told us, that the
King had a great kindness for them, and did them very great favors; but that
it was a dangerous thing to jest with him, and that he had a very sad
assurance of it in his brother, who being much respected at the Courr, for the
freedom of his humor, and his divertive conversation, the King told him one
day, that he wanted not any thing, save that he was not of the Mussulman's
Religion, and that he could not do him a greater pleasure, than to suffer
Circumcision. Whereto Elias-beg, replied smiling, that that might happen one
time or other, entreating his Majesty not to speak any further of serious
affairs, but to prosecute his Divertisements. There was no more said to him of
it for a good while, but upon occasion of the Clockmakers constancy, the king
sent him word, that he should remember the promise he had made to be
Circumcised. He would have excused himself, pretending what he had spoken was
in jest; but those whom the king had sent to him, would not be shuffled off
with that answer, took him, and Circumcised him by force. Elias-beg confirmed
what his elder brother had told us; but with this protestation, that he was
nevertheless a Christian in his Soul, and that he would die in the profession
he had ever made of that Religion.

December the second, DECEMBER.
Abasculi Beg, our Mehemandar, came, and brought us the Presents from the king;
The King's Presents to the Ambassadors.
to wit, to each of the Ambassadors a Horse, with the Saddles covered all over
with plates of Gold, and the Bridles having great buckles of the same Metal:
Two Garments, according to the Persian wearing, together with the Mendils and
Mianbends, that is, the Turbant and Girdle, of Gold Brocado, according to the
mode of the Country. Moreover, to be divided between them both, two hundred
and five pieces of fifteen sorts of silk stuffs, Satin, Damask, Darai, Taffata,
Cotton, etc. and two hundred Tumains in money, which amont to just three
thousand, three hundred and seventy Piastres, or a thousand French Pistols,
toward the expenses of their travel in their return. The five principal
persons of the Retinue had each of them a Satin Vestment, and another of
Taffata, with Flowers of Gold and Silk. The other Gentlemen had each of them
one of Taby, with Flowers of Gold; but the rest of the Retinue had not any
thing sent them. The Ambassador Brugman seized the money, bestowed some of it
among those of our Company, who stood in need thereof, to buy things necessary
for their journey, and distributed the rest among some of his Armenian friends.

The next day, The Ambassadors last treatment at Court.
December. 3. the King sent to invite the Ambassadors to Dine with him once more,
which was to be the last Treatment we were to have at Court. The Mahemandar
told them, it was the custom, that they should have, upon their own clothes,
the best of those Garments, which the King had sent them. The Ambassadors, at
first, made some difficulty to have that compliance; but when they were told it
was a custom observed by all Ambassadors, and that no doubt the King would take
it very ill at their hands, if they presented themselves before him, without
the marks of his Liberality, they at last resolved to do it, and, after their
example, all the rest of the Retinue. We Dined in the Hall of the Divan Chane,
and all things were performed with the same Ceremonies as at the first time.
Only this happened more than ordinary, The Chancellors Present to the King.
that, while the fruits were yet upon the Table, the Chancellor ordered to pass
before the King, the Present, which he is wont to make every year once, and
sometimes twice, for reasons whereof we shall give some account hereafter. This
Present consisted in twelve excellent Horses, very richly covered, forty nine
Camels laden with Turkey Tapistry, and other fine stuffs of Wool, fifteen
Mules, a thousand Tumains, or fifty thousand Livers in money, forty pieces of
Gold and Silver Brocado, and several other stuffs and Commodities, whereof
there was such abundance, that it took up an hour and a half ere all were
passed by, to be disposed into the Treasury: in as much as for every Tumain,
there was a several person, who carried it in his hand, in a silken Purse of
several colors.

After Dinner, The Ambassadors take leave of the King
the Kurtzibachi, or Lord high Chamberlain, came and conducted the Ambassadors
to the King, of whom they took their leave. The King delivered them himself the
Answer he made to the Letters they had brought him, with recommendations to his
Highness our Master, and promised that he would send to Visit him by an express
Embassy. The Ambassadors answered the Complement, and thanked the King for the
honor he had done them, and the noble Treatments they had received from him,
during the stay they had made in his kingdom; and returned to their lodgings,
observing the same order in their going from the Court as had been done at
their going thither.

December. 4. the Poslanick, The Muscovian Poslanick dismissed.
or Muscovian Ambassador, Alexei Savinowits went to see the Chancellor, who
dismissed him in the Kings name, that he might return in our Company. The days
following, those Lords, who had received any Presents from our Ambassadors,
sent theirs to them.

December. 5. Chosru Sulthan sent the Ambassadors two ^^orses.

The next day, The Presents from some Persian Lords to the Ambassadors.
Tzanichan, the Kurtzibaschi, sent his Present to the Ambassadors; but in
regard he had done it, by the Persian fugitive, Rustan, who had so basely left
the Ambassadors, to change his Religion, they would not accept of it, and sent
him word, that they much wondered, that, it being, as they conceived, his design
to do them an honor, and to oblige them by the Present he made them, he would
send it by a person, for whom they must needs have an aversion, and one they
could not endure to see. Three days after, he sent them, by another Man, two
Horses, a Mule, and eighteen pieces of Stuff, which they accepted, and gave the
person who brought the Present, five Pistols.

The 10. the Chamberlian sent them two Horses; the Chancellor, two Horses, a
Mule, and forty five pieces of stuffs, among which there were several, whereof
the groundwork was Gold.

The same day, the Mehemander came to give us notice, that the King intended
within eight days to go for Kaschan, and that if we could be ready against
that time, we might make our advantage of the convenience, as far as that City.
Which obliged us to put all things in readiness for our journey; and the 12. we
made an entertainment, in order to our departure, whereto were invited the same
persons who had been at the first, save that the acquaintances, which the
Ambassador Brugman had made in the Suburbs of Tzulfa, occasioned his invitation
of several Armenians to this, who had not been at the former

In the afternoon, there was running at the Ring, at which Divertisement was
present also the Portuguez Agent, who managed the Viceroy's affairs at the
Court, and a rich Jew, who drove a great trade between the Indies and
Constantinople. The Walls, windows, and tops of the neighboring houses were
full of Persians and Armenians, who came thither to see that Divertisement.

The noise of the Trumpets and Tymbrels continued all the time, Brugmans
imprudence.
as did also that of our Artillery, which the Ambassador Brugman ordered to be
discharged at all the healths that were drunk, and that so often, that Father
Joseph, our Interpreter, who knew that they might hear every shot at the Kings
Palace, fearing his Majesty should take it ill, was forced to represent to him
the Tyrannical humor of that Prince, and the danger, whereto he exposed not
only his own person, after the Ambassadors were departed, but also all that
belonged to the Embassy. He told him, that it was no extraordinary thing to see
that Prince exercise his cruelties upon all sorst of persons, without any
regard of their Quality or Character, and entreated him to command that there
should be no more shooting. But all these Remonstrances prevailed nothing with
the Ambassador, who ordered the Trumpets to sound, and the Gans to be fired as
much as at any time before. We understood since, that the King was so incensed
against the said Ambassador, as well for this action, as another, whereof I
shall presently give an account, that he was upon the point of ordering him to
be cut in pieces, and it may be all of us with him, if the prudence and
moderation of the Chancellor had not prevailed with him to forbear, by
representing to him, that the Prince his Master, who, no doubt approved not the
insolences of that Ambassador, would be sure to punish them, as soon as he were
advertised thereof.

But what most incensed the King was this following adventure. One of the
Gentlemen of the reti^^e (...) takes Sanctuary
Lion Bernoldi, who had the Quality of a Gentleman, in the Retinue of the
Ambassadors, was put into Irons by order of the Ambassador Brugman; upon this
account, that being born at Antwerp, whence he retired into Holland, there were
some jealousies conceived of him, upon the frequent Visits he made to the Dutch
Agent, from whom he received many little kindnesses. However, that the Agent
might not take ought amiss, and the more to smother the jealousy had of him,
it was given out that he had robbed the Ambassadors. He found means to make his
escape, and cast himself into the Sanctuary of the Persians, which they call
Alla-Capi, which is part of the King's Palace. The Ambassadors sent to entreat
the King to return their Domestic into their hands; but answer was brought,
that if what he was charged to have stolen were found about him, it should be
restored, but that as to his person, it was not in his power to force him out
of the Sanctuary, though he had committed some Crime against his Royal Dignity.
The Ambassador Brugman was so transported with passion at this answer, that he
said aloud, that he would have him, and would kill him, though he took refuge
and were found within the King's arms. Nay, not content to betray this sally of
his passion, Brugmans insolence.
he suborned an Armenian, who was to persuade Bernoldi, to get out of the
Sanctuary in the night, and to hide himself some where else, while he sent
above twenty persons a-foot and on horseback, Armed with Firelocks, and
Muskets with match lighted, to the Palace-Gate, with express Order to kill him,
if he came out, or to get him thence by force. His Colleague endeavored all he
could to prevent that violence, and the Kings Guard opposed it; but the
insolence of the party he had sent out upon this design, who did more than they
were commanded to do, was so great, that, making head against the Guard, who
would have thrust them back, the King awaked at the noise, and, desirous to
prevent further disorder, The King's patience.
commanded that Gate, through which there was an entrance into the Sanctuary,
to be shut, which was more than had been seen in the memory of Man; it being
the de^^g^ of the Foundation, that those unfortunate persons who are forced
thither, should find their way in at any hour.

The King was so incensed at these proceedings, that as soon as he got up the
next morning, he told the Lords of his Council, that being not safe, even
within his own Palace, by reason of the Germans, who would not suffer him to
take his rest in the night, there was a necessity, either he or they should
leave the City.

The same Ambassador engaged himself in another unhandsom business, which was
of so much the more dangerous consequence, that all the Christians of the
Suburbs were concerned in it. The King commands every year, a search to be made
among the Armenians, for all the handsome Maids, and makes choice of those whom
he likes best. Our Interpreter for the Armenian Language, whose name was Seran,
a person of a lewd life, addressing himself to the Ambassador Brugman, told
him, that, in that search, he was like to lose a Daughter, a beautiful Lass,
whom he tenderly loved, and desired his advice and protection in that case.
Brugman advised him to oppose the Searchers, and to call to his assistance the
Domestics of the Embassy, and assured him, they should be ready to relieve
him. This proceedure of his, and several other imprudent actions, had, at last,
forced the King to a more severe resolution against the said Ambassador, nay,
happily against the whole Company, if the Chancellor had not moderated his
passion.

THE TRAVELS OF THE AMBASSADORS FROM THE DUKE of HOLSTEIN INTO MUSCOVY,
TARTARY, and PERSIA.
The Sixth Book.
ERE we leave the City of Ispahan, which is now the Metropolis of the whole
Kingdom of Persia, it will not be amiss, I gave the Reader an account of what I
found therein, worthy my Observation, during our abode there, for the space of
five months, and to give here such a Description thereof, as he must expect to
be so much the more full and particular, inasmuch as there is not any Author,
who has hitherto written of it, has done it with exactness enough, to
satisfy, even, a mean Curiosity.

They say, Ispahan described*
that the City of Ispahan is the same which was heretofore called
Hecatonopolis, and that before Tamberlane's time, it was known by the name of
Sipahan, as well by reason of the number of its inhabitants, which was so great
as that, out of it, a considerable Army might be raised, as in regard that, in
that place, the Armies had their Rendezvous; from the ancient Persian and
Vsbeque word, Sipe, whereof Sipahan is the plural, and signifies the same thing
as L^sker, that is to say, an Army: from which is derived the word Sipes-alar,
a term the Persians do yet sometimes make use of, to signify a chief
Commander, or General of an Army. Tamberlane was the first, who, by
transporting the two first Letters of that name, called it Ispahan. Ahmed ben
Arebscha, who has written the Life and Actions of Tamberlane, calls this City
in all places, Isbahan, writing the word with a b, and the Modern Persians
always write it Isfahan, with an f, from an Arabian word, which signifies Rank
or Batallion, though they pronounce it indifferently, sometimes Isfahan,
sometimes Ispahan. Ios. Barvaro always calls it Spaham; and Ambr. Contarini,
who was sent Ambassador from the Republic of Venice, to Vssum Cassan, King of
Persia, in the year 1473. calls it Spaa, Spaam, and Aspacham. But as we said
before, its right name is Ispahan.

This City lies in the Province of Erak, or Hierack, which is the ancient
Parthia, in a spacious Plain, having on all sides, at about three or four
Leagues distance, a high Mountain, which compasses it like an Amphitheatre, at
thirty two degrees, twenty six minutes Latitude, and eighty six degrees, forty
minutes, Longitude; and I have observed, that the Needle declined there
seventeen degrees from the North toward the West. It has, toward the South
and South-west side, the Mountain of Demawend; and on the North-east side,
toward the Province of Mesanderan, the Mountain of Ieilak-Perjan. The Author
of the French Book, entitled Les Estats and Empires, puts it in the Province
of Chuaressen: but he is mistaken, for Chuaressen is a Province of the Vsbeques
Tartars. at 43. degrees Latitude, and lies at a great distance from that of
Erak.

If you take in all its Suburbs, Its greatness.
it will be found that it is above eight German Leagues in compass, in so much
that it is as much as a man can do to go about it in one day. The City has
twelve Gates, whereof there are but nine open; above eighteen thousand Houses,
and about five hundred thousand Inhabitants. The Walls of it are of Earth, low
and weak, being, below, two fathoms, and above, but a foot thick, and its
Bastions are of Brick, but so poorly flanked, that they do not any way fortify
the City, no more than does the Ditch, which is so ruined, that both Summer and
Winter, a man may pass over it dry-foot. F. Bizarro, and some others affirm,
that the walls are of Chalk; but I could find no such thing, unless it were
that in the Castle, which has its walls distinct from those of the City, there
are some places, which look as if they were whitened, or done over with Chalk
or Lime.

The River Senderut, The River Senderut.
which rises out of the adjacent Mountain of Demawend, runs by its walls on the
South and South-west side, on which side is the Suburbs of Tzulfa. Before it
comes into the City, it is divided into two branches, one whereof falls into
the Park, called Hasartzerib, where the King keeps all sorts of Deer, and from
the other, there is drawn a current of water, which passes, by Channels under
ground, into the Garden of Tzarbagh. This River supplies the whole City with
water, there being hardly a house into which it comes not by Pipes, or so near,
as that it is no great trouble to them to fill their Cisterns of it, which they
call Haws and Burke; though besides this convenience of the River, they have
Wells, the water whereof is as good as that of the River. Allawerdi-Chan,
sometime Governor of Schiras, built, at his own charge, the fair Stone Bridge,
which is between the Garden of Tzarbagh, and the City, upon this River, which
is as broad in that place as the Thames is at London.

Schach-Abas had a design to bring into the River of Senderut that of Abkuren
which rises on the other side of the same Mountain of Demawend; and whereas, to
bring these two Rivers into the same Chanel, there was a necessity of cutting
the Mountain, he employed, for the space of fourteen years together, above a
thousand Pioners at that work. And though they met with extraordinary
difficulties, not only in that they had to do with pure Rock, which in some
places was above two hundred foot deep; but also in regard, the Mountain being
covered with Snow for near nine Months of the year, they had but three to work
in, yet had he the work constantly carried on with such earnestness, that all
the Chans and Great Lords sending their Workmen thereto, upon their own
charges, there was in a manner to doubt made of the success of that great
enterprise, since there remained to do but the space of two hundred paces, when
Schach-Abas died, leaving the Consummation of that imperfect work to his
Successor, who has as yet done nothing therein.

If Aaly, the Patron and great Saint of the Persians, had lived in that time,
he might have done Schach-Abas a very great kindness, by opening that Rock at
one blow with his Sword, and so made way for the River, as he sometime did,
according to the Relations of the Persians, in the Province of Karabach, where
he made a passage for the River Aras, through the Mountain, which he opened
with his Sword, and which, upon that occasion, is, to this day, called Aaly
deressi, that is, the streights of Aaly.

The City of Ispahan was twice destroyed by Tamberlane; Ispahan destroyed by
Tamberlane.
once, when he took it from the King of Persia; and the other, when the said
City would have revolted from him, and become Subject to its lawful Prince.
Ios. Barbaro, who Traveled into Persia in the year 1471. says, that about
twenty years before, Chotza, whom he calls Giausa, King of Persia, desirous to
punish this City for its Rebellion, commanded his Soldiers not to come thence,
unless they brought with them the Heads of some of the Inhabitants of Ispahan;
and that the Soldiers, who met not every day with Men, cut off Women's heads,
shaved them, and so brought them to Chotza, and that by this means the City was
so depopulated, that there were not people enough left to fill the sixth part
of it. It began to recover it self under Schach-Isinael 11. but indeed, it was
Schach-Abas, by translating the seat of his Empire from Caswin to this City,
brought it to the height it is now in, not only by adorning it with many fair,
both public and private Structures, but also by peopling it with a great
number of Families, which he brought along with him out of several other
Provinces of the kingdom.

But what contributes most to the greatness of this City is the Metschids, or
their Mosqueies, the Marketplaces, the Basar, the public Baths, and the
Palaces of Great Lords that have some relation to the Court; but especially the
fair Gardens, whereof there is so great a number, that there are many Houses
have two or three, and hardly any, but has at least one.

The expenses the Persians are at in their Gardens, Its Gardens.
is that wherein they make greatest ostentation of their Wealth. Not that they
much mind the furnishing of them with delightful Flowers, as we do in Europe;
but these they slight as an excessive Liberality of Nature, by whom their
common fields are strewn with an infinite number of Tulips and other Flowers;
but they are rather desirous to have their Gardens full of all sorts of
Fruit Trees, and especially to dispose them into pleasant Walks, of a kind of
Plane or Poplar, a Tree not known in Europe, which the Persians call Tzinnar.
These Trees grow up to the height of the Pine, and have very broad Leaves, not
much unlike those of the Vine. Their fruit has some resemblance to the
Chestnut, while the outer coat is about it; but there is no Kernel within it,
so that it is not to be eaten. The wood thereof is very brown, and full of
Veins, and the Persians use it in Doors, and shutters for Windows, which, being
rubbed with Oil, look incomparably better than any thing made of Wall-nut Tree,
nay indeed than the Root, of it, which is now so much esteemed.

All things in their Gardens are very delightful, Its Fountains.
but, above all, their Fountains. The Basins or Receptacles of them are very
large, and most of Marble, or Freestone. There are belonging to them many
Channels, of the same stone, which conveigh the water from one Basin to another,
and serve to water the Garden. Persons of Quality, nay indeed many rich
Merchants, build, in their Gardens, Summer-houses, or a kind of Gallery or
Hall, which is enclosed with a row of Pillars, whereto they add, at the four
corners of the main Structure, so many with-drawing-rooms, or Pavilions, where
they take the air, according to the wind then reigning. And this they take so
much delight in, that, many times, these Summer-houses, are handsomer built,
and better furnished, than those wherein they ordinarily live. It Is true, their
Great-mens Houses and Palaces are very Magnificent within; but there is not any
thing so ugly without, in regard most of their Houses are built only of Earth,
or Brick, baked in the Sun.

Their houses are in a manner square, Their Houses.
and most have four stories, accounting the ground-room for one, They call the
Cellar, and such places, belonging to a house, as are under ground, Sirsemin,
the ground-rooms of the house, Chane, the first story Kuschk; the second,
Tzauffe; and the third, Kesser; and they call the open Halls Eiwan. Their
Windows are commonly as big as their Doors; and in regard their buildings are
not very high, the frames ordinarily reach up to the Roof. They have not yet
the use of Glass, but, in Winter, they cover the frames of their Windows, which
are made like Lattices, with oiled Paper.

There is also little Wood in Persia, Their stoves*
I mean in most of its Provinces, that, not being able to keep any great fire,
they make use of Stoves, but they are otherwise made than those of Germany. In
the midst of their low rooms, they make a hole in the ground of about the
compass of an ordinary Kettle, which they fill with burning Coals or Char-coal,
and put over it a plank, or little low Table, covered with a large Carpet.
Sitting, according to their custom, upon the ground, they thrust their feet
under the Table, and draw the Carpet over their Body up to the breast, so as
that the heat is thereby kept in. Some pass away the nights also, thus
accommodated, and so they procure a very natural heat with little fire, and
they imagine it to be the more wholesome, in that it troubles not the head, which
in the mean time has the benefit of a fresh and healthy air. They call this
kind of Stoves Tenuer; and that the brain might not be offended by Vapors,
which Char-coal commonly sends up into the head, they have certain Passages and
Conduits under ground, through which the air draws them away. Persons of mean
Quality, and such as are saving, dress their meat with these Tenuers, and make
use of them instead of an Oven, and bake Bread and Cakes over them. There is
not a house in Ispahan, but has its Court, which a man must cross ere he comes
into the house.

They say, The streets*
that heretofore, the streets of Ispahan were so broad, that twenty horse might
have rid abreast in any of them. But now, especially since the City began to
be re-peopled, in the time of Schach-Abas, they husbanded their ground better,
especially in the heart of the City, near the Maidan and the Basar; insomuch
that the streets are become so narrow, that if a man meets a Mule-driver, whom
they call Charbende, that is, a servant to look to the Asses, who many times
drives twenty Mules or more before him, he must step into some shop, and stay
there till they be all passed by. All the streets abutting upon the Maidan are
very narrow: but the Maidan, or Marketplace, though it has shops all about
it, is so large, that I cannot imagine there is any in Europe comes near it.

This Marketplace is seven hundred foot long, The Maida^
and two hundred and fifty broad. All the houses about the Maidan are of equal
height, and all built of Brick, having their shops vaulted: where you have, on
the side toward the King's Palace, Goldsmiths, Lapidaries, and Druggists; and
opposite to them, those Merchants who sell all sorts of stuffs, of Silk, Wool,
and Cotton, and the Taverns where they Tiple, and sell all sorts of Provisions.
All these houses are two stories high, and have all, their Eiwans, or open
Halls. The Marketplace is planted all about with a kind of Trees, called
Scimscad, which is somewhat like Box, but they are much higher, and the
branches being perpetually green, they are so cut, that the Shops are to be
seen between the Trees, and make a very delightful Prospect. But it is not one
of the least Ornaments of their Maidan, that the Riv^let which runs at the foot
of these Trees, in a Chanel of Freestone, raised two foot from the ground all
about the Marketplace, falls into two great Basins, at the two corners of it,
and is thence carried by Channels under ground to other places.

Tradesmen do not work at all themselves, but have their Slaves and
Apprentices, who do all the main work at their house's, while the Master's
business is only to sell his Commodities, in shops appointed for that purpose,
at the Maidan, in a great Vaulted Gallery built with Arches, or in the streets
abutting upon it, where every Trade has its particular quarter assigned it, or
happily in a street appointed for that particular Commodity, and where they
permit not the selling of any other. The observance of which order, in regard
the Persians are very neat in all they do, makes so delightful a show, that I
have not seen any thing like it. At the end of his Gallery, there are two
Balconies, covered over head, opposite one to the other, where their Music,
which consists in Tymbrels, Hawboyes, and other kind of Instruments, which they
call Kerenei, is to be heard every night at Sunset, as also, when the King,
either going out of the City, or coming into it, passes through the Maidan.
They have this kind of Music in all the Cities of Persia, which are governed
by the Chan, and they say Tamberlane first introduced that custom, which has
been observed ever since.

The King's Palace is upon the Maidan. The Persians call it Dowlet-Chane, or
Der Chane Schach, and there lie before the Gate several great Pieces, The
King's Palace.
of all sizes, but most such as require 36 or 48 pound Bullet, very roughly
cast, without Carriages, and lying upon Beams, so as that no use can be made of
them. Nicholas Hem, a Hollander, who traveled into Persia in the years 1623.
and 1624. says that these Pieces were brought thither from Ormus, and that they
secure the Avenues of the place; but, as I said before, it is impossible they
should be discharged. Nay, the Palace it self has no Fortifications, and is
compassed only by a high Wall. In the day time, there are but three or four
upon the Guard, and in the night, there are fifteen at the Gate, and about
thirty within the King's apartment. These last are all persons of Quality, and
sons of Chans, His Guard,
of whom, some stand Centry, and the rest walk the Round, and they all lie upon
the ground, in the open air. This Guard has its Kischiktzi, or particular
Captain, who, every night, delivers the King a List of their names who are upon
the Guard, that he may know whom he may confide in, and by what persons he is
served.

Over the first Gate, there is a great square structure, which has large
Windows on all sides, and we were told, that, within, it was Carved all over
and Gilt: The other principal apartments of this great Palace, are, the Tab
Chane, which is a spacious Hall, where the King treats all the great Lords of
his Court, and entertains them at Dinner, upon the day of their Naurus, which
is their first day of the year; the Divan-Chane, which is the ordinary place
where all Appeals are tried, and where the King commonly gives Audience to the
Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, as we said elsewhere; which is done, partly upon
this account, that, this Edifice having a great Court adjoining to it, into
which it looks, the King may have the convenience of showing the Ambassadors
some of his best Horses, and his other pieces of Magnificence, as he did at our
first audience. The Haram-Chane, which is a Hall, wherein the Casseha, that is
the King's Concubines, who are always shut up in several apartments, have their
meetings, to Dance before him, and to divert him with their Musicians, who are
all Eunuchs: The Deka, or the place of the King's ordinary residence; where he
lodges, and cats, with his lawful Wives. All these Halls have, belonging to
them, several Chambers, Closets, Galleries, and other necessary apartments, fit
for the lodging and divertisement of so powerful a Prince, and so great a
number of Ladies, who are all with him within the same Palace; wherein there is
not any considerable apartment, but has its particular Garden.

At the entrance of the Kings Palace, and about forty paces from the
outer-gate, on the right hand, there is another Gate, which opens into a
spacious Garden, in the midst whereof there is a Chapel which gives a Privilege
to the whole place, and makes the Sanctuary we spoke of before, The Sanctuary.
called by the Persians, Alla-Capi, that is, God's Gate. All those who stand in
fear of imprisonment, whether upon a civil, or criminal account, find here an
assured Sanctuary and refuge, even against the King's displeasure, and may live
there till they are reconciled to their Adversaries, if they have to do with
private men, or obtained their pardon of the King; provided they have
wherewithal to subsist. Murderers and Assassins participate of the same
Privilege; but the Persians have so great an aversion for Theft, as accounting
it a base and infamous Crime, as it really is, that they permit not Thieves, if
they do come in, to stay there many days. At the time of our Travels, we found,
in this Sanctuary, a Sulthan, who having, either through misfortune, or his own
ill conduct, lost the Kings favor, and being in fear of losing his life, was
got in thither with all his Family, and lived in Tents, which he had set up in
the Garden.

Behind the Kings Palace, lies the Castle, which they call Taberik Kale. It
serves for a Citadel, Its Citadel.
which is the signification of the word Kale, and it is fortified with a
Rampire, and several Bastions of earth, which being very sharp above, Nicholas
Hem, whom I have found in all things else the most exact of any that have
written of the City of Isp^han, took them for Towers. The King does not live
in it, but there is a Governor, who has the command of it, and a strong
Garrison within it, which is kept there for the security of the Treasure, the
Arms and Ammunition of War, that are within it; though all the Artillery
consists only in some Fieldpieces.

On the other side of the Maidan, Another Sanctuary
in a by-street, there is another Sanctuary, which is called Tschehil Sutun.
upon occasion of the forty Beams, which under-prop the Roof of the Structure,
and which all rest upon one Pillar, which stands in the middle of the Metschid,
or Mosquey. Into this Sanctuary, there got a great number of the Inhabitants of
Ispahan, when Tamberlane punished the rebellion of this City. For though he had
no great Sentiments of piety, yet did he discover a certain respect for the
places he accounted sacred; and accordingly he spared all those who took refuge
in the Mosquey, but ordered all the rest to be cut in pieces, and commanded the
Walls of the Court belonging to it, to be pulled down. But Schach-Ismael had
them built up again, and made the place a Sanctuary.

Toward the South part of the Maidan stands that rich and magnificent Mosquey,
The chief Mosquey of the City*
which Schach-Abas began, and was almost finished when he died, but Schach-Sefi
had the work carried on at the time of our being there, causing the Walls to be
done over with Marble. It is dedicated to Mehedi, who is the twelfth Iman, or
Saint, of the posterity of Aaly, for whom Schach-Abas had so particular a
Devotion, that he was pleased to build several other Mosqueys after the same
Model, though much less, at Tauris, and other places, in honor of the same
Saint, wherein he made use of the Marble, which he had brought from Eruan,
which is as white as Chaulk, and smoother than any Looking-glass. But the
Marble which was spent in the building of the great Metschid, at Ispahan, is
brought from the Mountain of Elwend. The Persians would have it believed, that
Mehedi is not dead, but lies hid in a Grot, near Kufa, and that he shall come
out thence, some time before the day of Judgment, and ride Duldul, Aaly's
Horse, upon whom he is to go all over the World, to convert people to the
Religion of Mahomet. Whence this Mosquey is called Metzid Mehede Sahebeseman.

To go from the Maidan to this Mosquey, a man must pass through a great Court,
paved with Freestone, at the end whereof, there is, under a Tree, a fair
Cistern, wherein those, who go to do their Devotions in the Mosquey, wash and
purify themselves. Behind this Tree, there is a pair of stairs, by which you
go up to the square place, which is much less than the foresaid Court, and
thence it is but a little further to the Mosquey. John de Laet, taking it from
Nicholas Hem, affirms, that there is a pair of stairs of thirteen steps to get
up to the Mosquey, and that those stairs are cut out of one piece of Mar^^e;
but there is no such thing. The Portal is of white Marble, and at least as high
as that of the Meschaick Choabende, in Sulthania. The door is covered all over
with plates of Silver, which are Gilt in several places.

As you pass through the Door, you enter into a great Court, round about which
there is a Vaulted Gallery, and, in the middle of it, a great Cistern of
Freestone, but eight square, and full of water. Above this Gallery there is
another, not so high as this, which upper Gallery has, toward the Hejat, or
Court, a row of Marble Pillars, which in some places are Gilt. A man must cross
this Court to go into the Mosquey, wherein are the Meherab and the Cathib, that
is, the Altar and the Pulpit, according to their way. As you come in, you pass
under a Vault of extraordinary height, done over with glittering Stones, some
Blew, some Gilt. It is a vast Structure, having many Neeches and Chapels, which
are all upheld by Marble Pillars. But the most remarkable thing in all this
Emerat, is, that all the Walls, as well those of the Gallery, which is in the
Court, as of the Mosquey it self, are of Marble, about fifteen or sixteen foot
high, and that there is no piece of Marble, (which is most of it white and
extremely well polished) but is five or six foot in length and breadth, and
they are so neatly put one into another, that, the Junctures being in a manner
imperceptible, a man cannot but admire the Art of the Workman, and acknowledge
that the Workmanship is not to be imitated. The Meherab, or the Altar, is all
of one piece of Marble, having on each side, a Pillar of the same stone, which
is also all of one piece. Besides this Mosquey, which is the chiefest in all
the City, and the most sumptuous of any in the whole Kingdom, there are in
Ispahan many others, but they are much less, and there is too great a number of
them, for us to undertake to give here a more particular Description thereof.

In the midst of the Maidan there stands a high Pole, The Exercises of the
Grand^es.
much after the manner of those that are set up in several Cities of Europe, to
shoot at the Parrat, but, instead of a Bird, they set on the top of it a little
Melon, an Arpus, or an Apple, or happily a Trencher, with money upon it; and they
always shoot at it on Horseback, and that Riding in full speed.

The King himself is sometimes pleased to make one, among the Inhabitants, when
they are at that sport, or sends some of his chiefest Lords to do it; and
commonly, there are very considerable sums laid. The Money which falls down
with the ^rencher, belongs to the King's footmen, and he who carries away the
Prize, is obliged to make a Feast for all the Company; nay for the King
himself, if so be he has shot among them. They play there also at a certain
Game, which the Persians call Kuitskaukan, which is a kind of Mall, or Cricket;
but they play at this also on Horseback, and strike the Bowl to the end,
Riding in full speed. They also often Exercise themselves at the Tzirid, or
Iavelin; their way we have described elsewhere. And in regard Persia has the
best Horses of any in the World, and that the Persians are very curious about
them, they many times lay wagers on their swiftness, and Ride them between the
two Pillars, which are at both ends of the Maidan. When the King is only a
Spectator of the sport, he sits in a little wooden Lodge, called Scanescin,
which is at one end of the Maidan; set on four Wheels, for the more convenient
removal of it from one place to another.

On the other side of the Maidan, Taverns.
over against the great Mosquey, are the Wine-Taverns, and other
Drinking-Houses, whereof we spoke before. There are several kinds of them. In
the Scire Chanes, they sell Wine; but those who have the least tenderness for
their Reputation, will not come into those places, which are infamous, and the
common receptacles of a sort of people, who divert themselves there with
Music, and the Dancing of some of their common Drabbs, who having, by their
obscene gestures, excited the brutalities of the Spectators, get them into some
corner of the House, or draw them along into some public places, where they
permit the commission of these abominations, as freely as they do that of
ordinary sins.

In the Tsal Chattai Chane, Places where The is drunk.
they drink The, or Tea, which the Persians call Tzai, though the Tzai, (...)
Cha are properly but a kind of The, and Chattai, in as much as it is b^ought
them from Chattai: we shall have occasion to speak more of it hereafter. They
are only persons of good repute who Drink of this, Chesse.
and frequent these Houses, where, in the intervals of their drinking, they
spend the time at a certain Game somewhat like our Tick-Tack. but they commonly
play at Chesse, at which they are excellent, and go beyond the Muscovites, whom
I dare affirm to be the best Gamesters at Chesse of any in Europe. The Persians
call this Game Sedrentz, that is, Hundred-cares, in regard those who play at
it, are to apple all their thoughts thereto; and they are great Lovers of it,
in as much as from the word Sch^ch, whence it has its name, they would have it
believed, it is of their Invention. Some years since, there was published in
Germany, a great Volume, upon the Game of Chesse, wherein the Author, too
easily crediting Olaus Magnus, would have it believed, that the ancient Goths
and Swedes, put those to play at Chesse who were Suitors to their Daughters,
that, by their management of that Game, which has no dependence on Fortune,
they might discover the judgment and disposition of their pretended Sons in
Law. But these are only Fables, as is also what is related of one Elmaradab,
King of Babylon. The Government of this Prince was so Tyrannical, as the story
at least would have it, that no Body thinking it safe, to represent to him the
dangers, whereto his cruelties exposed the State and his own Person, one of the
Lords of his Council, named Philometer, invented the Game of Chesse, which,
instead of openly opposing the sentiments of the Tyrant, discovered to him the
duty of a Prince toward his Family and Subjects, by showing him the removals
of the several pieces, by the representation of two Kings, encamped one against
the other, with their Queens, their Officers and Soldiers; and that this
wrought a greater impression on the King, than all the other remonstrances that
could have been made to him.

The Cahwa Chane are those places, Places for Tobacco and Cahwa, or Coffee.
where they take Tobacco, and drink of a certain black water, which they call
Cahwa: but we shall treat of both hereafter in this very Book, when we shall
have occasion to speak of the Persians manner of Life. Their Poe^s and
Historians are great frequenters of these places, and contribute much to the
Divertisement of the Company. These are seated in a high Chair, in the midst of
the Hall, whence they entertain their Auditors with Speeches, and tell them
Satirical stories, playing in the mean time with a little stick, with the same
gestures, and after the same manner, as those do who show tricks of Legerdemain
among us.

Near these Taverns or Drinking-Houses, Barbars and Surgeous.
are the shops of Surgeons and Barbers, between which Trades there is a great
difference in Persia, as there is, within these few years, in France. The
former, whom they call Tzerrach, only dress Wounds and Hurts; and the others,
named Dellak, only Trim, unless they sometimes are employed about Circumcision.
These Barbers are much taken up, for there is not a man, but is shaved, as soon
as any Hair begins to appear; but there is not, on the other side, any who
carries not his Rasour about him, for fear of getting the Pox, which they are
extremely afraid of, because it is very common among them, and very contagious.

As you go out of the Maidan, The Basar.
on the same side, and turning on the right hand, you come to the Basar, or
true Marketplace, and, in the midst of the Marketplace, the K^^serie, or kind
of open Cloister, where are sold all the richest Stuffs and Commodities that
the Kingdom affords. Over the Gate of this Structure, there is a
striking-Clock, made by an Englishman named Festy, in the time of
Schacst-Abas: and in regard, that then there were few Lords that had Watches,
the Persians looked on the Motions of that work as a thing Miraculous and
Supernatural. This English Clock-maker had met with the same fate as Rodolf
Stadler, and had been cut to pieces by the friends of a Persian, whom he had
killed, and the Clock had been out of Order ever since his Death.

This Marketplace consists of several Streets, covered over head, and is so
full of Shops, and those shops so full of all sorts of Merchandises, that there
is nothing, though ever so rare in World, which is not to be had here, and at a
very reasonable rare. For indeed, there is nothing dear at Ispahan, but Wood
and Provision, inasmuch as there is no Forest near it, nor Meadows for the
feeding of Cattle.

Of all the shops I saw at Ispahan, I was not pleased so much with any as that
of a Druggist, who lived in the Maidan, on the left hand as you go to the
Metzid, by reason of the abundance of the rarest Herbs, Seeds, Roots and
Minerals it was furnished with. The Root Tzinae, or Chinae, which the Persians
call Bich Tzini, and Rhubarb, which they call Rawentzini, and is brought
thither from China and great Tartary, were not worth here above three Abas's,
or a Crown the pound.

There is not any Nation in all Asia, nor indeed almost of Europe, who sends
not its Merchants to Ispahan, Ispahan a place of great trade
whereof some sell by Wholesale, and others by Retail, by the Pound and the
Ell. There are ordinarily above twelve thousand Indians in the City, who have,
most of them, their shops near those of the Persians, in the Maidan, and their
Merchandises, in the Caravanseras, where they have their Habitations, and their
Storehouses. Their Stuffs are incomparably fairer, and their Commodities of
greater Value than those of Persia; inasmuch as besides the Musk and
Amber-grease; they bring thither great quantities of Pearls and Diamonds. I
observed, that most of these Indosthans, had upon the Nose, a mark of Saffron,
about the breadth of a Man's finger; but I could never learn what that Mystery
signified. They are all Mahumetans or Pagans: they burn the bodies of their
Deceased friends and kindred, and in that ceremony they use only the Wood of the
Mesch-Mesch, or Apricock-Tree. But of these a particular account will be given
in the Travels of Mandelslo into the Indies. Besides these Indians, there is,
at Ispahan. a great number of Tartars, from the Provinces of Chuaressem,
Chattai and Buchar, Turks, Jews, Armenians, Georgians, English, Dutch, French,
Italians and Spaniards.

The City is supplied with Provisions out of the other Provinces of the
Kingdom. Out of that of Kirman, there are brought, in the Winter time, fat
Sheep, and, in Summer, Lambs, which are sold at Ispahan, at nine or ten Abas's
a piece: for the very Skin is worth five or six, upon the account of the Furr,
which is very precious there. The Province of Kilan furnishes it with Rice; and
those of the Kendeman, Tasum, Ebarku, and Ieschi, though they lie at a great
distance, with Wheat and Barley. Wood and Charcoal are sold here, by the pound,
the Wood near a half penny, and the Charcoal a penny the pound, in regard they
are forced to bring it from Mesanderan, and Ieilak-Perjan.

The ordinary Money of Persia is of Silver and Brass, very little of Gold. The
Abas, the Garem-Abas, The Persian money*
or half- Abas, which they commonly call Chodabende, the Scahi and Bisti, are
of Silver. The former were so called from Schach-Abas, by whose command they
were first made, being in Value about the third part of a Rixdollar; so that
they are about 18 d. sterling. though they do not amount, by weight, to above 15
d. Schach-Chodabende gave his name to the half- Abas. The Scahi are worth about
the fourth part of an Abas, and two Bisti and a half make a Scahi.
Schach-Ismael had Coined, in his time, a kind of Money, which was called Lari,
and it was made after the manner of a thick Latin wire, flatted in the middle,
to receive the impression of the Characters, which showed the value of the
piece. The Persians call all sorts of Copper or Brass money Pull, but there is
one particular kind thereof, which they call Kasbeki, whereof forty make an
Abas. When they are to name great Sums, they account by Tumains, each whereof
is worth fifty Abas's. Not that there is any piece of Money amounting to that
Sum, but the term is only used for the convenience of accounting, as in
Muscovy, they account by Roubles, and in Flanders by thousands of Livers. They
will receive from Foreiners no other money than Rixdollars or Spanish Ryals,
which they immediately convert into Abas's, and gain a fourth part by the
money. The King of Persia farms out the Mint to private persons, who gain most
by it, and share stakes with the money changers, whom they call Xeraffi, who
have their shops, or Offices, in the Maidan, and are obliged to bring all
foreign money to the publick-Mint, which they call Serab-chane.

There is this remarkable as to the brass money, that every City has its
particular money and mark, Their brass money.
which is changed every year, and that such money goes only in the place where
it was made. So that upon their first day of the year, which begins with the
Vernal Equinox, all the brass-money is cried down, and the mark of it is
changed. The ordinary mark of it is a Stag, a Deer, a Goat, a Satyr, a Fish, a
Serpent, or some such thing. At the time of our Travels, the Kasbeki were
marked, at Ispahan, with a Lion, at Scamachie, with a Devil, at Kaschan, with a
Cock, and in Kilan, with a Fish. The King of Persia, on the one side, makes a
great advantage by this brass-money, in as much as he pays for a pound of this
Metal, but an abas, which amounts to about eighteen pence, and he has made of
it sixty four Kasbeki; and, on the other, he, by this means, keeps the Kingdom
from being too full of uncurrent and cried down money.

The great Trade of the City of Ispahan has obliged the King to build there a
great number of Caravanseras. Caravanseras or public Inns.
These are spacious Storehouses, built apiece, and enclosed of all sides
with a high Wall, for the security of foreign Merchants, who have their lodgings
in them, as also for that of the Commodities they bring thither. They are two
or three stories high, and have, within, many conveniences, Courts, Chambers,
Halls, and Galleries.

Among other public Structures, we may well take notice of the two Monasteries
of Italian and Spanish Monks, which are in the most Northerly quarter of the
City, and about a thousand paces distant one from the other, One is the Convent
of the Augustine Monks, whereof we have spoken before; but the other is
inhabited by certain Carmelites, who are Italians, and though they were but ten
in all, yet I may boldly affirm, that those of this Order have not a nobler
Convent in any part of Europe. Their Prior's name was F. Tinas, and he was, at
our being there, very ancient, a good man, and of a free disposition, as were
also the other Monks; who live among the Infidels much more orderly than they
do elsewhere. We are obliged to acknowledge their civilities, especially those
among us, who, having the advantage of the Latin tongue, could converse with
them. We never visited them but they treated us with a Collation, and dismissed
us extremely obliged to them for their kindness, as in other things, so
particularly, in the instructions they gave us how we ought to behave our
selves during our abode in Persia. They presented M. Hicrome Imhof, a Senator
of Nuremberg, and one of the chief Gentlemen belonging to the Embassy, (who is
now in Germany, in a Court much different from that of Schach-Sefi) with a very
fair Italian and Persian Lexicon, which he promises to publish, with the
Latin, since by him added to the other two Languages. They did me, in
particular, the favor, to afford me refuge in their Convent, to protect me
against the persecutions of the Ambassador Brugman, and to get my Letters
conveyed into Germany with much safety and speed.

At the time of our being there, they were also beginning to build a Convent
for certain French Capuci^s, French Capucius.
who had bought a place, for that end, within a quarter of a League of the
Monastery of the Angustines. They were but three in all, who seemed to be very
good people, and had attained some learning. They had finished the Chapel, and
were then upon the Dormitory, which had adjoining to it a Kitchin-Garden, and a
Vineyard, with much likelihood they would not give over building with that.

Between this last Monastery, The King's stables.
and that of the Carmelites, are the King's stables, near which there is a
pretty high Tower, which is all built of Earth, and the Horns of Stags and
A^u's. They say, that Schach-Tamas I. having killed two thousand of those
beasts at one Hunting, employed their Horns in that building, in memory of so
remarkable a defeat, and that he therewith made that Tower which they call
Keleminar.

The parts adjacent to the City, His Garden.
are not unsuitable to the sumptuousness of its Structures, and the greatness
of so famous a Metropolis. The King's Garden, which they call Tzarbagh, is, no
doubt one of the noblest in all the World. It is above half a League in a
perfect square, and the River Senderut, which has spacious Walks on both sides
of it, divides it into a cross, so as that it seems to make four Gardens of it.
At one of its extremities, toward the South, there is a little Mountain,
divided into several Alleys, which have on both sides steep Precipices, in
regard that the River, which they have brought up to the top of the Mountain,
does thence continually fall down, by Channels, into Basins, which are cut
within the Rock. The Channels were about three foot broad; and were cut upon
every side, so as that the water falling directly down, and, with a great noise
into the Basin, extremely delighted both the ear, and the eye. No Basin but the
water fell into it, and upon every Alley, there was a Basin of white Marble,
which forced the water into diverse figures. All the water about the Garden fell
at last into a Pond, which in the midst of it, cast up water forty foot high.
This Pond, had, at the four corners of it so many large Pavilions, whereof the
appartments were gilt within, and done with fueillage, there being a passage
from one to another by Walks, planted with Tzinnar-Trees, whereof there being
Millions, they made the place the most pleasant and delightful of any in the
World.

The Fruit Trees are not to be numbered, Fruit Trees.
and there are of all sorts, which Schach-Abas, who began this Garden, had sent
for, not only out of all the Provinces of the Kingdom, but also out of Turkey
and the Indies. Here you have all sorts of Apples, Pears, Almonds, Apricocks,
Peaches, Pomegranates, Citrons, Orenges, Chestnuts, VVallnuts, Filbeards,
Goosberries, etc. besides a great many not known in Europe. We saw there a
kind of Grape which they call Hallague, of the bigness of a man's thumb, which
had no stone, but the skin and meat firm, and of an admirable taste. This
Garden is kept by ten Master-Gardeners, who have each of them ten men to work
under them; and there is this further convenience in it, that when the Fruits
are fit to eat, they permit any that have a mind to go into it, and to eat what
they please of the fruits, paying four Kasbeki, or two pence a piece; but they
are forbidden to carry any away.

The City has, on all sides, very large Suburbs, which they c^ll Abath,
whereof the fairest and most considerable is, that which is called Tzulfa,
wherein there are twelve Churches, and above three thousand houses, The
Suburbs. Tzulfa.
equal, in point of building to the best in the City. The Inhabitants of this
quarter are Armenians, Christians, and most of them Merchants, and rich men,
whom Schach-Abas brought out of great Armenia, and planted in this place. They
pay the King but two hundred Tumains, by way of Tribure, which amount to about
a thousand Livers, which sum their Daroga, who, in our time, was called Chosrou
Sulthan, and the Calenter, Seferas-beg, are obliged to bring into the King's
Coffers.

On the other side of the River Senderut, lies the Suburbs of Tabrisabath,
Tabrisabath.
where live those who were translated thither out of the Province of
Tauristhan, by Schach-Abas; upon which account, it is sometimes called
Abasabath.

The Suburbs of Hasenabath is the ordinary habitation of the Tzurtzi,
Hasenabath.
that is to say, the Georgians, who are also Christians, and most of them
Merchants, and wealthy men, as the Armenians, as well by reason of the Trade
they drive within the Kingdom, as in all other places abroad. They delight much
in making Voyages, especially to the Indies, and into Europe, in so much that
most of the Merchants who come to Venice, Holland, and other places, and who
are there called Armenians, are of this Nation. Not that the Christians,
whether Armenians, Georgians, or others, are not permitted to live within the
City; but their living in these remote Quarters proceeds from the desire they
have to settle themselves in a place, where they might live quietly, and enjoy
the freedom of their conscience. For the Persians do not only suffer them to
inhabit any where, since they have a particular Quarter assigned them within
the City of Ispahan, behind the Metzit Mehedi, in a place which they call
Nessera; but they have also an affection for them, as well upon account of the
advantage they make by Trading with them, and the Tribute they pay, as
particularly upon the score of their Vines. The Mahumetane Law forbids those
who are subject thereto, the drinking of Wine, and consequently the cultivation
of Vineyards. But the Persians, who are so given to Wine, that it were
impossible they should forbear it, imagine they commit no great sin, in the
drinking of Wine, though it be done even to excess, provided their Vineyards
are dressed by Christians. The Armenians are expert enough at all things
requisite to the ordering of the Vines; but they understand nothing of the
making or preserving of Wine. They are no lovers of white Wine, in so much that
when it has not stood long enough in the Vat, or is not high colored enough
to their fancy, they put into it a little Brazil-wood, or Saffron, to heighten
its color. They do not keep it in Buts or Tuns, but either in great earthen
pots, or fill therewith the whole Cellar, without using any Vessel at all.

There is yet a noble part of the Suburbs toward the West Side of the City,
Kebrabath.
named Kebrabath, deriving its name from a certain people called Kebber, that
is to say, Infidels, from the Turkish word Kiaphir, which signifies a Renegat.
I know not whether I may affirm they are Originally Persians, since they have
nothing common with them but the Language. They are distinguished from the
other Persians by their beards, which they wear very big, as also by their
habit, which is absolutely different from that of the others. They wear, over
their Wascoats, a Casaque, or Coat, which falls down to half the leg, and is
open only at the neck and shoulders, where they ty it together with Ribbons.
Their Women cover not their faces, as those of the other Persians do, and they
are seen in the streets and elsewhere, contrary to the custom of those, who
pretend to live civilly; yet have they a great reputation of being very chaste.

I made it my business to enquire, The Religion of the Kebbers.
what Religion these Kebbers are of, but all the account I could have of them,
was, that they are a sort of Pagans, who have neither Circumcision, nor
Baptism, nor Priests, nor Churches, nor any books of Devotion or Morality among
them. Some Authors affirm, that they have a certain Veneration for the fire, as
the ancient Persians had; but there is no such thing. They believe indeed the
immortality of the Soul, and somewhat, consonant to what the ancient Pagans
writ, of Hell, and the Elysian fields. For when any one of them dies, they let
a Cock out of the House of the party deceased, and follow him into the fields
without the City, and if a Fox take him by the way, they make no doubt but
that his Soul is saved: but if this experiment take not, they use another,
which in their opinion is more certain and infallible; which is this. They put
about the deceased person his best Clothes, hang several Gold Chains and Jewels
about his neck, and Rings, and whatsoever else he had of most value of that
kind, upon his fingers and in his hands, and so dressed, he is brought to the
Churchyard, where they set him standing against the Wall, and keep him up in
that Posture, by putting a Fork under his Chin. If it happen, that the Crows,
or any other ravenous Birds, pick out his Right Eye, he is looked upon as a
Saint, there is no doubt of his Salvation, the Corpse is buried with Ceremonies,
and is very gently and orderly let down into the Grave. But if the said Birds
unfortunately make at the Left Eye, 't is an infallible argument of his
Damnation, they conceive a horror at him as a Reprobate, and they cast him
headlong into the Grave.

There are near and about Ispahan fourteen hundred and sixty Villages, Villages
near Ispahan.
the Inhabitants whereof are all in a manner employed in the making of Stuffs
and Tapistry, of Wool, Cotton, Silk, and Brocado.

The fields about the City lie very low, and it seems Nature was willing in
that to show an effect of her Providence, inasmuch as were it not for that
convenience, the Country would not be Habitable, The fields about it.
by reason of the execessive heats which reign there. For the convenience they
derive from this situation is this, that they can make the River Senderut
overflow, when the Summer heats have melted the Snow on the neighboring
Mountains, and draw it all over the fields. Johannes de Persia says indeed,
that the River, falling again into its Chanel, leaves a slime behind it, which
corrupts the Air; but he is mistaken. For it is certain, that, some Provinces
only excepted, which lie upon the Caspian Sea, there is not any place in all
Persia, where the Air is more healthy than at Ispahan.

True indeed it is, that the heats there are very great, especially in June and
July, but the Inhabitants are not much incommodated thereby. For as, in Winter
they have their Tenuars, or Stoves, against the Cold, so in Summer, they have
their Vaulted apartments, and their Halls and Galleries, with Windows of all
sides, that the Wind and Air may find their passage in, to moderate their great
heats. And though it freezes there so little, that in a Night's (...) it does
not make an Ice as thick as a man's finger, which thaws as soon as the Sun
appears over the Horizon, yet have they a way to make the Ice above two foot
thick, and to keep it, to be used to cool their Drinks in Summer. To do this,
they make choice of a commodi^^us place, that is cool, and toward the North,
paved with Freestone or Marble, but uneven, and with a little descent, upon
which they pour the water, and as soon as that is congealed, they pour on more,
and by this means, in one night, they make an Ice a foot thick, which in the
day time they cover, that the Sun may not shine upon it: and so continuing this
exercise for two of three nights together, they provide Ice enough to serve
them all Summer. Having made as much as they desire, they break it in pieces,
and put it up into Snow-Houses, whereof there are so many at Ispahan, that, for
two or three Kasbekis, a man may have as much as will suffice him all Summer.

The extent we have assigned Persia, The air of Persia.
from the 25 degree of the Equator, to the 37 Northward from the Aequinoctial
line, discovers, that it is seated in the temperate Zone. Mount Taurus divides
it in the middle, almost as the Apennine does Italy, thrusting forth its
Branches here and there into several Provinces, where they are called by other
particular names. The Provinces, which have this Mountain between them and the
North, are very hot; but the others, which have it between them and the South,
have a milder and more temperate Air. The Kings of Persia heretofore took this
convenience, to change the places of their habitations, according to the
Seasons, passing away the Summer at Echatane, which is now called Tabris,
having the Mountain between it and the South-west, and by that means not so
much exposed to the great heats: and the Winter, at Susa, in the Province,
which, from that name, is now called Susistan, where the Mountain not only
keeps off the North Wind from annoying the Inhabitants, but also sends them
heat, by the reflection of the Sunbeams at Noon, and makes the place so
delightful, that it has thence the name Suse, that is, Lilly. In Spring and
Autumn, they lived at Persepolis, or at Babylon. The Modern Kings do still use
the same convenience. Schach-Abas, lived, in the Winter, at Ferabath, in the
Province of Mesanderan; and Schach-Sefi, sometimes at Tabris, and sometimes at
Ardebil, or Caswin. The City of Ispaban is the most commodious of any, as well
for Winter as Summer, inasmuch as being seated in a great Plain, at, in a
manner, an equal distance of three Leagues from the Mountain, there is always
some little Wind stirring, which cools the Air, and comes into all Rooms.

We had but too much experience of this change, and the inconveniences ensuing
thereupon, and found, that the heats of the day, and the cold of the nights, of
which Jacob made his complaint to Laban his Father-in-law, are there equally
insupportable. For, being forced to Travel in the night, and that during the
hottest season of the year, we felt there a cold, which deprived us of the use
of our Limbs, and made us many times unable to get off our Horses, especially
when there was an East or North Wind: whereas, on the contrary, the South Wind
sent us sometimes such hot blasts as was ready to choke us.

From what we have now said, it may be deduced, that all the Provinces of
Persia are not equally healthy, Diseases.
and that there are some, where Diseases are much more common than in others.
Those of Schirwan and Kilan are very much subject to Fevers; but the Air of
the City of Tauris is so good, that a man hears no talk of that Disease there.
Nay, on the contrary, they say that those who are troubled therewith, may find
their remedy in that place, even without taking any Physic. Epidemical
Diseases, such as the Bloody Flux, and the Plague, are not so ordinary here as
in Europe. The Pox, which is called Sehemet Kaschi, that is, the Disease of
Kaschan, in regard it is more common there than elsewhere, or that there notice
was first taken of it, (as it is called in France, the Neapolitan Disease, and
in England, and other places, the French, in as much as, instead of going to
Naples for it, where the French were infected in the name of Charles VIII. they
may now have it as conveniently at Part) is very common at that place. It Is
true Kaschan is a place excellently well seated, but the Air must be somewhat
unwholesome, when they want fresh water thereabou^s, and that it is here the
Tarantulas and the most dangerous Scorpions of all Persia are most rife. The
Dropsy is not very rare in the Province of Kilan; but there are very few
troubled with the Stone in any part of the Kingdom; and for the Gout, it is a
Disease not yet known among them. The Inhabitants are Long lived, it being an
ordinary thing to see persons of a hundred years of age. I knew a Judge in the
Province of Serab, between Mokan and Ardebil, who was a hundred and thirty
years of age; and the Father of Hacwerdy, who went along with us into Holstein,
was above six score. Their temperance and sobriety contributes much to the good
constitution of their Body, the continuance of their Health, and length of
their Lives.

As to the soil of Persia, Persia is sandy and dry.
the Province of Kilan excepted, which is very fertile, it is sandy and barren
in the Plains, every where in a manner checkered with little red Stones, and
not bringing forth ought but Thistles and Reeds, which they use for firing in
their Kitchen instead of Wood, where there is not any. The Province of Kilan
only has nothing of this drought. But in the uneven parts of the Country,
where the Mountains make several Valleys, the ground is very good. Accordingly
in these places it is, that most of their Villages are seated, inasmuch as they
are very Ingenious, in conveying the water, which rises out of the Mountains,
by Channels of about four foot in breadth, which they use in their Gardens, and
many times in tilled Lands, to those places where it seldom Rains. To give the
earth that moisture which Heaven has denied it, they raise up the ends of
their Lands, which are about fifteen or twenty fathom square, a foot higher
than any other part, into which they let in the water out of their Channels over
Night, and the next Morning let it out again: so that the earth, which has
been thus moistened, receiving the Sunbeams almost perpendicular, brings forth
all sorts of fruits in great abundance.

In the Cultivation of their grounds, they make use of Ploughs, which are so
big in those places, where the soil is strong and fat, as it is in Iruan and
Armenia, that many times twenty or four and twenty Buffles, or wild Oxen, are
hardly able to draw them, and they require six men to drive them. The furrows
are a foot deep, and two foot broad. They ordinarily sow only Rice, Wheat, and
Barley. They care not for Rye, and when there chances to be any Grains of it
among the Wheat, as this often degenerates into the other, they weed it out,
and cast it away. Oats is a kind of Grain not known among them. They sow also
Millet, Lentills, Pease and Beans. They call the Ciches, Nagud, and the common
Pease, Kulul.

They sow also whole fields of Ricinus, or Palma Christi, which they call
Kuntzut. They beat the Grain thereof, to get an Oil out of it, which they call
Schirbach, and it is sweet and pleasant, and very good to eat. The Peasants eat
also the Grain; and mixing it with Ciches, and Currens, they make their Deserts
of it.

There is in a manner no Province of Persia but brings forth Cotton, Cotton*
which they call Pambeh, and there are whole fields covered therewith,
especially i^ Armenia, Iruan, Nachtzuan, Kera^^ath, near Arasbar, in
Adirbeitzan, and in Chorasan. It grows upon a Bush, two or three foot high,
having leaves like those of the Vine, but much less, and shoots forth at the
extremity of its Branches a bud of about the bigness of a Nut, which, when
fully ripe, opens in several places, and thrusts out the Cotton, through the
clefts that are in the shell. Though there be abundance of it spent in all
sorts of Stuffs made in the Country; yet do they drive a vast Trade with that
which is unwrought, The Province of Kilan brings forth also a kind of Flax, the
thread whereof is very good, and fit for Cloth.

The domestic Creatures, Domestic, Creatures
as well such as are used in carriage, as others, are Sheep, Goats, Buffles,
Oxen and Cows, Camels, Horses, Mules, and Asses. The ordinary Forage for
Horses is Barley, mixed with Chaff, or Rice mixed with shredded Straw. The
Persians water not their Horses till an hour and a half after they have eaten,
contrary to the ordinary custom of the Turks, who water theirs immediately
after they have given them their allowance. There is in Persia a certain kind
of Herb, which they call Genscheht, which is sown much after the same manner as
we sow Saint-foin, once in seven years. It grows up three foot high, and brings
forth blew Flowers. It is cut twice a year, and they are only Persons of
quality who give it their Horses. There is very little common Hay, unless it be
in the Province of Iruan, and Armenia. In some Provinces they do not make any
at all, because there is Grass enough all the year long.

Of all Cattle, Sheep.
they have most Sheep. Of these they have very great Flocks, and it is their
most ordinary Food, though it be not of so pleasant a taste to those who are not
accustomed thereto. They are much of the same bulk with those of Europe, and
sometimes a little bigger; but short and flat-Nos'd with the Ears hanging down,
as our Spaniels. They are but lean, in regard the Tails, which weigh ten,
twenty, nay sometimes thirty pounds, draw all the fat out of them. The Tails
have the bones and joints, as our Sheep have, but the fat hangs to them in
great gobbets like locks of Wool; which much hinders them from running or
leaping. in Kurdesthan, near Diarbeker, and in Sirie, they have the Invention
of putting the tails of these Creatures upon a kind of little Cart with two
Wheels, which is fastened by a little stick to the Necks of them. The Sheep we
saw among the Tartars, upon the Ca^pian Sea, are in all things like those of
Persia; but those of the Tartars of Vsbeque and Buchar have a greyish long
Wool, curling at the ends into little white and close Knots, like Pearls, which
makes a pretty show, whence it comes that their fleece is more esteemed than
their flesh, in as much as this kind of furr is the most precious of any used
in Persia, next to Sables. They are very tenderly kept, and for the most part
in the shade, and when they are obliged to bring them abroad, they cover them
as they do Horses. These Sheep have as little tails as ours.

The Persians have also great flocks of Goats, Goats.
and they eat the flesh of them. Of the Suet they make Candles; and it is of
their skins that they make the Leather which we call Marroquin or Spanish
Leather, and is brought through Moscovy and Poland into the other Provinces of
Europe.

They have abundance of Buffles, Buffles.
especially toward the Caspian-Sea, in Ferab, near Ardebil, in Eruan, and
Surul, where some Peasants have five or six hundred of them. They are kept in
moist places, and they say their milk is very cooling, as is also the butter
made thereof. They have also Oxen like those of Europe; but, in the Province of
Kilan, they have a bunch of fat upon the neck, as those of the Indies have. I
have been told, that the Cows will not suffer themselves to be milk'd, if their
Calves be not brought before them: so that if a Calf chance to die, (for they
never kill any to eat) they fill the skin with Straw, cast a little Salt upon
it, and they let the Cow lick it, by which means she stands quiet to be milk'd.

The Persians have an aversion for Swine; They abhor Swine.
whence it comes that the Armenians themselves, who live among them, seldom
breed any, unless it be in those places where they live apart, as in the
Suburbs of Tzulfa, where they have some few. They conceive they have very good
reason to have an aversion for this Creature, following the example of the
Jews, and tell, to that purpose, a ridiculous and obscene story, which they
take out of the Alchoran, and relate; That, one day, the Apostles entreated our
Savior, to tell them, after what manner Noah lived in the Ark, during the
Deluge. But our Savior, without saying a word to them, having taken a handful
of dirt, made the figure of a man with it, cast it upon the ground, and said to
it, rise up in the name of the Father. Immediately there started up an oldman,
all white, whom our Savior asked, Who art thou? He made answer, I am Iaphet,
the son of Noah. Our Savior asked him, whether he were so white when he died;
whereto he answered, that he was not, but that he became so just that moment,
out of the fear he was in to appear before God, as believing he had been raised
up to come to the last judgment. Upon that, Jesus Christ commanded him to
acquaint the Apostles with all that had been done in the Ark. Iaphet obeyed,
and told them, among other things, that, one day, the Ark being so full of dirt
at that place where the house of ease stood, that Noah, fearing it might take
in water there, thought fit to consult God in that extremity. The Divine answer
was, that he should send an Elephant to the said common house, and that of the
Dung of that Creature and man's mixed together, there was immediately engendered a
Swine, which so turned up that heap of Ordure with his snowt, (...) the Ark
went very even. This nasty Creature having filled its Nostrils with filth,
sneez'd very violently, by means of which sneezing, there came out a Rat, which
put Noah into greater perplexity than before; in so much, that, to be delivered
out of these troubles, he addressed himself once more to God, and asked him
what he should do in that unhappy conjucture. The answer was, that God
commanded him, to strike the Lion upon the head with a Wand, and that he, being
thereby put into a fury, fell a-roaring so loud, that, out of his Nostrils
there came out a Cat, which immediately pursued the Rat. The Persian Paraphrast
of the Alchoran, going on with his story, says, that Noah, knowing he was to
continue forty years in the Ark, separated the Males from the Females, out of a
fear, that the several species multiplying, the Ark would not be able to
contain them, and that they might want meat. Of all Creatures, only the Dog
had the freedom allowed him to stay with the Bitch, at the bottom of the Ark.
One day the Cat having observed that those Creatures had the liberty to do what
all the rest were denied, went, and made her complaints to Noah, who reproching
them with what they had done, the Dog would not acknowledge the fact. But word
was so often brought to Noah of the Dog's transgression, that he desired God to
make known the truth of it by an infallible proof, and that afterward the Dog
desirous to line the Bitch became fastened to her; wherewith the Cat having
acquainted Noah, they were taken in the fact, and found guilty of having lied
before. Thence it comes, that, ever since that time, Dogs have been so fastened
in the act of generation, and have an inveterate fewd against Cats.

They have several sorts of Camels. Camels.
Those which have two bunches they call Bughur, and those, which have but one,
Schuttur. Of these last there are four kinds; that is, those, which, by way of
excellence, they call Ner, that is to say, the Male, which is engendered of a
Dromedary, or Camel, with two bunches, and a Female that has but one, which is
called Maje, and these are not to be covered by any of another kind. These are
the best and most esteemed of all the Camels, in so much that some of them are
sold at a hundred Crowns a-piece. They carry nine hundred, or a thousand
weight, and are in a manner indefatigable. When they are hot, they eat little,
foam at the mouth, are angry, and bite; so that to prevent their doing any
injury to those who govern them, they have a kind of Muzzle put over their
mouths, which the Persians call Agrab. The Camels, which come of these,
degenerate very much, and are heavy and flow, whence the Turks call the Iurda
Kaidem, and they are not worth above thirty or forty Crowns.

The third kind is that which they call Lohk; but these are not so good as the
Bughurs, nor do they foam at the mouth as the Ners, when they are hot: but when
they go to rut, they put out under the Throat a red bladder, which they draw in
with their breath, life up their heads, and snort often. These are worth about
sixty Crowns apiece. They are not near so strong as the others, whence it is,
that when the Persians would speak of a stout and daring man, they say he is a
Ner, and when they would express a poor-spirited and cowardly person, they call
him a Lohk.

The fourth kind is, by the Persians, called Schutturi baad, and by the Turks,
Ieldovesi, that is, Wind-Camels. They are much less in bulk, but more active
and sprightly than the others: for whereas the ordinary Camels go but a
footpace, these trot and gallop as well as Horses.

The King and the Chans have many Teams of them, and every Team consists in
seven Camels coupled together. They use them at Magnificent Ceremonies, either
to meet Ambassadors, covered with covering-cloaths of red Velvet, or
Pack-saddles made of the same stuffed, embroidered with Gold and Silver, with
silver-bells about their necks, or to ride post, nay, sometimes in the Wars,
in which they are thus much the more serviceable, that, in a defeat, they
contribute much to the saving of the Baggage. They trot so hard, that the Boy
who guides them, and to that end gets up first, is glad to be tied to the
Panel or Saddle by the waste. When they run, they put out their heads, and
open their Nostrils, and run with such violence, that it is impossible to stay
them. At our entrance into Scamachie and Ardebil, we saw a great number of
them, galsoping sometimes before, sometimes behind us.

This is one of the greatest conveniences that Travelers meet with in Persia,
as well for the carrying of their own persons, as the conveyance of their
Baggage and Commodities, which they may, by this means, transport from one
place to another, at a very easy rate, and with little trouble. One man guides
a Team, or as many as are fastened together: and if a man thinks it not safe to
travel alone, he may join with the Caravans, which go perpetually up and down
the Country, and with these is the safest way of traveling.

The traveling of the Camels is at a certain rate, Carava^^.
and therefore their Stages being set, they find it no great trouble to make
them reach their ordinary lodgings, which are either in Villages upon the
Highway, or at Caravanseras, expressly built for the entertainment of the
Caravans. Some of these Caravanseras have persons in them, who are as it were
Hosts, and sell Provender, but in others, you have only the bare Walls. It is
no great charge to keep the Camels. Their sustenance is Thistles and Nettles
and sometimes they thrust down their throats a hard Paste, made of the chaff of
Barley, about three pound in weight, much after the fashion of the Loaves which
the French Soldiers, who serve in the Low Countries, corruptly call
Brindestocq. Sometimes, they put into this Paste, Cotton-seed, which is very
sweet, and as big as a great Pease. They can endure thirst for two or three
days together; wherein nature seems to have made some Provision against the
extremity men are put to for want of water, when they travel over the Deserts
and Heaths of those hot and dry Countries. They only touch the knees of their
forelegs to make them bow to receive their burdens, and being so laid with
their bellies on the ground, they suffer a man to order them as he pleases. The
harmonious sound of a man's voice, or an instrument, enlivens them; whence it
comes that the Persians tie little bells about their knees, and a pretty big
one about their necks, not only by reason of the long trains of them that go
together, it being necessary they should be heard at a great distance, to give
those notice who might unadvisedly come between them, but also to divert these
Creatures in their travel. The Arabians, to the same purpose, make use of
Timbrels, when they travel through the Deserts of their Country, in as much as
whipping or beating does not make them advance; but Music, especially a man's
voice, animates, and inspires them with a certain courage. What most troubles
the Camels, is a kind of Snail, called Mohere, which sometimes lies within the
Thistles; if these sting them in the Nostrils, it proves mortal.

The Camels are very revengefull, and remember a long time any injury they have
received: in so much, that, in Persia, a Camels anger is come into a Proverb,
when they would speak of an irreconcilable enmity. As to this particular, there
is a very memorable example of a Camel, which, being hot, and having not the
Muzzle on, bit a servant who went along by him, in the Arm. The servant gave
him a many blows about the neck with a Cudgel, which part is the tendrest about
these Creatures. But the Camel had a cruel revenge of him, ere they came to
their journey's end. For some time after, being got loose in the night, he went
among the servants, who by reason of the cold lay near the Camels, that they
might thrust their feet under their bellies, and having pitched upon the person
that had beaten him, he trod on him so as that all his bones were crushed and
broken. The servant's Father demanded satisfaction, and had the Camel adjudg'd
him, to be disposed of as he pleasid. If anger proceed from Choler as its
principle, a man may justly wonder whence it comes, that Pliny says, that
Camels, Horses, and Asses, have no Gall. Nor could I ever find any reason why
the same Pliny should affirm, after Xenophon, that Camels have an aversion for
Horses. When I told the Persians of it, they laughed at me, and said, that it
was not without reason Camels hated Horses; when many times the Horses may get
into the stables, and have a house over their heads, whereas the Camels, which
cannot get in by reason of the lowness of the Doors, are forced to lie abroad,
and to suffer the Horses to take up their quarters. And indeed there hardly
goes any Caravan, but a man may see Camels, Horses, and Asses put up together
in the same stable, yet express not any aversion or animosity one against
another.

True indeed it is, that the Females go twelve months, but those are extremely
mis-inform'd, who believe that the Male, when he covers her, turns his hinder
part to her. This mistake took its rise hence, that the Camels, when they make
water, put their yards backwards between their hinder legs; but in the work of
Generation they use them otherwise. The Female lies down upon her belly, and
the Male covers her, after the same manner as Horses do. And though this
Creature be of a great bulk, yet is not its generative member, which is at
least three foot in length, any thicker than a man's little finger. This animal
is seldom eaten, as being more serviceable in point of work; but when they
fall under their Burdens, or in case they be stung by one of the Moheres, they
kill them, with two thrusts into the Throat, one at the place where it joins to
the Head, the other, toward the Breast, and then they eat them.

There are abundance of Horses in Persia, Horses.
most of them well made. They are very handsome about the Head, Neck, Ears,
Crupper, and Legs. Media bred heretofore such excellent Horses, that they were
all kept for the King. The Horses of those parts are at this time very good
ones, and there are of an excellent breed in the Province of Erscheck, near
Ardebil; but it is withal certain, that the Arabian Horses are incomparably
better, and accordingly more esteemed by the King, who makes them the chiefest
Ornament of his Stables. Next those, they most value those of Turkey, though
the King has good breeding places in several Provinces of his Kingdom,
especially in Erscheck, Schirwan, Karabag, and Mokan, where is the best
Meadow-grounds in Persia. They make use of them fot the most part for men's
Riding, very seldom for the carriage of Commodities, and never almost in the
Cart, which, all over Persia, has but two Wheels. And whereas the main forces
of the Kingdom consist in their Cavallry, it thence comes, that they are great
lovers of Horses, and very tender in the keeping of them. Yet with all this
care, do they not make use of straw for Litter, but of Horse-Dung, which they
dry in the Sun, and make beds of it a foot deep, for the Horses, which could
not lie more at their ease upon quilts. This Litter serves them a long time,
and when it is moistened with stale, they put it into the Sun, dry it again,
and so continue to make use of it. With their soft beds, they also cover them
with a Hair-cloath, lined with a kind of soft coarse cloth. They also fasten
them by the hinder feet, to a stake, that, in case they should break or slip
their Haltars, they may not get away, or hurt the other horses. All the manage
they bestow on them, consists only in accustoming them to start away, as
Lightning, at the beginning of a Race, and they call those Horses which exceed
in swiftness Bad-pay, that is, Windy-heel'd. If their Horses be White or Gray,
they color the Main, and the Tail, and sometimes also the Legs, with Red or
Orange; wherein the Polanders and Tartars are wont to imitate them. They do not
in any thing make so great ostentation of their expense, as in what is employed
about the harness of their Horses, which they sometimes cover with Plates of
Gold or Silver, and adorn the Reins, Saddles, and covering-Cloaths, with
Goldsmiths Work and Embroidery. Yet is not this custom of so late a beginning,
but that there may somewhat of this kind be observed out of the most ancient
Authors of the Greek History.

They have also a great number of Mules, Mules.
which for the most part are used only for Riding. The King himself, and the
Chans, ordinarily Ride upon these, and they stood us in good steed, when all
other kind of Riding had been very troublesome to us, in our sickness. They
yield as good a rate as Horses, so that a Mule, though none of the best, nor
very handsome, is sold at least for a hundred Crowns. I was told there were
some white ones, but they are very rare, and highly Valued; and I must confess,
I never saw any.

Asses are very common all over the East, Asses.
but in Persia more than any where, and especially at Ispahan, where there is
an infinite number of them, in regard they allow not Carting within the City.
Those who drive them, have at the end of their Whip a great Bodkin, fastened
with a chain, wherewith they make a noise, and are perpetually pricking of this
Creature, which seems to be more cold and heavy in this Country, than any where
else.

The heats are so great in Persia, Fruits.
and the weather so constantly fair and clear in the Summer, that it is not to
be much wondered they should have such good and excellent Fruits. As for those
which are spent in the Kitchen, they are there in greater abundance, but
incomparably better and more savoury than in Europe. Among others, the Onions
are so big in the Province of Tarum, near Chalcal, that one of them will weigh
three pound. The Cabbages are there curled, very tender, and of an excellent
rast.

Their most precious Fruits are Melons; Melons.
and as their care in the ordering of them is extraordinary, so they have every
year great quantities of them. They sow them all only in good mold, yet are
there not any but what are very excellent. There are two sorts of them, to wit,
those which they call Kermek, from the work Kerm, which signifies hot, in
regard they are eaten in Summer, and they come betimes, and are fully ripe in
June. These are as yellow as Gold, and the sweetest of any. The other sort they
call Charbusei pasi, and they come not to perfect maturity till Autumn. These
are very big, and weigh thirty, forty, or fifty pound weight. They are kept,
not only all the Winter, but even till there are new ones to be had: and this
is done with such industry, that, to distinguish them from the new ones, a man
must put his finger to them and see whether the Rind gives way; and by this
means they are never without Melons. They have a way also to keep Grapes, by
wrapping them up in green Reeds, and hanging them up to the roof of their
Chambers. There is yet a third sort of Melons, which they call Scammame, and
are no bigger than Orenges; but these are wrought or embroidered, having amidst
the embroidery red, yellow, and green spots. They are not very good to eat, but
the scent is very pleasant, and for that reason the Persians carry them in
their hands. There is yet another sort of water-Melons, which they call
Hinduane, in regard the first of them were brought out of the Indies, as we
said elsewhere, i^ the description of the City of Astrachan, where we had some
occasion to speak of this kind of Fruit. It is very big, and yet the stalks of
it are so small, that the Persian Poets use them in their Inventions, to make a
comparison between them and the Wall-nut Tree, which being a great and lofty
Tree, yet brings forth but a Small Fruit: to show, that, many times, a person
of Mean Birth may do very noble actions, and that, on the contrary, a Great
Prince may do things that are poor and unsuitable to his extraction.

They have also several sorts of Citrulls, Citrulls.
or Citrul-Cowcumbers, and among the rest, one, which they call Kabach, and may
be found among the Herbarists, under the name of Cucurbita Lagenaria. They are
about ^he bigness of a man's Head, and sometimes bigger, and have a long Neck.
They are eaten green, and before they are come to their full Maturity: for when
they are ripe, the Rind dries, and grows as hard as the Bark of a Tree, or
boiled Leather, and the meat within is so consumed, that there being nothing
left but the Seed, the Persians use them instead of Flaggons, and make Drinking
Cups of them.

They have yet another kind of fruit, Padintzan.
not known in Europe, which they call Padintzan. They are like little Melons,
or rather Cowcumbers. The fruit is green, save that at the end toward the
stalk, it is somewhat of a Violet Color. The Seed is round and long, and of a
pretty bigness. This is not eaten raw, because it is a little bitter; but,
being boiled, or fried in Butter, it is a delicate Dish.

The Climate of Persia is excellently good for the Vine. The Vine,
There is no Province in the whole Kingdom which does not bring forth
excellent Grapes; but in regard the Mahumetan Law forbids them the use of Wine,
Why the Mahumetans drink no Wine.
they accordingly neglect the cultivation of the Vine. They say, that the
Prohibition made in the Alchoran against their drinking of Wine is grounded on
a reason, which they think very good, and seems to us pleasant enough to
deserve a small Digression in this Relation. They say then, that God, desirous
to comfort Mankind, especially the poor, for the injuries and affronts, which
Great Lords and Wealthy Men are apt to do those who have any dependence on
them, sent into the World two Angels, named Haroth, and Maroth, and forbad them
particularly three things, to put any person to Death, to do any wrong, and to
drink Wine. Now it happened, that a young and very handsome Woman lived in some
discontent with her Husband, would needs have these Angels to undertake the
arbitration of the difference that was between them, and to gain their favor,
she invited them to Dinner, and pressed them to drink of her Wine, which was
the best the Country could afford. The Angels, at first, would have excused
themselves, alleging the Prohibitions which God had made them to that purpose;
but at last she prevailed with them, and they drunk so liberally of her Wine,
that they began to be very familiar with their fair Hostess, and to desire of
her the greatest kindness it is in a Woman's power to do a Man. The Woman was
content they should have their desires, but made this condition before hand,
that one of them should show her the way by which people come down from Heaven,
and the other that by which they go up into it: but as soon as the Angels had
shown her the way, the Woman slunk away from them, and went stright to Heaven.
God finding her Clothed as she was, asked her how she could get up to Heaven
without Dying. She made answer, that it was by the information of the Angels,
and for the preservation of her Honor. Which obliged God to Crown her Chastity
with an extraordinary Glory; and whereas she was one the most Beautiful Women
in the World, it was accordingly his Pleasure, that she should have more light
than any of the other Stars, and so he made her that Star or Planet which is
called Venus. Afterward having called the Angels before him, he told them,
that in requital of the good they had done, he was content they should condemn
themselves to some punishment which they thought proportionable to their Sin:
whereupon they went into the Cave of Bebil, between Babylon and Betreh, where
thy were hung up by the Feet, to a great Iron Chain, in which posture they were
to continue till the day of Judgment.

The Persians, in obedience to Mahomet's command, make no Wine; but in regard
they are great lovers of it, they do not only permit the Christians to make
thereof, but indeed the chief reason why they permit the Armenians to live
among them, is, that they may buy thereof of them. They do not make it so well
as it is done in Europe, and have not the Ingenuity to put it into Buts, but
keep it in great Earthen Pitchars, each of which contains near half a Barrel,
as we said elsewhere. The Seder, that is, the chief of the Religion of the
Persians, to express his zeal, did sometimes order the Pitchars of the
Armenians to be broken. The Persians are permitted to make a si^rrup of sweet
Wine, which they boil, till it be reduced to a sixth part, and be grown as
thick as Oil. Duschab.
They call this Drugg Duschab, and when they would take of it, they dissolve it
with water, and add thereto a little Vinegar, all which together make a very
pleasant Drink. The Minatzim, or Astrologer of Scamachie, gave me of it at a
treatment he made for me at his own House. In the more Northerly Provinces of
Persia, where the Wine is not very good, the Inhabitants dissolve the Duschab
in the Country Wine, whereto they by that means give both the Color and Taste
of Sack.

Sometimes they boil the Duschab so long, that they reduce it into a Paste, for
the convenience of Travelers, who cut it with a Knife, and dissolve it in
water. At Tabris, they make a certain Conserve of it, Helwa.
which they call Helwa, mixing therewith beaten Almonds, Flower, and peeled
Filbeards or small Nuts. They put this mixture into a long and narrow Bag, and
having set in under the press, they make of it a Paste, which grows so hard,
that a man must have a Hatchet to cut it. They make also a kind of Conserve of
it, much like a Pudding, which they call Zutzuch, Zutzuch.
thrusting through the middle of it a small Cotton thread to keep the Paste
together.

There are some Chemists, who maintain that by the same reason, to prevent the
charges arising upon the transportation of Wine, it were possible to reduce
five Tuns to one, by causing sweet Wine to be boiled away to the fifth part.
For, as they say, there is no likelihood the Wine should lose ought of its
Spirits, before it has wrought, and is disposed into Vessels, and that
afterward adding thereto as much fair water, out of which the superfluous
humor has been evaporated, it might be restored to the same quantity, and
reduced to the same degree of goodness it had been of before. But I am of
opinion, that if this were feasible, the experiment had been long since tried,
especially in France, instead of turning Wine into Aquavitae.

There are two sorts of Grapes in Persia, but the best and sweetest are at
Schiras, and Tabris; whence they bestow on the most delicate of them the name
of Tabersch. This Grape is long, and has no stone, and it may be kept all
Winter. Those which they call Keseki, are yellowish and sweet, and grow in
Tarum, at Tabris, and at Ordebath: but of these a man must eat sparingly, for
fear of a Bloody Flux.

The small Grapes, which we call Currens, are there yellowish, and bigger than
those which grow in the Isle of Zanthe. They call them Kischmisch, and the best
of them grow at Bawanat, near Herat.

Besides these, there are yet several other sorts of Grapes, not known in
Europe; among the rest, those which they call Hallague. The Grape it self is
above an inch and a half thick, but the meat of it is hard, juyce-less, and
without stones, and they are kept all the year long: as also the Enkuri
Alideresi, the bunch whereof is above a foot long, and the Grapes are about the
bigness of a Damasin, of a dark red Color, full of juice and very sweet; but
they will not keep. There does not grow any of these save at one place, in the
Province of Iran, between Ordabath and Choddaserin They derive their name from
their great Prophet Aly, who being, one day, in Winter, at that place, desired
a Vinedresser, whom he met, to give him some Grapes; whereto the other making
answer, that it were impossible to satisfy his desire, in that season, Aly bid
him go into the next Vineyard, and he should find some. He went, and according
as he had said, found the fairest Grapes he had ever seen; upon which occasion,
they are called Enkuri Aly deresi, that is, the Grapes of the little Valley of
Aly.

There is no Fruit-Tree in Europe, Fruit Trees.
but is to be found in Persia; but, besides those, they have many, not known to
us; as a sort of Pears, which they call Melletze, which grow near the City of
Ordebath, about the bigness, and much of the color of Citrons. The scent of
them is very sweet and pleasant, and they are very juicy, but not delighfull to
the taste.

Pomegranate-Trees, Almond-Trees, and Fig Trees grow there without any ordering
or cultivation, especially in the Province of Kilan, where you have whole
Forests of them. The wild Pomegranates, which you find almost every where,
especially at Karabag, are sharp or sowrish. They take out of them the Seed,
which they call Nardan, wherewith they drive a great Trade, and the Persians
make use of it in their sawces, whereto it gives a color, and a picquant taste,
having been steeped in water, and strained through a cloth. Sometimes they
boil the juice of these Pomegranates, and keep it to give a color co the Rice;
which they serve up at their entertainments, and it gives it withal a taste
which is not unpleasant. The Persians use sharp sawces with most of their meat,
and thence it comes, that among them, you very seldom find any person troubled
with the Scurvy, which is a Disease, too well known, and mortal in several
Provinces of Europe.

I shall say nothing of those other Fruits, which we have also in Europe, as of
their Narintz, or Orenges, Limec, Citrons, Meschmeschi, Apricocks, Scafralu,
Peaches, etc. only thus much, that they are not equally good every where. The
best Pomegranates grow in Iescht, and at Caswin, but the biggest, in Karabag.
Ispahan is famous for its good Melons; Caswin, for its Peaches; Tabris, for its
Apricocks; and the Provinces of Kilan and Lahetzan for Silks.

The Trees out of which they get this rich Commodity, Silk
may, no doubt, be very well numbered among the Fruit Trees, not only in regard
that it is true they bear Fruit, but also upon this score, that the Persians
every where fill their Gardens with these plants. They are white and black
Mulbery-Trees, which they plant so close one by another, that a man can hardly
pass between the Trees, but they order them as Bushes, and suffer them not to
grow above five foot and a half high, that they may easily reach to all the
Branches. In the Spring, as soon as these Trees begin to shoot forth their
leaves, the Persians begin to hatch their Silkworms. To do this, they carry
the Seed in a little bag under the arm pit, where the heat of seven or eight
days hatches them. Then they put them into a wooden dish, upon the
Mulbery-leaves, which they change at least once a day, having a great care that
they be not wet. At the end of five days, they sleep three, and then, they
dispose them into Rooms, or Barns; kept very clean and prepared for that
purpose, and in the Province of Kilan, they have particular Buildings for that
end. Along the beams of these Buildings they nail laths, or cleft pieces, such
as Hoops are made of, upon which they lay the Mulbery-branches with the leaves
on, and put the Worms upon them, every day changing these branches, and at
last, when they are grown pretty big, twice or thrice a day; and they so shut
all ouvertures of the Barns, which are covered with Nets, that the very Birds
cannot get in to eat them. In the mean time, and before they begin to spin,
they sleep eight days more; but there must be a great care taken, that Women
troubled with their Monthly infirmity, come not near them; inasmuch as it
would kill them, and as it were smother them in their own moisture. After seven
weeks life, they begin to spin, which is known as well by their satiety, in
regard they then give over eating, as by the Silk which comes out at their
Mouths. They suffer them to work twelve days at their God, and in the mean
time they very carefully watch the place where they spin. That time expired,
they find as many Cods, as there had been Worms, and they make choice of the
biggest for the Seed. All the rest is cast into a Kettle of boiling water, into
which they ever and anon put a Besom, made for that purpose, whereto the Silk
sticks, and they immediately wind it up, and what remains they cast away. That
which is kept for Seed they set upon a Table, out of which, about fifteen days
after there are hatched Butter-flies, and these produce the Seed, which is kept
in a temperate place till the year following. In this Commodity of Silk
consists the greatest Trade of all Persia, nay in a manner af all the East, as
it is, in effect, the Richest and most Noble of any that is driven in Europe.

We may put, Nefte.
into the number of the Fruits of this Country, the Nefte, which is gotten out
of several sources, Salt.
near Baku; as also the Salt, which is drawn out of the Salt Pits of Nachtsuan;
but this is fairer, and as clear as Crystal in Kulb, Vrum, Kemre, Hemedan,
Bisethun, Suldus, and Kilissim. There are no other Pits or Mines where they
work. There are indeed certain Forges, Iron*
at Masula, and Keintze; but the best Iron comes from Masula, where it is so
soft and tractable, that it is malleable, and yields to the Hammer without
heating. There are Gold and Silver Mines between Serab and Miane, but they
cannot be wrought for want of Wood, which is so scarce thereabouts, that the
advantage might be made of them would not defray the charges. Between Pirmaras
and Schamachie, we saw a Mountain of Lapis Specularis, which, when the Sun
shone upon it, looked like a heap of Diamonds.

The Persians are of mean stature. The stature of the Persians,
Xenophon says, that they were most of them bulky and fat: and Marcellinus, on
the contrary, affirms, that, in his time, they were spare-bodied, and dry. They
are so now, but strong, and have great limbs, their faces inclining to an
Olive-colour, Black-hair'd, and Hawk-nos'd. The men are shaved once in eight
days, contrary to the custom of the ancient Persians, who suffered their Hair
to grow, as do at present the Seid, that is, the kindred of Mahomet, who, as
they say, went so. They also shave their Beards, leaving only Mustachoes. They
are only a sort of Religious men, called Pyhr, who suffer their Beards to grow
upon their Chins, and about their Cheeks. These people are in great Veneration
among them, upon the account of their apparent sanctity, which principally
consists in abstinence. There are also those, who never cut their Mustachoes,
which by that means cover their Mouths; and this they do in remembrance of
their Prophet Haly, who wore them in that manner. These last are called Suffi;
and they say Haly wore his Mustachoes so, for the following reason: That when
Mahomet took that Voyage to Paradise, which the Alchoran speaks of, Azoara, 27.
Haly followed him. At first they made some difficulty at the Gate to let him
in, till such time as he told the Po^ter, that he was Schir Chodda, that is,
God's Lion. Being got in, he saw that the Angels made Mahomet drink of a
certain excellent Wine, whereof he was so happy as to have one Goblet presented
to him, which he took off; but some drops of the Divine draught sticking on his
Mustachoes, he would never afterward suffer them to be cut.

The Persians have a great fancy to black hair, and they bear with the
flaxen-hair'd, but not without some trouble; but for red-hair'd people, they
have a strong aversion. They have so great an esteem for black hair, that when
it is not fully black, they color it so. To do that, they make use of the herb
and seed of Wesme, which is brought from Bagdat, and is somewhat like that
which the Herbarists call Securidaca, which they beat very small with the rinds
of Pomegranates, and mix therewith Soap and Arsenick; they boil this
composition in Spring Water, and rub their Hair therewith, which they
afterward wash with a strong lie, made with unslak'd Lime. They make use also
of the water, which issues out of the Vines, in the Springtime: the Men rub
their Mustachoes therewith, and Maids their Hair, which fall down over their
shoulders tied up in several tresses; out of an opinion they all are of that
this makes them grow.

They have also a custom of Painting their Hands, Paint their Hands and Nails.
and, above all, their Nails, with a Red Color, inclining to Yellowish or
Orange, much near the color that our Tanners nails are of* There are those who
also Paint their Feet. This is so necessary an ornament in their Married Women,
that this kind of Paint is brought up, and distributed among those that are
invited to their Wedding Dinners. They therewith Paint also the Bodies of such
as dye Maids, that when they appear before the Angels Examinants, they may be
found more neat and handsome. This Color is made of the herb, which they call
Chinne, which has leaves like those of Liquorice, or rather those of Myrele.
It grows in the Province of Erak, and it is dried, and beaten, small as Flower,
and there is put thereto a little of the juice of sour Pomegranate, or Citron,
or sometimes only fair Water; and therewith they Color their hands. And if
they would have them to be of a darker Color, they rub them afterward with
Wall-nut leaves. This color will not be got off in fifteen days, though they
wash their hands several times a day.

Their Clothes have no proportion to their Limbs. Their Habit.
Their Coats and upper Garments are large and hang loose, not unlike the
Garments of Women. They express a certain Effeminacy in their gate. They go as
it were Jetting and Wadling, and with very little Gravity. I am of opinion,
that this scurvy Habit is derived from their manner of sitting, which is, as
our Tailors do; whereto being accustomed from their infancy, they are not so
strong in the Hamms as they would otherwise be. Diodorus Siculus ascribes the
invention of this kind of Garments to Semiramis, and tells the occasion of it,
as do also most of the other ancient Authors. The Coeffure of the men, which
they call Mendils, and the Turks, Tulbans or Turbants, is made of Cotton
cloth, or some Silk stuff, that is very fine, and of several Colo^rs, and
being about eight or nine Else in length, comes many times about their Heads,
having the folds slightly sowed, or drawn with a Gold thread. Those of their
Priests, and particularly, of the Hasis, is white, as are also all their
Garments. There are some put to their Mendils a tassel of Silk, which hangs
down their backs, or over their shoulders, a quarter of an Ell or better in
length. The Seid, that is, those who pretend to be of the Posterity of Mahomet,
and assume the title of his Successors, have their Mendils of green silk. Some
Persians, even of the greatest of the Kingdom, wear furred Caps, the inside
and outside being of Buchar Sheep skin, so as that the Wool hangs down from the
edges the length of a man's finger, and is as soft as Silk. These Caps are
esteemed in Persia as the Castors are in Europe, and are sold at ten or twelve
Crowns a piece. They wear these about their Heads, in Summer as well as
VVinter, though a man might think, that, by reason of the extreme sultriness of
the weather, they should be very troublesome and incommodious. This custom of
keeping their Heads always very hot, brings them to that tenderness, that they
dare not expose them to the Cold, no not in calm weather. To this purpose I
conceive I may allege what Herodotus says; Lib. 3.
to wit, that, after a fight between the Persians and the Egyptians, where
there fell a great number of men on both sides, care was taken that the Bodies
of both parties were disposed into several places, and it was found, some time
after, that the Skuls of the Persians, were so thin and delicate, that a man
might thrust his finger into them, and that, on the contrary, those of the
Egyptians were so hard, that they could not be broken with stones. The reason
he gives for it, is, that he says, the Egyptians, who were accustomed from
their infancy to go bare-headed in the Sun, were by that means grown hard,
whereas the Persians, having their Heads always wrapped about, were very
tender in their Skuls. And indeed they never uncover them, neither at their
Devotions, nor when they Salute other men, no, not when they speak to their
King: but when they salute any, they do it by a low inclination of the Head,
and putting of their hand to their Breast.

Many of the Persians wear Red Caps, Kisilbaschs
whence the Turks take occasion, to call them, by way of derision, Kisilbaschs,
that is to say Red-Heads. Most Authors, who treat of the affairs of Persia,
write this word Cuselbas, Queselbach, or Querselbach; but the right name is
Kisilbasch, as being compounded of the word Kisil, which has two different
significations, to wit, that of Red, and of Gold, and Basch, which signifies a
Head. Paulus Iovius, in the 13. Book of his Histories, and, after him, F.
Bizarro, in the 10. Book of his History of Persia, affirm; that Tefellis,
Disciple of Harduellis, otherwise named Eider, who, as they say, lived about
the beginning of the sixteenth age, was the first who brought the Persians to
wear Red Caps, to distinguish them from the Turks, at their separation from
them in the business of Religion. But they are both mistaken: for the truth is,
that the Persians, when they broke Communion with the Turks, and made a
particular Sect of the Mahumetane Religion, by the advice of Schich-Sefi, the
Author of their new Opinions, immediately held, that the first Successors of
Mahomet, Omar, Osman, and Ababeker, had usurped the Succession, to the
prejudice of Aaly's right, and would have this last to be accounted the
Propher, and that his twelve Successors, whom we shall name hereafter, when we
come to speak of the Religion of the Persians, were Canonized, and put into the
number of their Imans, or Saints; that they were looked upon as having that
quality, and that their Ecclesiastics or Religious men wore Red Caps, made
with twelve foldings, in form much like the Bottles used in Languedoc and
Provence, which have great and flat Bellies, and very long and narrow Necks.

This difference in matter of Religion, occasioned a great War between the two
Nations, wherein the Turks, making advantage of their Arms, were very cruel
toward the Persians, but especially the Ecclesiastics, by reason of the
aversion which they had for that new Religion. And in regard their Coiffure, or
what they wore about their Heads, distinguish them from the others, they left
off their Caps in several places of the Kingdom, and obliged the rest to follow
their example. This persecution lasted, till Schach-Ismael l. finding himself
forced by the Turks to retreat into the Province of Kilan, and having some
reason to fear, that, within a short time, he might see the whole Kingdom in
the hands of the professed enemies of his Religion, resolved to meet them, and
to put all to the hazard of a Battle. To this end, he sent Persons to represent
to the Provinces and the chief Cities of the Kingdom, the danger, whereto the
State, their Liberties, and Religion were exposed, if they resolved not to make
what opposition they could in that extremity against the Turk, sending them
word, that he would grant those who should serve him in Person, in that
Conjuncture of affairs, a general and perpetual Exemption, for them and their
Posterity. By this means, he got together an Army of three hundred thousand
fighting men, wherewith he marched directly to Ardebil, as desirous to begin
his Exploits by a pious Enterprise, in recovering the Sepulcher of Schich-Sefi
out of the hands of the Turks, who were forced out of that City. He was no
sooner become Master of it, but he confirmed all he had promised touching the
Exemption, and to the end those might be known who were to enjoy the benefit of
it, he ordered the making of these Red Caps, which were done with Twelve
foldings, in remembrance of their Twelve Imans. But in regard the City was not
able to find Scarlet enough, for so great a number of Caps, a Shoemaker of
Ardebil would needs make twelve of them, of Maroquin, or Goats Leather, of the
same Color, which Schach-Ismael presented to the chief Commanders of his Army.
He ordered them to be Red, to make a certain representation of the Crown of
Aaly, whom the Persians give the quality of King, as well as of Prophet, as
they do these Caps the name of Tatsch, that is to say, a Crown. Whence it
comes, that the Persians are so far from taking it ill, that they are called
Kisilbasks, that they think it an honor done them, though, in effect, only
those of the Posterity of Aaly, and these exempted Persons, wear red Caps: the
former having them covered with Linen Cloth, or some other kind of Stuff, and
the others without any thing at all about them. The Posterity of these exempted
Persons do still enjoy these Privileges, and out of them is chosen the Guard
for the King's Person, as being looked upon, as the Swizzers are in the Courts
of diverse Princes of Europe.

Their ordinary Habit are a kind of sleeveless Coats of Cotton, or Silk, of
several Colors, which come down to the calves of their Legs. Those of Cotton
have flowers printed upon the Cloth, and are quilted, as Mattresses. They draw
the sides of them together, under the left arm, and gird themselves with a
Skarf about two Else in length, called Tzarkesi, which comes several times
about the Body. The richer sort have, upon this, another rich Skarf, which they
call Schal, made of a very fine stuff, brought by the Indians into Persia: for
their Silk being much fairer, and their Colors more lively and finer, than
those of Persia, their Stuffs are accordingly more highly esteemed.

When the Mollas, or Priests come before the Mchere, they take off that rich
Skarf, to express their Humility. The other Persians wear in it a Poniard,
their Knives, their Handker-chiefs, and their Money; and those, whose
profession it is to write for others, carry in them their Ink-horns, a
Penknife, and a little Whet-stone, Letters, and all that the Muscovites are
wont to thrust into their Boots or Buskins, which serve them instead of
Pockets. Persons of quality, and the King himself, wear, over this Coat, a kind
of Rocket, without sleeves, which reaches but to the Waste, bordered with
Sables. When they go abroad, whether a-foot, or on horseback, they cast over
these, a silk Garment of diverse Colors, or wrought with Gold flowers, which
they call Iakub Cahni, from a King, of that name, who was the first that ever
wore them in Persia. Their Breeches are of Cotton, made after the fashion of
Drawers; accordingly they wear them under their shirts, and they reach down to
their feet. Their Shirts are of Cotton Cloth, and for the most streaked with
Red. Their Stockings are of Woollen Cloth, unhandsomely cut out, without any
shape, or any proportion to the Leg. They wear them very wide, and commonly,
they are made of green Cloth: a color which is abhorred by the Turks; and
this is indeed one of the chiefest differences of their Religion: upon this
account, that Mahomet having worn a green Cap, the Persians, the more to
dishonor that Color, put their Feet into that which their great Prophet wore
about his Head. Their Shoes, which they call Kefs, are very picked at the toe,
and very low quartered, so as that they put them off and on, with as much ease
as we do our Slippers. Which convenience they the more stand in need of, in
regard they put them off in the Antichamber, as well at their own Houses, as
when they visit their Friends, either upon business or otherwise. To this
purpose, I remember, that one day, going to the Chan's of Scamachie, about the
time that he gives audience, for the Administration of Justice, we found, in
the Antichamber, more shoes than the richest Shoemaker thereabouts had in
his shop, and standing by them, one I may call the Shooe-keeper, who with a
forked stick gave those their shoes who went out.

The women wear much finer stuffs than the men do, The Habit of the Women.
and have not any thing to tie about the waste: but their Drawers and Smocks
are made after the same fashion as the Drawers and Shirts of men. Their
Stockings are ordinarily of red or green Velvet, and they have little or no
Ornament about the Head, but suffer their Hair to hang down negligently, in
several tresses, down the back, and about the shoulders. All the Ornament they
have about their Heads consists in two or three rows of Pearls, which they do
not wear about their Necks, as Women do elsewhere, but about the Head, being
set over the Forehead, and falling down along the Cheeks to be fastened under
the Chin, so as that their Faces seemed to be set in Pearls. Which may give a
little light to that expression in the Canticles, Chap. 1.
Thy Cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels. Young maids sometimes wear Rings,
with precious Stones in them, in the right Nostril, as the Tartarian Women do.
They also wear of them on their Fingers, and about their Arms, and they have
bracelets of Silver-plates. But the Mahumetan Law allows not the men to wear
Gold Rings. Whence it came, that when our Ambassadors presented Saru Taggi,
Chancellor of Persia, with a very fair Diamond Ring, he had the stone taken off
the Collet; and put into Silver, and so presented it to the King. The Women do
not uncover their faces as they go about the City, but have over them a white
Veil, which reaches down below their knees, which they open a little to see
their way. The Persians make an emblem of it, to signify, that, many times,
in a handsome Body, a wicked Soul may be log'd, and that, under a fair
appearance of good Life, a great number of enormous Vices may find shelter; as
that Veil does often times, under very rich Clothes, hide a very Ugly Woman.

The Persians are very neat, The Persians are very neat.
as well in their Rooms and Furniture of them, as in their Habit, wherein they
would not have so much as a spot to be seen: insomuch that those who are of
ability to do it, change them as soon as they are ever so little stained, and
others, who are not much before hand with the World, have them washed once a
week. Which is very much contrary to the humor of the Muscovites, among whom
a man seldom sees any Clothes but what are full of Nastiness, and shine with
Grease. Nay it is certain, that the Stables and other such Houses of the
Persians, are kept much neater, than the Stoves and Lodging Chambers of the
Muscovites.

The Persians are of a ready Wit and sound Judgment. Iagenious.
They apply themselves to Studies, and are very excellent in Poesy. Their
Inventions are tich, and their Fancies subtle and strong. They are so far from
being any way Vainglorious, that they slight no man, but, on the contrary,
they are complaisant, and of a Taking Conversation, very civil and obliging
among themselves, but especially to Strangers. The Submissions, wherewith they
express themselves in their Complements, exceed any thing they do in that kind
in France. A Persian, to invite his Friend to come into his House, and profer
him his service, delivers himself in these terms: Let me entreat you to make my
House noble by your presence; I sacrifize my self to your Commands; I lie
prostrate at your Feet; to serve you, I wish the apple of my Eye might help to
pave your way, etc. but for the most part, these are indeed but Complements.
This puts me in mind of a Persian, who coming to our Physician to acquaint him
with a pain he had in his side, told him, that if he could Cure him, he would
give him his Head; whereupon it being represented to him, that he should not be
so much troubled at the want of Health, who was so prodigal of his Life, he
made answer, that he meant otherwise, but that it was their manner of speaking.

The Persians have ever had the reputation of not being over-carefull to speak
the truth; Liars.
and even to this day, those, who would speak it at all times, must pass, in
their account, for people a little troubled with simplicity. Whence it comes,
that no man thinks himself injured, when they say to him, Drugh Mikui, or, in
the Turkish Language, Galan Diersen, that is, thou have told an untruth, and
the word Galantsi, which signifies a Liar, is accounted a drollish expression,
though Herodotus says it was a Vice the ancient Persians hated most of any,
and that they made it their main business to bring up their young men, to Ride
and Shoot well, and to speak the Truth.

They are very faithful in observing the particular friendships they contract
together, True in their friendships
and they enter into Fraternities among themselves, which last as long as they
live, nay they are so exact in the improving of these, that they prefer them
before all Obligations of either Blood or Birth. In Germany, there is no
reckoning paid, but those Drunken persons who clubb to it, make some
fraternity; yet is not the friendship contracted thereby, ever the greater, in
regard there cannot really be any between such as are incapable of it: but in
Persia, it is far otherwise. It is their custom to make every year a great
Feast, whereat all the men between whom there is any thing of Kindred, and some
other friends, meet together, and if, at that assembly there be any persons,
who, out of a reciprocal and particular affection, are desirous to enter into a
more close and constant friendship, they address themselves to some one of the
Company, whom they take by the border of his Garment, and having told him that
they make choice of him for their Babba, Father or Godfather, which the other
cannot deny, they go all three together, to their Calif, (there being no Family
but has its own) kiss his Hand, and crave his Benediction. To receive which,
they lie down upon their Bellies, first the Godfather, and afterward the
Brethren, at the Calif's feet, who gives each of them three strokes with a wand
upon the Back, pronouncing at the first stroke, the word Alla, at the second,
that of Mahomet, and at the third that of Haly. That done, they kiss the wand,
and with this Ceremony the Fraternity is established. And this kind of alliance
is so sacred, according to their opinion of it, that they affirm, there is no
other sin but may be pardoned; that Sacrilege and Idolatry are not
irremissible, and that a man may hope for pardon, if he has drunk Wine, nay in
case he has abused an Abdalla; but that the privileges of this kind of
Fraternity cannot be Violated, and the offense not be Punished. And if it
happen that two of these Brethren fall out, they are to be reconciled at the
next assembly; which is done thus. He who has been injured comes to his Door
who did him the injury, bowing down his Head, and, with his Arms carelessly
hanging down, continues in that posture, till the other has entreated him
thrice to come into his House, and thence they go together to the assembly,
where the reconciliation is perfected. The Persians are of a good nature, and
very sensible of any kindness done them; but where they hate, they are
irreconcilable. They are Courageous, and good Soldiers, going cheerfully upon
any design or engagement, though never so dangerous.

They are also modest, and very reserved; whence it comes, they never make
water standing, but squat down as Women do, and when they have done, wash
themselves. It is upon this account, that, at Weddings, and other great
assemblies, they have in some by-places, several earthen pots full of water. If
they be near a Brook, or River, they will be sure to make water in it, whence
the Turks, by derision, call them Cher Scahei, that is, the King's or Aly's
Asses, in regard Asses never go through water but they piss; on the contrary,
the Persians call the Turks Seksumi, because they piss, like Dogs, against a
Wall. Certain it is that Persons of Quality in Turkey observe, in this
particular, the custom of the Persians, and both Nations take a great care,
when they either make water, or ease Nature otherwise, not to turn their Faces
or their Backs toward the South, in regard that when they say their Prayers
they look that way.

But it is also true, (...)
that this modesty is only as to the external part, and that otherwise they are
more Luxurious than any other Nation in the World. For, not thinking it enough
to marry several Wives, and besides, them, to have a great number of
Concubines, they have a kindness left for common Whores. Accordingly, there is
no City, Ardebil only excepted, where there are not public places appointed
for that sport, under the protection of the Magistrate. During our abode at
Scamachie, one of our Soldiers having had his pleasure of a Woman, got away
without paying her. She made her complaints to the Chan, who sent to the
Ambassadors, to entreat them to take same course that she might be satisfied,
sending them word, that it was but reasonable, that the Kahbe, who pay the King
a great Tribute, should be also paid the Salary due to them. We have given an
account elsewhere, what use the Persians make of them at their great Feasts;
and this custom is so ancient, that Herodotus speaks of it, when he says, that
the Ambassadors of the Persians told Amyntas, King of Macedon, that it was
their custom, when they entertained their Friends to give them also the
Divertisement of Women. He brought into the place where they were men in
women's Clothes, who killed the Ambassadors.

The King himself maintains a great number of these Women at his own charge,
The King Persia has several Wives and Concubin^s.
and makes it his Divertisement at Meals to see them Dancing and showing all
manner of postures before him: so that those who are desirous to take up that
Profession, must not only be handsome, but also pleasant and active. The King
takes them along with him into the Country, nay into the Army, after the
example of the ancient Kings of Persia, and particularly that of Darius, who,
as Q. Curtius affirms, had, in his Retinue, three hundred and sixty Concubines,
all very sumptuously Clothed.

Sodomy is no extraordinary sin among them, Sodomy not punished in Persia.
nor is it punished as a Crime. Saru Taggi, who was Chancellor of Persia at the
time of our Travels, was not punished for his Sodomy, but for the Violence he
had done in the Commission of it. The King himself was given to this Vice, and
so far from punishing it in another, that, as we were told, in the year 1634.
Schach-Sefi being at the siege of Eruan, one of the Colonels, who was got drunk
at the King's quarters, would, at his return to his own, in the heat of his
Wine, having forced a young Lad that served him, and had often before refused
to hearken to his lewd addresses. The Boy, to prevent the violence, which he
now saw was unavoidable, lays hold on the Poniard, which his Master wore at
his Girdle, and therewith run him into the Heart. The next day, the King
missing the Colonel, asked what was become of him. Some body told him, he had
been killed by one of his Domestics, and gave him an account how it had been
done. The Boy was brought before him, who very ingenuously confessed what had
passed between his Master and him, and avowed, that the horror he conceived at
that sin had made him take that resolution. The King was so incensed, that he
Commanded him to be cast to the Dogs, to be torn to pieces by them. The two
first that were brought would not meddle with him, but afterward they got two
English Mastives, which upon the first setting on tore him to pieces.

The Mahumetan Law allows them to be Luxurious, Polygamy allowed in Persia.
not only by permitting Polygamy, but also those other carnal enjoyments,
wherein the chiefest part of their Beatitude consists, even that which the
Mussulmans of that Religion expect after this Life; it being their persuasion,
that, in their celestial Paradise, they shall not only have the same lawful
Wives they had in this World, but that they shall also have as many Concubines
and Servants, as they please, and enjoy all other Women, as often as they have
a mind to it.

They use all imaginable inventions to stir themselves up to lust, and to this
end have they, at all meetings, whether at common Tippling Houses, or elsewhere,
men and women Dancers, who provoke them to brutality by their obscene postures.
They use also the seed and leaves of Hemp, to revive languishing Nature, though
our Naturalists assign it a cold quality, which weakens and corrupts Nature. I
cannot imagine how this can add any fuel to their lustful inclinations;
unless it be that the windy humor of it be also expulsive, or that in these
hot Countries, it has other qualities, than it has in Europe. To prepare this
Drugg, they gather the leaves before they come to Seed, dry them in the shade,
beat them to powder, which they mix with Honey, and make pills thereof, about
the bigness of a Pigeons Egg. They take two or three of them at a time, to
fortify Nature. As to the Seed, they sry it, put a little Salt thereto, and
eat it by way of Desert. Imanculi, who was sent Ambassador from the King of
Persia to the Duke of Holstein, took of it at every meal, after he had married
a young Woman at Astrachan, he himself being seventy years of age. Persons of
good repute, in Persia, will not eat of it, for they say, that he who makes use
of this remedy commits a greater sin, than he that had ravished his own Mother
upon Mahomet's Sepulcher. They call those who use it, Bengi kidi bengi. But
when all is done, the Persians think they have sufficiently expiated the sin of
Fornication, when, immediately after they have had their pleasure of a Woman,
they either bath themselves, or wash their Bodies all over with cold water.

The charges the Persians are at in Housekeeping, The Housekeeping of (...)
Persi^ns
as to the Kitchen and the Cellar, amounts to very little, unless it be in
those Famalies where there are many Women, who inflame the Bill very much. The
Cotton-Cloath, which makes most of their Clothing, is very cheap there. Their
Houses are but poorly furnished, and they think they have to spare, when the
floor of their Lodging Room is covered with Tapistry; and all the provision
they make for the whole year, is only Rice. Flesh is not dear, save only at
those places, where the great number of Inhabitants makes all Provisions
scarce, in regard they are for the most part brought out of remote Provinces.
The Garden supplies them with a Desert, and the next Brook serves them for a
Cellar. They are very neat about their Rooms, and they suffer not Dogs, which
out of some other respects, they hold to be unclean Creatures, or any other
Animals to come into them. And whereas they have this inconvenience at meals
that they use no Trenchers, they use a sort of Pots which they call Tustahn,
about the bigness of our Chamber-pots, setting one of them between every two
Persons; and into these they spet, and cast the bones, and parings of Fruits.
We have said elsewhere, that they have their Tennrs, or Stoves to keep them
warm, and to spare Wood as much as may be, nay some makes a shift to roast and
boil their meat with them.

In the Kitchen, Their Housholdstuff.
they have Kettles and Pots of Brass, or of Copper tinned over, which are
commonly fastened to the Hearth, as also earthen pots. In many Provinces they
are pretty well stored with VVood; but there are others, where they have only
Loppings, and many times they are forced to warm themselves with Cow or
Camels-dung, dried in the Sun. Their Dishes are of Copper, but so handsomely
made, and so well tinned over, that Silver Plate cannot look better. Some have
Porcelane, and the Country people are glad of earthen ware. As to their meat,
they do not care for much, as being satisfied with very little. Which is
contrary to what Bizarrus relates of them, to wit, that Butchers meat is dear
in Persia, by reason of the Gluttony of the Inhabitants, which, as he affirms,
is so great, that aged persons there make four meals a day, and consequently,
with much more reason, the younger sort of people. Nor does this agree neither
with the account the ancients give of them, who generally affirm that the
Persians were very temperate, and contented themselves with little Meat, but
they loved Fruits. Accordingly, during the abode we made in Persia, I observed
that one of their chiefest Virtues was Temperance, and that the Persians
seldom eat Flesh above once a day, and that if they make another meal besides,
it consists, for the most part, of Butter, Cheese, and Fruits, though I must
confess there are some who make two set meals.

There is not any thing more ordinary in Persia than Rice soaked in water.
Their ordinary food is Rice.
They call it Plau, and eat of it at all their Meals, and serve it up in all
their Dishes, especially under boild Mutton. They some times put thereto a
little of the juice of Pomegranates or Cherries, and Saffron, insomuch that
commonly you have Rice of several Colors in the same Dish. They serve it up
also under Capons, and broild Fish. They also eat Sorrel, Spinach, and
Cabbages, white and green, but they do not much care for the red. They do not
want small Birds, and they have all sorts of Fowl in abundance, Turkeys only
excepted, which are so scarce in this Country, that a Georgian Merchant, having
brought thither some of them from Venice, in the time of Schach-Abas, he sold
them at a Tumain, that is, near five pound sterling. a piece. Parridges and
Feasants are common, and, at those places where they are to be had, they may be
bought cheap enough.

Though Rice serves them instead of Bread, Which servs them for Bread,
yet do they make some, of several sorts, of Wheat also. The Komatsch are three
fingers thick, and a foot and a half in length. The Lawasch are round, and
about the thickness of a man's finger. The Peasek^ssche, are half an Ell, and
they are baked in their Houses, over the Tenurs, on which they are set, and
with the five fingers of the hand, they make them as many Horns, whence they
have their name. The Sengek are made upon the pebbles, wherewith some of their
Ovens are covered, so that this kind of Bread or Cakes is uneven, and full of
pits. The Iaucha is like Wafers, and as thinn as Parchment, but in length and
breadth they are half an Ell or better. The Persians use them instead of
Napkins, to wipe their fingers, wherewith they take up the Rice, and pull their
Meat to pieces, for you shall seldom see them use any Knives. When they have
put the Iaucha's to this use, they tear them into bits, put a little Rice or a
Morsel of flesh into one of them, and so swallow it down, or happily eat them
without any thing with them. All their Spoons, even the King's, are of Wood,
made Oval-wise, at the end of a very small handle, but a foot and a half in
length.

Their ordinary Drink, Their Drink*
especially that of the meanest sort of people, is water, into which they
sometimes put a little Duschab, and some Vinegar, For though Wine be cheap
enough there, especially in the Provinces of Erak, Aderbeitzan, and Schiruan,
where the measure, which they call Lullein, and which contains near an English
pottle, costs but six pence. Yet are there many who make a difficulty to Drink
thereof, because the use of it is forbidden by their Law, especially the Hatzi,
who are such as have gone on Pilgrimage to Meca, to Mahomet's Sepulcher, and
are to forbear it all their Lives after, out of a persuasion they are of, that
all their merits would be effaced, by so enormous a sin. But such as are lovers
of Wine, and the common prostitutes, who have for the most part contracted a
necessary habit of sinning, Drink of it without any scruple, out of a
presumption, that that sin will be pardoned them with the rest, provided they
do not make the Wine themselves. Whence it comes they make no great
entertainment, but they drink very freely of it. After meal, there is warm
water brought in for the washing of their hands.

Opium, They tak^ Opium.
which they call Offouhn, and Teriak, is commonly used among the Persians. They
make pills of it of the bigness of a Pea, and take two or three of them at a
time. Those who are accustomed thereto will take about an Ounce at a time.
There are some who take of it only once in two or three days, which makes them
sleepy, and a little disturbs their brains, so as that they are as if they were
a little entered in Drink. There is abundance of it made in Persia, especially
at Ispahan, and it is thus ordered. The Poppy being yet green, they cleave the
Head of it, out of which there comes a white Liquor, which being exposed to the
Air grows black, and their Apothecaries and Druggists trade very much in it.
All over the East they use this Drugg, the Turks and Indians, as well as the
Persians, insomuch, that Bellon says, in his Observations, that if a Turk has
but a penny, he will spend a farthing of it in Opium; that he saw above fifty
Camels laden with it, going from Natolia into Turquey, Persia, and the Indies,
and that a Ianizary, who had taken a whole Ounce of it one day, took the next
day two, and was never the worse for it, save that it wrought the same effect
in him as Wine does in such as take too much of it, and that he staggered a
little. It has also this quality common with Wine, that it does infuse Courage
into those who have not much; whence it comes, that the Turks take of it before
they go upon any design. The Women do not ordinarily take any; but those who
are not able to bear with their untoward and imperious Husbands, and prefer
Death before the Slavery they live in, do sometimes make use of Opium, whereof
they take a good quantity, and, drinking cold water upon it, they, by a gentle
and insensible Death, depart this World.

There is hardly any Persian, They take Tobacco.
what condition or quality soever he be of, but takes Tobacco. This they do in
any place whatsoever, even in their Mosqueyes. There grows abundance of it near
Bagdat, and in Kurdesthan, but they have not the art to Cure it as it ought to
be, thinking it enough to let it dry, as they do other leaves and Medicinal
herbs. There are whole shops full of it at Ispahan, being put up in Baggs,
where it is reduced in a manner to powder, and is at least as small as Sena.
They highly esteem that which is brought them out of Europe, and call it Inglis
Tambaku, because the English are they who bring most of it thither. They are so
great lovers of it, that, when I gave a piece thereof to a Master, who taught
me the Arabian Language at Scamachie, he took it for an extraordinary kindness.
To take it with any delight, they make use of a Glass Flaggon, an Earthen
Pitcher, a Cocos, or Indian Nut-shell, or a Kaback, which is the rind of a
certain sort of Citralls, or Cucumbers, which they fill half full of water, or
little more, and sometimes put a little perfumed Waters into it. Into this
water they put a little hollow Reed, having at the end of it a Bole wherein
they put the Tobacco with a little Coal, and with another Pipe, about an Ell
long, which they have in their Mouths, they draw, through the water, the smoke
of the Tobacco, which leaving in the water all its soot and blackness, is
incomparably more pleasant this way, than as we take it. Those who have not all
these conveniences are glad to take it our way; but their Pipes, which have
Boles or Heads of Earth or Stone, are of Wood, and much longer than ours.

They Drink, Cahwa, or Coffee.
with their Tobacco, a certain black water, which they call Cahwa, made of a
Fruit brought out of Egypt, and which is in color like ordinary Wheat, and in
taste like Turkish Wheat, and is of the bigness of a little Bean. They fry, or
rather burn it in an Iron pan without any Liquor, beat it to powder, and
boiling it with fair water, they make this Drink thereof, which has as it were
the taste of a burnt Crust, and is not pleasant to the Palate. It has a Cooling
quality, and the Persians think it allays the Natural heat. Whence it comes,
that they often drink of it, inasmuch as they would avoid the charge of having
many Children, nay they are so far from dissembling the fear they have thereof,
that some of them have come to our Physician for remedies of that kind. But he
being a merry disposed Person, made answer, that he would rather help them to
get Children, than give them ought to prevent the getting of them. I say the
Persians are persuaded this water is able absolutely to smother all Natural
heat, and to take away the power of engendring; and to this purpose they tell a
story of one of their Kings, named Sulthan Mahomet Caswin, who Reigned in
Persia before Tamerlane's time, that he was so accustomed to the Drinking of
Cahwa, that he had an inconceivable aversion for Women; and that the Queen
standing one day at her Chamber Window, and perceiving they had got down a
Horse upon the ground, in order to the Gelding of him, asked some that stood
by, why they treated so handsome a Creature in that manner; whereupon answer
being made her, that he was too Fiery and Metalsome, and that the business of
those that were about him, was, with the taking away of the excess of Metal,
which Stone-Horses are guilty of, to deprive him of all generative Virtue; the
Queen replied, that that trouble might have been spared, since the Cahwa would
have wrought the same effect; and that if they would keep the Stone-Horse with
that Drink, he would, in a short time, be as cold as the King her Husband.

They affirm further, that the Son of that King, whom they also, after his
Father, call Mahomet, being come to the Crown, Commanded that great Poet, Hakim
Fardausi, to give him a piece of his Writing, and promised by way of reward to
give him a Ducat for every Verse. The Poet in a short time made sixty thousand,
which are at this day accounted the best that ever were made in Persia; but the
King who expected not he should have made such haste, sent him to those who had
the oversight of his Revenue, who judging this to be too great a sum for a
Poet, told him he must content himself with a less recompense. Accordingly they
brought it so low, that Fardausi made other Verses, wherein he reproached the
King with his avarice, and told him, the present he had made him, might be
rather though^ to come from a Porter than a Prince. Whereto he added, that
Shooe-makers and Bakers were wont to do so, and that he could not be persuaded
that the King was of Royal Extraction, but must rather be descended from some
Shoemaker or Baker.

The King was so nettled at these reproaches, that he made his Complaints
thereof to his Mother, who presently imagining, that the Poet had made some
Discoveries of her, ingenuously acknowledged to her Son, that the King, her
Husband, being become impotent through his excessive Drinking of Cahwa, she
fancied a Baker belonging to the Court, and that this Baker was his Father;
That she chose rather to take that course, than leave the Kingdom destitute of
Heirs; That he was now to consider, that had it not been for that Baker, he had
not been at all, and that he would do well to recompense the Poet, so as that
the business might take no further wind, lest the people should deprive him of
a Crown which belonged not to him. The Son made his advantage of the advice and
remonstrances of his Mother, and ordered the Poet should have what he had
promised him.

We said before, that the Persians are great frequenters of the Taverns or
Tipling-Houses, which they call Tzai Chattai Chane, in regard there they may
have The, or Cha, which the Vsbeques Tartars bring thither from Chattai. The
use of The, or Tea.
It is an Herb which has long and narrow leaves, about an inch in length, and
half an inch in breadth. In order to the keeping and transportation of it, they
dry it, so as that it turns to a dark gray Color, inclining to black, and so
shrivelled up, that it seems not to be what it really is: but as soon as it is
put into warm water, it spreads and reassumes its former green Color. The
Persians boil it, till the water has got a bitterish taste, and a blackish
color, and add thereto F^nnel, Anniseed, or Cloves, and Sugar. But the Indians
only put it into seething water, and have for that purpose either Brass, or
Earthen pots very handsomely made, which are put to no other use. They drink it
so hot, that they are not able to hold their Dishes, which are of Porcelane or
Silver, in their hands: whence it comes, that they have found out a way of
making them of Wood or Canes, done over with a Plate of Copper or Silver Gilt,
and sometimes of Gold, so as that the heat not being able to penetrate them,
they may hold them in their hands, even though the water were boiling. The
Persians, Indians, Chinese and Iaponneses assign thereto such extraordinary
qualities, that, imagining it alone able to keep a man in constant health, they
are sure to treat such as come to visit them, with this Drink, at all hours.
The quality it is, by experience, found to have, is, that it is astringent, and
that it consumes superfluous Humors, which incommodate the Brain, and provoke
Drowsiness. They who have Written of the affairs of the Indies, as Maffeus,
Linschooten, Trigault, and others, tell Miracles of it: but this herb is now so
well known in most parts of Europe, where many persons of quality use it with
good success, that it must needs be known, what are both its good and bad
qualities: which Dr. Tulp, a Physician of Amsterdam, has very strictly
examined, in the last Chapter of the fourth Book, of his Medicinal Observations.

The Persians live either on the Fruits which their Gardens bring forth, or by
the advantage they make by Tilling the ground. Some live by Traffic, others by
their Trades; some to the Wars, and there are those who get their livelihood
by Writing. For since Printing is not yet used amongst them, and that they
stand in need of many Copies of their Alcoran, they have them done by a sort of
people, who do not only get a livelihood thereby, but grow very rich, inasmuch
as a Copy of it well written: will yield eighteen or twenty Crowns. Whence it
comes, that there is no man that has Children, but he teaches them to write,
and yet there are an infinite number of men in Persia who live only by writing.

It is a pleasant sight, as a man passes over the Maidan, or through the Basar,
to see the Tradesmen of all Professions in their Shops, where they sell what
they had made at their Houses; for it is very seldom seen, that a Tradesman
works in his Shop, which for the most part is at some distance from the place
where he lives, and confined to certain parts of the Marketplace, where every
Trade has its distinct quarter, only for the selling of Commodities. The most
common Professions are Weavers, Dyers, and Painters, who paint Flowers upon the
Stuffs of Silk and Cotton, and sometimes even upon Brocadoe. The ordinary
length of their pieces of stuffs is not above five or six Else, it being as
much as needs for a Garment according to their fashion. The fairest Stuffs, as
well for Painting, as Workmanship, are made at Iescht and Kaschan, where they
represent upon Silk and Cotton, the figures of Persons, and particularly
VVriting, Where the best Stuffs are made*
and the Characters of their Language, so exactly done, that no Painter can do
things with such Life and Art. Using only what they spend themselves in
Clothes, they Trade with the rest into other parts, with great profit, as they
do also with unwrought Cotton and raw Silk, whereof there are great quantities
brought into Europe, through the Indies. As for the Silk, it is worth in Persia
not above 2s. 6d. or 2s. 8d. the pound. Their o^dinary weight is the Badman,
which is not the same in all places; in as much as, at Tabris, it weighs but
six pound; in Kilan, where they make use of the Schach badman, it is twelve;
and at Scamachie and Karabath, it is sixteen pounds. Persia yields yearly
20000. Balls of Silk.
It is conceived that Persia produces every year, one with another, ten
thousand Somms, or twenty thousand Balls of Silk, every Ball weighing two
hundred and sixteen pounds. The Province of Kilan it self, in good years,
yields eight thousand Balls; Schiruan, three thousand; Chorasan, as many;
Mesanderan, two thousand; Karabath, two thousand. In which account we do not
comprehend what Georgia, which is richer in Silk than any other Province,
produces within it self. They say, that all Persia does not spend above a
thousand Balls of Silk, and that the rest is sold into Turkey, the Indies,
Italy, and to the English and Dutch, who Trade at Ormus, and who bring thither
Tinn, Copper, English and Dutch Cloth, nay some Clothes made at Berry (in
France) and Saux, which the Persians, who are not good at the ordering of
VVoollen stuffs, do so highly esteem, that ordinary Cloth is sold there at 20.
or 24. Crowns the yard.

The Armenian Merchants, who are Christians, are the richest of any, by reason
of the pains they take in making Voyages themselves, which is more than the
other Persians do; though both have an absolute freedom to Traffic where they
please themselves, as Foreiners have the liberty to come into Persia, and put
off their Commodities there, paying custom; contrary to what is observed in
Muscovy, where the Subjects cannot go out of the Kingdom, without the Czaar's
express permission. There is also this particular advantage in Persia, as well
as Turkey, that the Wars do not obstruct their Commerce, the Caravans and
other Merchants having the same freedom to go to and fro, Trading not
obstructed by the Wars.
in the time of war, as they have in Peace, inasmuch as both those Princes are
equally concerned to improve the advantages they make thereby. The commerce of
the Persians would be incomparably greater than it is, if they could make their
benefit of that which the Sea affords them, and if Navigation were as well
settled there, as it is in Europe.

The Wars, which the King of Persia is obliged to carry on sometimes against
the Turks, sometimes against the Mogul and the Vsbeques Tartars, make him stand
in need of a great number of Soldiers. Those who are entertained into his
Service have a settled pay at all times, as we shall have occasion to speak more
fully to anon.

Having spoken of the Shops, the Cellars and the Kitchins of the Persians, I
must not forget their Chambers, and what belongs to them; nor yet their
Marriages A Persian, who thinks himself able to maintain several Wives, will
seldom be content with one. Polygamy is an old evil, deeply rooted in them.
Strabo is of opinion, that they took several Wives, because they would have
many Children, and to get the reward which their Kings gave those who had many
Males. They are still willing enough to take the Wives, but not upon the same
Motives, since they use all the means they can to hinder their getting of
Children. What they do now is purely upon the account of pleasure, that their
enjoyments may be heightened by the variety. To this purpose, they have a
Proverb, which says, that, to have a perpetual Spring, a man must often change
Wives, and use them as Almanacks, which serve but for a year. The Alcoran
permits the Mahumetans to marry as many Wives as they are able to maintain.
Whence it comes that rich Merchants, who are obliged to Travel up and down the
Country, marry Wives, and keep Houses in several places, that where ever they
come they may be at home. Yet do I not advise any man to believe those, who
say, there is Law in Media, whereby men are enjoined to Marry at least seven
Wives; nor yet what Niger says in his Geography, that the Children kill their
Father and Mother, when they are come to seventy years of age. These are idle
stories, which have no ground in the ancient History, and whereto we found
nothing consonant in our time.

It is not our design to dilate much upon the inconveniences of Polygamy; but
certain it is, that, The inconvenience of Polygamy.
in Persia, there is but little friendship among the Women. Some love there
may be between them, but it is no doubt of that kind which comes near
brutality. It is impossible also that a Family, where there are so many women,
can be free from jealousy, which is inevitable among those, who would all be
loved, and absolutely depend on him, who should, but cannot, love them all
equally. The Persians themselves, to express the inconveniences of Polygamy,
say in their Proverbs, that, as two Asses are more troublesome to be driven,
than a whole Caravan; so a Judge finds not so much difficulty in deciding the
differences of a Province, as a man distracted by two Women, who cannot live
together without some jarring. We were told several examples of the great
mischiefs happening in Families through Polygamy, and and among the rest one,
concerning Silfaher, Chan of Scamachie. He was a Person of very great Authority
in the Country, and well looked upon at the Court, where he had Married the
Sister of Schach-Chodabende, who was Father to Schach-Abas. This Woman
conceiving a jealousy at the affection her Husband expressed toward another
young Lady whom he had Married, and imagining her quality would take away all
Comparison between her and her Rival, was so highly incensed against him, that
she resolved to be revenged; and to that purpose writ to the King her Nephew,
to bid him beware of her Husband, as having some design upon his Person.
Schach-Abas, who took the least suspicions for certain proofs, immediately
Commanded Kartschichai-Chan, Chan of Mesched, who was then about him at
Ardebil, to go and bring him Silfahar's Head. Kartschichai being come to the
foot of the Mountain of Elbours, in the Province of Schiruan, sent one to
Silfahar, to desire him to come to him. Silfahar, not fearing any mischief from
the other, who was his intimate Friend, departed upon the first summons, and
coming late at Night to the place appointed him by the other, he set up his
Tent near that of Kartschichai. The next day Kartschicai getting up betimes in
the Morning, went to Silfahar, who was in Bed, and having awaked and kindly
saluted him, he desired him to rise and take a Walk with him, for he had some
affairs of great consequence to communicate to him. But while Silfahar was
putting on his Clothes, Kartschichai, perceiving his soul was in a quiet
posture, in regard he was going to his Prayers, made a sign to his Servants,
who knew what they had to do, to dispatch him, and having caused his Head to be
cut off, he brought it to Court.

It happened also, not long before our Travels into Persia, that one who kept a
Tipling-house at Ardebil, whose name was Schiritzi Aly, being Drinking very
late with one of his Friends, upon that Bridge of the City. which is called
Heider Aly, saw coming toward him a laden Mule, which seemed to look after a
Master, while the true owner, who was a Merchant, was gone to ease himself on
the River side. Schiritzi had the good nature and charity to drive the Mule to
his own House, to unload it, and to turn him out again to look for his Mastet,
who coming immediarely into the City, met with his Mule in the streets, but
discharged of his burden. He went and made his complaints to the Governor,
who bid him name the person that had robbed him, and he would do him Justice.
But the Merchant, not satisfied with this answer, made his Case known to the
King, who presently recommended him to Aliculi-Chan, with express order to see
the Merchants loss made good to him, to the full value he should set upon his
Commodities, inasmuch as the Chan had not been careful to secure the Highway,
and neglected to make an exact enquiry after the Thief; which order the Chan
was forced to obey. Schiritzi, on the other side, finding his Fortune much
bettered by this unexpected Wind-fall, and not thinking one Wife enough,
Marries a second, which he took up out of the Brothelhouse, but had no Children
by her, By the former, he had a Son, who, one day coming from School, and
finding in the Chamber a Melon, whereof some part had been cut, presumed to
take a piece of it, and by that means gave the young Woman occasion to strike
him. The Child's Mother came into the Room, and revenged him, not only by
fighting with her Rival, but also by the complaints she made thereof to her
Husband, representing to him the insolence of that young Woman, with so much
bitterness, that being no longer able to endure her Language, he gave her a
good Cudgelling. The Woman exasperated at that, went to the Chan, and
acquainted him with the Adventure of the Mule. The Chan immediately sent for
the Taverner, and having found him guilty of the Fact, ordered him to be
hanged. And whereas the two Women had discovered the Robbery, out of pure
animosity and private resentments, rather than out of any affection they had
for the Governor, or regard of public Justice, he caused them to be publicly
ravished, and banished them out of the City. The Taverners Son was sold, and
all his Fathers Estate confiscated to the use of the Governor, who lost
nothing by the bargain.

The Persians are not so scrupulous in their Contracts of Marriage, but that
many times it happens a Man Marries his Brother's Widow; Incest tolerated.
yet could I not learn, that Incests were so common there as some Authors would
have it believed, nor that the Son meddles with his Mother, or the Brother with
his Sister. Nay it cannot be found, that, before the Reign of Cambyses, who
fell in love with his own Sister, there was any talk of these incests in
Persia, no more than there was in Egypt, before Ptolomey's time. There
Marriages are celebrated as follows.

When a young Man has a mind to Marry, Their Ceremonies of Marriage,
and has heard of some person he can fancy, he employs others to make enquiry
into the qualities and disposition of the young Maid, inasmuch as neither he
nor any of his Relations are permitted to see her, and if upon the account he
receives of her by them, he finds his affections inclined to her, he makes a
demand of her by two of his Friends, who had been his Godfathers at his
Circumcision, or, for want of those, by two others of his Kindred. This first
Embassy ordinarily finds no very kind reception, lest they should imagine the
Father to be over-forward to be rid of his Daughter. But if on the other side,
the young man's Friends find that his addresses are not taken amiss, they
continue them, and proceed to Articles, and agree upon the Dower, which, in
these Countries, the Friends of the Bridegroom, and not those of the Bride are
to give. The Dower is to be either in Money, which the young man sends to his
Mistress, some few days before the Marriage, as a recompense to the Father and
Mother for their Care in the Education of their Daughter; or he promises her by
the contract of Marriage, a certain sum of Money, or such a quantity of Silk,
or Stuffs, to be paid in Case of Divorce. These contracts are passed in the
presence of the Kasi, or the Molla who signs them. That done, they name on both
sides certain persons to be as it were Agents, who in the name of the
betroathed parties, go to the Kasi, or Ecclesiastical Judge, if it be in the
City, or, if in a Village, to the Molla, who is empowered by the Kasi to that
purpose, and who, being satisfied that all is done with the consents of the
Kindred on both sides, as also of the parties contracted, Marries them by the
said Agents, in the name of God, of Mahomet, and of Aly, delivering them a
Certificate of the Marriage. This Ceremony is for the most part, performed in
private, the Kasi or Molla taking along with him the two Agents into a private
room, or happily into the fields, to some place where no people come, out of a
fear that some trick might be put upon the new Married couple, or some
Witchcraft used upon the Bridegroom. Whence it comes, that, when the Marriage
is celebated in public, before the Kasi, as it often happens, (the Persians it
seems, having the superstition to do actions of this consequence according to
their Observance of certain Constellations, which they think fortunate or
unfortunate to them) that the Judge may not be frustrated in the execution of
his Duty, they oblige all that are present, to stretch out their hands, that
they may not be able to do any thing of Witchcraft under their Garments. The
Persian, whom we brought along with us to Holstein, told us, that when he was
Married, one of his Wife's Kindred cut a little piece of blew Galoom-lace off
his Garment, wherewith he made his enchantments, which made him impotent for
above two years and a half, till such time as having heard of a Sorcerer that
lived at Serab, who had the secret to dissolve those Charms, he went to him
about it. This pretended Sorcerer, or Magician, who was lame in both hands and
feet, seeing him coming toward him, told him he knew what was the occasion of
his discontent, and that he should be eased of it, as soon as he had taken a
Nail out of a hole of a certain Wall, which he told him of, which when he had
done, he could perform the duty of a Married man as well as any other.

Strabo affirms, that, heretofore, the Persians observed the Vernal Equinox as
the fittest time for their Marriages; but now they are absolutely indifferent
as to the Season, and a man may be Married on any day, save only in the Month
of Ramesan, which is their Lent, and during the ten days of the Aschur, when
the Ceremonies performed in remembrance of the interment of Hossein employ
their Devotions; inasmuch as during that time, they allow not of any
Divertisement at all.

The Wedding day being appointed, the young man sends, the day before, to his
intended Wife, Pendants, Bracelets and other Ornaments, suitably to their
qualities, as also some Dishes of Meat, to entertain the Relations and Friends,
who are to bring the young Woman to him: but neither of them both are present
at the Dinner. In the Evening, toward Night, the Bride is conducted, on
Horseback, or upon a Mule or Camel, covered with a Veil of Crimson Taffata,
which falls down below her Knees, accompanied by her Kindred, and Music, to the
Bridegroom's house. As soon as they are come to the House, they carry the Bride
with her Maids into one Chamber, and the Bridegroom with his Friends into
another, and Supper is brought up. Which ended, she is led to the Chamber where
she is to lie, where the Bridegroom comes to her, and then is it that he has
the first sight of her. The Bridegroom, who find his Bride broken up to his
hands, may lawfully cut off her Nose and Ears, and turn her away; but Persons
of quality, for the most part, think it affront enough to the Bride who is no
Maid, to send her and her friends immediately packing away. But if he really
finds her a Maid, he sends the tokens of it, by an ancient Woman, to her
Friends, and then they continue their entertainments for three days together.
After the first engagement, the Bridegroom gets up from his Wife, and goes to
his Friends, among whom he spends some hours in Merriment. Persons of any
Learning who come to these Entertainments, instead of Drinking, divert
themselves with their Books, which, to that end, they bring along with them,
and spend the time in discourses of Morality, or speculative Philosophy, which
they do also at those other assemblies which they many times appoint for that
purpose. Their Poets are never wanting at these Feasts, and contribute very
much to the Divertisements thereof, especially the next day after the Wedding,
and the day after. Among other things, there is brought in, a great wooden Dish
full of Fruit, in the midst whereof there is a Tree, having on every branch
Fruit and dried Conserves, and if any one of the Company can take ought thence,
so as that the Bridegroom perceives him not, his slight is recompensed with a
Present, which the Bridegroom is obliged to make him: but if he be surpised
therein, he must make good what he should have taken, a hundred fold; They have
also this custom, that if any one of the Company is not there the next day
precisely at the hour appointed for Dinner, he is laid upon a Ladder set
against the Wall, with his Head downwards, and Whipped on the soles of his Feet
with a Handkercher rolled about, till he redeems himself.

They have also Dancing; but the Men Dance by themselves, in one room, and the
Women by themselves in another room, into which the Music comes not, but
stand at the Door.

The next day after the Wedding, the Bridegroom washes himself, in the Winter
time, in Baths, which are very ordinary in those parts, and in the Summer, in
the River, or next Brook; but the Bride baths her self in the House. In the
Evening they set before every one of the Persons invited, upon a Handkercher of
Flowered Cotton-Cloath, two spoonfulls of Chinne, which is the Drugg, wherewith
they Color their Nails and Hands. That done, the Guests make their Presents.
If they have taken a little more Wine than they can well bear, as it often
happens, they take up their Lodging at the House where they Supped; in regard
the Watch which is kept very strictly there in the Night, suffer not any to go
in the Streets without a Lantern. Those who find themselves well enough to go,
give the Guard somewhat to Drink, and are brought home to their Houses.

I shall here take occasion to say something of the excellent order observed in
all Cities of Persia, The Watch in the Night.
for the Guard. At Ardebil there are forty men, who incessantly walk about the
Streets, to prevent Mischiefs and Robberies, with such Vigilance and Exactness,
that they are obliged to Indemnify those that are Robbed. Whence it came, that,
at Ispahan, we came many times after Midnight, from the Monastery of the
Augustines, which was above half a League from our quarters, yet never met with
any mischief by the way: nay if at any time, as it might well happen in that
great City, we chanced to lose our way, the Guard would bring us with Torches
home to our very Doors. It is reported of Schach-Abas, that, desirous, one day,
to make trial of the Vigilance of those people, suffered himself to be
surpised by them, and had been carried to Prison, had he not been known by one
of the Company, who discovering him to the rest, they all cast themselves at
his Feet, to beg his pardon. But he expressed himself well satisfied with their
care, and told them they had done but their duty; that he was King in the day
time, but that the keeping of the Public peace in the night depended on them.

If it happen, that, after the Marriage, the Bride be obliged to live at her
Husband's Father's House, it is not lawful for her to appear before him with
her Face uncovered, much more to speak to him, till such time as the
Father-in-Law has hired her to do it, and given her a new Garment, or a piece
of Stuff to make one, to oblige her thereto. But after all this, she must not
uncover her Face in his presence, nor yet her Mouth when she eats: for she has
a piece of Cloth, which they call Iaschmahn, tied to her ears, so as that it
hangs over her Mouth, to hinder her from being seen eating.

The Persians keep their Wives more in restraint than the Italians do, and
suffer them not to go to Church, or to any great Feast, unless their Husbands
go along with them. If a Woman permit her Face to be seen, all the Apologies
she can make for her self shall not clear her from the suspicion conceived of
her Dishonesty, even though she granted that favor to one of her Husband's
nearest Relations. This reserv'dness they also observe in their Hoases, where
they are kept up as close Prisoners. When any business obliges them to go
abroad, it it be a foot, they cover themselves with a white Veil, like a
VVinding-sheet, which reaches down to half the Leg, and if it be on
Horseback, they are disposed into a kind of Chests, or at least muffle up
their Faces, so as that it is impossible to see them.

The Ceremonies we mentioned before are only for ordinary Marriages; Marriage
for a certain time.
but besides these, there are two other kinds of Matrimony among the Persians,
which are celebrated quite after another manner. For those who are obliged to
sojourn at other places besides those where their ordinary Habitations are, yet
are unwilling to take up their quarters in public places, take Wives for a
certain time, allowing them a certain Salary, either for a Month, or such term
as they agree upon. They call this kind of Marriage Mitt^he, and to dissolve
it, there is no need of Bills of Divorce, but the time of the contract being
expired, it is dissolved of it self, unless both parties are mutually content
to prolong it. The third kind of Marrying is, when a man makes use of a Slave,
that he has bought, and these Slaves are for the most part Christian Maids, of
Georgia, whom the Tartars of Dagesthan steal, to be afterward sold in Persia.
The Children which they bear, as also those Born in the Marriage called
Mitt^he, share in the Fathers Estate as well as the others, who have no other
advantage of them therein, than what was granted the Mother by her contract of
Marriage: but they are all accounted lawfully begotten, inasmuch as, after the
example of the ancient Egyptians, they look upon the Father as the principle of
Generation, and say, the Mother does only foment and feed the Child when it is
once conceived; and upon the same account it is, that they affirm, that the
Trees which bare fruit are the Males, and that those which do not are the
Females.

When the Women are in Labor, The superstition of the Persians.
and that they find some difficulty in the delivery, the Kindred and Neighbors
run to the Schools, and make a present to the Molla, to oblige him to give his
Scholars leave to play, or at least to pardon some one of them that has
deserved to be severely punished; imagining that by the liberty they procure
for those Scholars, the Woman in Labor is eased, and will be the sooner
delivered of her burden. It is also out of the same persuasion, that, in such
Emergencies, they let go their Birds, and many times purposely buy some, that
they may give them their liberty upon such an occasion. They do the like for
persons in the agony of Death, who seem unwilling to dye. The Muscovites let go
Birds when they go to Confession; believing, that as they permit the Birds to
fly away, so will God remove their sins far from them.

The men take an absolute liberty to see the Women when they please, They are
jealous.
but they allow not their Wives the freedom of seeing so much as one man, so
far are they from permitting them to see any in private, so excessive is their
jealousy. The offenses Women commit contrary to their faith plighted to their
Husbands are unpardonable, nor indeed can they be guilty of any which they will
punish with greater severity, nay indeed cruelty. We were told an example of
it, that had happened in the Province of Lenkeran, in the time of Schach-Abas,
who coming to understand, that one of his Menial servants, who was called
Iacupzanbeg, Kurtzi Tirkenan, that is to say, he whose Office it was to carry
the King's Bows and Arrows, had somewhat a light Wife, sent him notice of it,
with this message, that if he expected to continue at Court, and to keep in his
employment, it was expected he should cleanse his House. This message, and the
affliction he conceived at the baseness of his Wife, and his reflection that it
was known all about the Court, Adultery cruelly punished*
as also that of the hazard he was in to lose his place, put him into such a
fury, that, going immediately to his House, he cut in pieces, not only his
Wife, but also her two Sons, four Daughters, and five Chamber-maids, and so
cleans'd his House by the blood of twelve persons, most of them innocent, that
he might not be turned out of his employment. The Law of the Country allows
them to kill the Adulterer with the Woman, if they be taken in the fact. These
accidents are not very extraordinary among them, and the Judge recompenses with
a new Garment the person who does an Execution of this Nature: which I conceive
is instead of the Salary which he is obliged to pay the common Executioner.

Divorce is lawful among them, and the dissolution of the Marriage is made
before the Judge, upon hearing of what both parties have to allege for
themselves: for it is Lawful, not only for the Men, Divorce lawful.
but also for the Women to give Bills of Divorce, showing good causes, not only
for Adultery, but also in several other Cases. Impotence, or Frigidity, rather
declares the Marriage null, than dissolves it; and Adultery is punished among
them, as we mentioned before. We were told a story of a Woman, who, desirous
to part from her Husband, charged him with impotence. The Husband desired the
Judge to command the Woman to scratch his Back; whereto she replied, I have
scratched thee so often, that I am weary of it, and thou would never scratch
me where it most itch'd. Another complained of her Husband, that he would have
done his work in the wrong place, whereupon the Judge ordered her to be
separated from him, and the Husband to be Gelt. They Marry again after Divorce,
as well Men as Women, with this difference nevertheless, that the Women are
obliged to continue in VViddow-hood three months and ten days, not only that
it may be known, whether they are with Child, but also that they may have time
to work their accommodation with their Husbands, if they have any such desire.
The Turks following the Doctrine of Hanife, have, in this particular, a very
brutish custom, in regard that, in Turquey, there may be a reconciliation made
after the Divorce, but when a man has put away his Wife three several times,
or, at her putting away, says only the word Vtzkatala, that is to say, I
renounce thee thrice, he cannot take her again, unless he permit the Molla to
name some person, who is to lie with her before hand in her Husbands presence,
so as that he may be assured he has done his work with her. I should not set
down a thing so extravagant, had I not informed my self of the truth thereof
from Persons of quality, either Turks born, or such as have lived several years
at Constantinople, who have all assured me, that, of sixty two Sects, whereof
the Turkish Religion consists, many have this Custom, nay what is more, that
they give Money to those who do them that good office. There are some indeed
who think it sufficient to put a-Bed with their Wives a young Lad, that is not
able to perform the work of Matrimony, which they do only for form sake,
thereby to reconfirm the Marriage.

To this purpose, A pleasant story.
there is a Story, that during the time there was no other Religion allowed in
Sulthania, but the Turkish, though there was a great number of persons who
professed the Persian Religion; the Sulthan, being one day incensed against his
Wife, said to her the word Vtzkatala, so that being obliged by the Law to give
her a Bill of Divorce, he immediately repented of it, and not willing that
another should make use of her, in order to his having of her again, he asked
his Ecclesiastics whether there were not any Iman, who could dispense with the
severity of that Law. Whereto the Mufti, and the other Turkish Priests having
returned their answer, that that Law was indispensable, he would needs hear
what a certain Molla, named Hassan Raschi could say in the business. This man
was a Persian Born, and had the reputation of a Jeaster, and one that made
sport with things most serious, insomuch that there had been no great notice
taken of his affirming, that he knew an Iman, who would certainly dispense with
the Sulthan, had it not been for the passionate desire this latter had to take
his Wife again, wherein he was so earnest, that he hearkened to any advice was
given him to that purpose. Hassan came to see him; but instead of leaving his
shoes behind him in the Antichamber, according to the custom of the Persians,
he brought them in under his arm. The Sulthan perceiving him coming in that
posture, asked him the reason of it, and whether he were afraid his shoos might
be stolen. Hassan made answer, that he was not afraid of any such thing, but
only that he was unwilling any other should put on his shoos, expressing
thereby, that the Sulthan should not permit another to lie with his Wife.
Whereto he added, that in the time of Mahomet, some body had done the Hanife
the afront to take away his shoos. The Turkish Priests, who were present at
this discourse, laughed at him, and said, that if he had no better reasons to
allege, to satisfy the Sulthan, that he might take his Wife again, he might go
his ways, in as much as Hanife had not lived in the time of Mahomet, but long
after. Hassan Kaschi, making his advantage of this answer, replied; If it be
so, said he, that Hanife lived not in the time of Mahomet, nor you neither, and
that in the whole Alcoran there is not a word to be found of this infamous Law,
how can you tell whether Mahomet had any such intention? And how can you impose
this burden upon the people? He thereupon cited the exposition of Saduk,
Hanife's Master, upon the Alcoran, and made it appear, that a Husband has the
power, not only to give his Wife ill words, and to threaten her, but also to
beat her, yet it shall not be in her power to forsake him, for his so doing.
This reason, which suited with the Sultan's design, pleased him so well, that
he not only took his Wife again, but he also professed the Persian Religion,
and either put to Death or Banished all the Turkish Priests.

They relate another pleasant Story to the same purpose; Another story.
to wit, that Solomon, Emperor of the Turks, being one day angry with his
Wife, did, in the heat of his passion, pronounce the Vizala against her. He
soon repented him of it, in regard his Wife, being one of the handsomest Women
in the World, it went to his very soul to part with her; and it being not in
his power to take her again, till such time as she had passed through another
man's hands, he bethought him, the only way were to have ^er Bedded by a
Dervis, of the Sect of those, whom they call Dervis Rastkeli, who were in so
great repute for their sanctity and austerity of Life, that he had not the
least fear he wouldmedd^e with her. It is to be observed by the way, that he,
who thus lies with the Wife, is before solemnly Married to her, and when he
has done his work, is Divorced from her, otherwise it were adultery. Soliman
then, having concluded the Marriage between his Wife and the Dervis, ordered
them to go to Bed together: but they gave one the other such mutual
satisfaction, and ere they came out of the Bed, were so well agreed, that the
next day, they declared, that they had an affection one for the other, and that
they would not be separated; so that, it being not in the power of the Law to
force them to a Divorce, Solomon was forced to let him enjoy his Wife, who
went along with her Husband into Persia, where he settled himself very well, by
the means of his Wife, who had great Wealth.

It must needs be, The Education of their children.
that, of so many Women, there are Born a great number of Children.
Accordingly there are some Fathers have 25. or 30. But the modern Education of
them differs much from that of the ancients; in as much as now they are not
brought up by Women, and the Fathers put them not out till they come to such
an age, as they did anciently, when they admitted them not to their presence
till they were four years of age, according to Strabo, or five, according to
Herodotus, or seven, according to Valerius Maximus. Nor do they now, as
heretofore, exercise them in Shooting and Riding; but they are put, very young,
either to Work, or to School, to learn to Write and Read; there being very
few Persians who cannot do both.

Their Metzid, or Mosqueies, where they say their Prayers, serve them also for
Schools. No City but has as many Metzids as Streets, every street being
obliged to maintain a Metzid, with the Molla belonging to it, who is as it were
the Principal of the College, and the Calife, who is the Regent. The Molla sits
in the middle of the form or Class, and the Scholars all about him, Their
Authors for reading.
all along the VValls. As soon as they begin to know the Characters, they put
them to read certain Chapters taken out of the Alcoran, and afterward the
whole Alcoran. Then they put them into the Kulusthan, or the Rose-Garden of
Schich Saadi, and his Bustan, or Orchard, and at last into Hafis, who set out
the Bustan in Rhyme. These last Authors, who were both of Schiras, which is the
ancient Persepolis; where the Language is more pure than in any other place of
Persia, are highly esteemed, as well for the Excellency of their Style, as the
Praegnancy of their Inventions. The Children read very loud, and all at the
same time, the same Text, moving themselves all with the same agitation from
one side to the other, much after the manner that the VVind shakes Reeds. Their
Writing.
They all write upon their knees where ever they are, or what age soever they
be of, in regard they have not the use of either Stools or Tables. They make
their Paper of old rags, as we do, which for the most part are of Cotton and
Silk, and that it may not be hairy or uneven, Their Ink.
they make it smooth with a Polishing stone, or sometimes with an Oyster or
Muscle shell. They make their Ink of the rinds of Pomegranates, or of Galls and
Vitriol, and to make it thick, and more fit for writing, their Characters
requiring a full Body, they burn Rice or Barley, beat it to powder, and make a
hard paste of it, which they dissolve with Gum-water, when they go to write.
The best comes from the Indies, which though it be not all equally good and
fine, is yet very fit for their Pens, which are not made of Goose-quills, And
Pens.
as ours in Europe are, in regard they would be too hard for their Paper,
which, being of Silk or Cotton, is very tender, but they make them of Canes, or
Reeds, and a little bigger than our Pens. They are of a dark Color without,
and they are brought for the most part from Schiras, or from the Gulf of
Arabia, where there grows abundance of them.

The Persians have their particular Language, The Persian Language.
which has much of the Arabian, but nothing at all of the Turkish. There are
in it also many foreign words, as Germane and Latin, insomuch that it might be
thought these Languages have the same Original, if it were not found, that it
happen also in almost all the rest, yet not so as that it may be thence
inferred that all these Nations come from the same source. To signify, Father,
Mother, a Tooth, a Pen, a Rat, a Yoke. they have the same words with the
Latin; the ne and tu are Latin and Persian words; and du, no, de, signify
two, nine, and ten: yet is it not to be concluded thence, that the Persians are
originally Romans. True it is, that the Persians come from the Scythians, as do
also the Germans; yet would I not affirm, that the ancient Goths and modern
Tartars are the same people. It must therefore be granted, that the modern
Language of the Persians differs much from the ancient, if what Herodotus says
be true, that all their words ended in S; though it may be withal confessed,
that they have all a full termination, inasmuch as they have in a manner all
the accent upon the last Syllable. It is easy enough to be learnt, as having
but few irregular Verbs, and if it be true, that it is the same Language which
was spoken anciently, the examples of Themistocles and Alcibiades make it
appear, The Persians learn the Turkish Language.
that it may be attained in a short time. All that is hard in it is the
Guttural pronunciation thereof.

Most of the Persians, with their own Language, learn also the Turkish,
especially in those Provinces which have been long under the Jurisdiction of
the Grand Seignour, as Schiruan* Adirbeitzan, Erak, Bagdat, and Eruan, where
Children are taught the Turkish Language, and by this means, it is so common at
Court, that a man seldom hears any one speak the Persian; as in the Grand
Seignor's Court, they ordinarily speak the Sclavonian, and in the Mogul's, the
Persian. But in the Province of Fars, which is the ancient Persia, and at
Schiras, they speak only the Persian Language. They understand nothing of the
Hebrew, Greek, or Latin; but instead of these Languages, wherein the Europaeans
study the Sciences, they have the Arabian, which is to them as the Latin is to
us; in regard the Alcoran, and all its Interpreters make use of it, as do also
all those who write any Books of Philosophy and Physic. So that it is not to
be much admired, Their Characters.
that it is so common, that indeed they cannot express their own Language, but
in Arabian Characters.

It Is true, Their Universities.
the Sciences are not improved to that perfection by them as they are by the
Europaeans, yet can it not be said but that the Persians are much addicted to
Study, and they call their Learned men Filosufs. To this end they have their
Colleges, or Universities, which they call Medressa, and the Professors who
teach in them, Mederis. Their most eminent Colleges are those of Ispahan,
Schiras, Ardebil, Mesched, Tabris, Caswin, Kom, Iescht, and Scamachie, which
are all under the superintendency of the Sedder, or chief of their Religion,
who is obliged to take care for their allowances and maintenance. This is done
out of the Revenue of those Provinces which pay no Taxes to the King, as
Kochtzeh, near Eruan, Vtuathzuk, near Karabath, Tabakmelek, between Georgia and
Karabath, Agdasch, and Kermeru.

They have a particular inclination for Arithmetic, Geometry, Eloquence,
Poetry, Natural and Moral Philosophy, Astronomy, Astrology, Law, and Medicine,
in regard they make some advantage of the Profession of these Sciences. They
have all Aristotle's Philosophy in the Arabian Language, and call it Dunja
piala, that is to say, the Goblet of the World; with this remark upon it, that
as a man Drinking out of a great Bowl moderately, finds himself the better for
it, and taking so much of it that he is Drunk therewith, he both injures his
Body and disturbs the Mind; so is a man to make a temperate use of the
Philosophy of Aristotle, and, not deboysting himself, observe a Mediocrity in
the Study thereof. Children are taught Arithmetic in the Schools with their
VVriting and Reading. In their accounts, they commonly make use of the Indian
figures; but the more Learned use the Arabian Characters.

They join Eloquence and Poesy together, and comprehend these two Sciences
under a very few precepts: which bring a man in a short time to the practick
part thereof. And indeed most of their Eloquent pieces, which they embellish
with abundance of Histories, and Moral Sentences, are in Verse.

For the excellency of their Language, Their best Authors.
Pregnancy of conceit, and Elegance of expressions, they read the Kulusthan of
Schich Saadi, whom they prefer before all their other Authors. It is a very
Eloquent piece, though in Verse, full of figures and enriched with History, and
Maxims of Policy and Morality. Accordingly, there is not any one almost, but
has this Book; nay some have perused and studied it so much, that they have it
by Heart, and apply the Passages, Sentences, and Comparisons thereof, in their
ordinary Discourse, so pertinently, that it is no small pleasure to hear them
talk. They are also great Lovers of History, and delight much in reading the
Lives and Deaths of their Prophet Aly and his Son Hossein, who was killed in
the War against Iesied; which pieces are written in a style truly Historical,
and of a noble height. They have also several other Histories, and Chronicles,
Ecclesiastical and Profane, of the Lives and Wars of their Kings; and some,
of the affairs of other foreign Nations: the best whereof are those of Mirchond,
Enweri, Zami, Walchi, Nussegri, and others. The best of all their Historians is
Mirchond, who has written the History of Persia, in excellent good Language,
in several great Volumes, and it is a piece so highly esteemed, that it is
worth in the Country above two hundred Crowns; and therefore I cannot think it
can be had perfect in Europe, though I know, that Golius, Professor of the
Oriental Languages and the Mathematics in the University of Leyden, has most
of it, with several other excellent Books of that Nature. But there is not any
man, I know of, that has so much of it, and makes so great advantages thereof,
as the incomparable Monsieur Gaulmin, Counselor of State, and the Senior of
the Masters of Requests, who though he has the best Library in Europe, for
Books of this Nature, yet must it be acknowledged, that he is so perfect a
Master of all the Oriental Languages, that he needs not be obliged for ought he
can learn out of any of these Authors.

I do not give this account of their Histories, that a man should give any
great credit thereto, especially when they speak of their Religion and Saints.
For in Persia, as well as elsewhere, they have their pious frauds, and think it
a kind of Piety to establish and improve the errors of their Religion, by
Fables and Impostures: since that even in their profane Histories, they take
that freedom which is only allowed Poets and Painters, as may be seen
particularly in the History of Alexander the Great, which they have so
disguised, that it has no Consonancy to what is written of him by Q. Curtius,
Plutarch, and Arrianus. But though it be not true, yet it is Divertive enough,
at least to excuse, if not deserve, this little Digression.

They say then that Iscander (so they call Alexander the Great) was Born in
Iunahn, that is to say, Greece; that his Father's name was Betlimus, and that
his Mother was the Daughter of King Tzimschid, A fabulous History of Alexander
the Great.
who was the Son of Keikobath. They say Tzimschid lived seven hundred years;
That he was the wisest of all the Kings that ever Reigned, and that he is to be
acknowledged the Inventor of Saddles, Horse-shooes, Bows, Painting, Tents, and
Wine. That the education of Alexander was committed to Aristotle, who knew so
well how to ingratiate himself with his Disciple, that being extreme unwilling
to be without him, he obliged him to go along with him in his first Wars,
wherein he made great advantages of his advice. For Alexander being as yet but
fifteen years of age, bethought him one day to ask Aristotle, to whom all
Greece belonged, whereto being answered by him, that his Grandfather by the
Mother-side had heretofore been Master of it, he, extremely troubled to find
himself deprived of so great a Kingdom, resolved upon the Reduction and
Conquest of it, and afterward to wage a War against all the World. To that
end, he went, with his Tutor, to Stampul, or Constantinople, and made proffer
of his service to the King there. Aristotle, who was one of the most Eloquent
men of his time, knew so well how to recommend the excellent endowments of
Alexander, that the King trusted him with the conduct of an Army, wherewith he
Conquered Egypt, and all the neighboring Provinces. Afterward, he conducted
that Army against those of the Hebbes, who still made opposition, and making
their advantage of their Elephants, rendered all Alexander's attempts fruitless,
till Aristotle advised him to rub over with Nefte a heap of Reeds, to set them
a-fire, and to cast them among the Elephants, which were so startled at the
fire, that they were put into disorder, whereupon the Hebbes were defeated, and
forced to submit. Thence he went to Sengebat, the Inhabitants whereof have
great Lips, and very long Teeth. Their King, with some of his people, got into
a Tower, where Alexander would have besieged him. But Aristotle told him, that
being Master of the City, he had cut off the Root of that Tree, and that it
would not be long ere he saw him fall without any further trouble. He took his
advice, and went thence to Iemen, and Conquered all Arabia. He went afterward
to Aleppo, Erserum, Diabek, going on still along the River Tigris, as far as
Mosel, and thence fell down into Georgia, reduced all to his Subjection, and
came at last to Berde, in the Province of Iran. In this City, there lived at
that time the Widow of a certain King, named Melkchatun, who hearing daily of
the great wonders done by Alexander, employed several Painters, to take his
Picture, as also those of all the great Men of her time; insomuch, that
Alexander going disguised, and in the quality of an Ambassador from Alexander,
to give her a Visit, the made a shift to discover him, and invited him to Dine
with her. But instead of Meat, there were brought up only great Basins full of
Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, which she desired him to fall to and to make
the best Cheer he could: whereupon Alexander telling her, that there was not
any thing could satisfy his hunger, she represented to him, that it was for
those useless trifles that he ruined so many Provinces and fruitful Countries,
such as were able to produce what could maintain many Millions of People, and
showed him, how that when he had Conquered all the World, he must at last dye
for want of Bread, if he still continued the courses he then took, and
entreated him not to deprive her of her Kingdom. Alexander did as she desired;
and they talk to this day of the great Wisdom of that Queen, of whom they
relate among other things, that, being very Rich, she did not impose pecuniary
Mulcts upon offenders, but obliged them to make Graves for the Burial of the
Dead, and they say there are yet many of those made by her Command to be seen
near Nechtzuan. That thence Alexander went to Schiruam, and built the City of
Derbend, causing it to be fortified on the side toward Persia, and drawing a
wall all along the Mountain as far as the black Sea, and building Towers at a
League distance one from another, for Guards against the Invasion of the
Tartars. That afterward, he went into Persia, became Master of almost all the
Provinces thereof, and engaged against Darius, who was then, with an Army of
two hundred thousand men, in the Province of Kirman. That Darius had the
advantage in the three first Battles, but was defeated in the fourth. Alexander
having drawn the Enemie's Army to a place where he had caused several pits to
be made, which he had covered with straw, and that Darius was taken in one of
them. Afterward, he went into Chorasan, and thence into the Indies, where,
upon the entreaty of the Indians, he caused to be made a Palizado of Iron
against the Pigmees, which is to stand till the day of Judgment. Afterward, he
defeated the Vsbeques, and after that, he turned his Arms against the Hebbes,
who rebelled against him. That having so many Kings in his power, he would
needs be advised by Aristotle, whether it were not the safest way to put them
to Death. But Aristotle having represented to him, that some of their Children
might come to revenge that cruelty, he set them all at Liberty, except Darius,
whom he poisoned. After this, Alexander coming to understand, that, in the
Mountain of Kef, there was a great Cave, very black and dark, wherein ran the
water of Immortality, would needs take a Journey thither. But being afraid to
lose his way in the Cave, and considering with himself, that he had committed a
great oversight, in leaving the more aged in Cities and fortified places, and
keeping about his Person only young people such as were not able to advise him,
he ordered to be brought to him some old Man, whose counsel he might follow in
the adventure he was then upon. There were in the whole Army but two Brothers,
named Chidder and Elias, who had brought their Father along with them, and this
good old Man bid his sons go and tell Alexander, that to go through with the
design he had undertaken, his only way were, to take a Mare that had a Colt at
her heels, and to Ride upon her into the Cave, and leave the Colt at the
entrance of it, and the Mare would infalliby bring him back again to the same
place without any trouble. Alexander thought the advice so good, that he would
not take any other person with him in that Journey but those two Brothers,
leaving the rest of his Retinue at the entrance of the Cave. He advanced so
far, that he came to a Gate, so well polished, that, notwithstanding the great
darkness, it gave light enough to let him see there was a Bird fastened
thereto. The Bird asked Alexander what he would have? He made answer, that he
looked for the water of Immortality. The Bird asked him, what was done in the
World? Mischief enough, replies Alexander, since there is no Vice or Sin but
Reigns there. Whereupon the Bird getting loose and flying away, the Gate
opened, and Alexander saw an Angel sitting, with a Trumpet in his hand, holding
it as if he were going to put it to his Mouth. Alexander asked him his name.
The Angel made answer, his name was Raphael, and that he only staid for a
command from God to blow the Trumpet, and to call the Dead to Judgment. Which
having said, he asked Alexander, who he was? I am Alexander, replied he, and I
seek the water of Immortality. The Angel gave him a Stone, and said to him, go
thy ways, and look for another stone of the same weight with this, and then
thou shall find Immortality. Whereupon Alexander asked, how long he had to
live? The Angel said to him, till such time as the Heavens and the Earth which
encompass thee, be turned to Iron, or as others say, into Gold and Silver.
Alexander being come out of the Cave, sought a long time, and not meeting with
any stone just of the same weight with the other, he put one into the Balance
which he thought came very near it, and finging but very litrle difference, he
added thereto a little Earth, which made the Scales even; it being God's
Intention to show Alexander thereby, that he was not to expect Immortality,
till he himself were put into the Earth. At last, Alexander having, one day, a
fall off his Horse, in the barren ground of Kur or Ghur, they laid him upon the
Coat he wore over his Armor, and covered him with his Buckler, to keep off the
heat of the Sun. Others affirm, that this Coat was Embroidered with Gold and
Silver, and that his Buckler was covered with Plates of the same Metal, and
that then he began to comprehend the Prophecy of the Angel, and was satisfied
the hour of his Death was at hand, that accordingly he dyed, and that his Body
was carried into Greece.

They add to this Fable, that these two Brothers, Chidder and Elias, drunk of
the water of Immortality, and that they are still living, but invisible, Elias,
upon the earth, and Chidder, in the Water, wherein this latter has so great
power, that those, who are in danger of being destroyed by water, if they
earnestly pray, saying, Ia Chidder Nebbs, vowing a Sacrifice or Offering to
him, and firmly believing, that he can relieve them, shall escape the danger,
and save their Lives. Whence it comes, that, if any one perish, it is
attributed to his Incredulity* but if he escape, they are of a certain
persuasion, that it is by the assistance of Chidder, to whom those who escape
Shipwreck, or any other danger upon the Sea, do every year, upon the same day,
give solemn thanks, and acknowledge the protection of this Saint. These
Ceremonies are performed in February, and those who keep the Vows they have
made upon such occasions, invite their Friends to a Supper, both Men and Women,
relate to them the particulars of the dangers they had been in, and how they
were delivered out of them, by the means and assistance of Chidder. Then they
Sup together, and make good Cheer, but drink no Wine. In the mean time, they
serve up into another Room, several Dishes of Fruit and Conserves, and in the
midst of the room, they set in a Wooden Dish, full of Pease-Meal, a Wax-Candle
lighted, and as they go out of the room, they say, Chidder Nebbi, if this
offering be acceptable to thee, show it by some sign. If, the next day, they
find the track of any ones having been in the room, or the print of a hand in
the Meal, it is accounted a very good sign, and the Friends have another
meeting, to spend that day in Merriment. Whence it comes, that the Women, who
are not often admitted to these Feasts, find out ways to get into the Room, so
as that they are not perceived, and take away a handful of the Meal, that the
Feasting may be continued. The Nassara, who are a sort of Christians, of
Armenia, do also celebrate this Festival, but they drink Wine thereat, which
the Persians do not. We were told at Ardebil, that one day, a Woman making her
advantage of this Feast, had locked up her Gallant in the room where they had
prepared the entertainment for the Prophet. She went ever and anon to see him,
and perceived not that a Child of hers, about four four years of age, followed
her, who seeing a strange face, fell a crying, so loud, that the Gallant took
an Apple out of the Fruits designed for Chidder, and gave it the Child to make
him hold his peace. But as soon as the Child had got the Apple, he runs into
the Hall, where he showed his Father the present, which Chidder Nebbi had made
him. The Father not knowing what to think of that Vision, and derous to see
whether Chidder was become visible, went into the room, and there found a man
in a posture that a little startled him. But the Gallant, fearing they would
have Sacrifiz'd him to the Prophet, made a shift to get away, and the Woman,
pretending she had not seen any thing, it passed for a certain apparition of
Chidder.

There Is no Nation in the world more addicted to Poetry than the Persians. The
Persians inclined to Poetry.
There you have Poets in all the Marketplaces, and in all Houses of good
fellowship, where they entertain and make sport for such as frequent them, as
the Mountebanks, and such as show tricks of Legerdemain do in Europe. All bear
with them, and the Great Lords think they cannot give their Friends a better
entertainment, than by Diverting them, while they are at Dinner, with the
recital of some Poem. The King himself, and the Chans have, among their other
Menial Servants, their Poets, whose only business it is to find out somewhat
for their Diversion by whom they are maintained, and which they are not to
communicate to any other, without the consent of their Patrons. The Poets are
known from others by their Habit, which is the same with that of the
Philophers; to wit, a long white Coat, but open before, with great broad
Sleeves, and they have at their Girdle a kind of a Hawking-bag, in which are
their Books, Paper, and an Ink-horn, that they may give Copies of their verses
to such as desire them. Their under Garment has no Sleeves, and would be a
perfect Cloak, if it had but a Cape. They wear no Stockings; their Breeches
come down to their feet, like Pantaloons, and in winter, they wear such as
reach but to their ankles. Instead of Mendils or Turbants, they wear a kind of
Caps. Those who put off their Productions in the Market places and at Taverns,
wear Skarfs of several Colors, which come about their Bodies just above the
waste, and passing over the right shoulder fall down under the left arm, Most
of these take for the Subject of their Poetry the Religion of the Turks and
their Saints, which they are pleased to rail at and make sport withal.

It may well be imagined, that, among so many Poets, there must also be some
Poetasters, and that there, as well as in other places, a man must expect to
find but few Homers and Virgils. Nay there are some so modest as to vent only
the works of other Men, and finding in themselves such a barrenness of wit as
will not produce any thing, make it their business to disperse their
productions who are in repute. Persia has this common with France, as indeed
it has many other things, that it has hardly any Author excellent at an Epick
Poem, and that some few Poets laid a^ide, who are in great reputation, the rest
are rather to be pitied. The best, and such as may justly be accounted good
Poets, The best Persian Poets.
are Saadi, Hafis, Firdausi, Fussuli, Chagani, Eheli, Schems, Naway, Scabidi,
Ferahsed, Deheki, Nessimi, etc. Their Poetry is suitable to the modern way, and
they will keep up the Rhyme, though they are not very exact in observing the
number of the Syllables. Nor do they think it much to use the same words to
keep the Rhyme, as imagining it no breach of the Rules of their Prosodia; as for
example in the following Verses: Tziri, tziri, Tziragh Iani tze?
Adamir a demagh Iani tze?
Tziri, tziri, tziragh es teri bud,
Adamira demagh cheri bud.


Where the Poet makes a pretty allusion between the words Teri and Cheri,
whereof one signifies moist, and the other, of or belonging to an Ass. The
sense of the Verses, is to this effect; Why does the Candle go out? Why does
man boast and is vainglorious? because the one wants moist Suet, and the other
is troubled with Asse's fat. They also delight much in Equivocations, and many
times very handsomely begin the subsequent Verse with the word that ended the
precedent, as in the following Example.

Kalem be dest, debiran behes hasar derem
Derem be dest nea Ied meker nauk Kalem.
Their Study of the Law can be of no great extent, Their Law.
in regard they have but few Laws, and those they have are all taken out of the
Alcoran, and the Commentaries upon it: which the Kasis and the Divanbegs
observe, in the decision of differences. They have besides these, certain Local
customs, but very few.

In Physic, Medicine.
or Medicine, they follow the Maxims of Avicenna, and their Physicians are all
Galenists. Phlebotomy is not very ordinary among them, but they administer
continual Medicines made of Herbs and Roots, and many times apply Fomentations
and other outward remedies. They have nothing of Anatomy, and their practice is
so gross, that, when I was ^at Scamachie, where our Physician was entreated to
visit a Man, who, having drunk too much Aquavitae, lay a dying, I saw a
Moor-Physician, who had the sick party in hand, order a great piece of Ice to
be laid on his Stomach, maintaining his proceedure by this general Maxim, that
a Disease is to be Cured by what is contrary thereto. When Women or Children
are troubled with any Disease or Indisposition, they do not send for a
Physician, but for the Midwife, whence it comes that Midwives have some skill
in Medicine. The Books which treat thereof, have this extraordinary, that, the
remedies they prescribe, are as fit for Horses as Men.

Our Physician, who had joined to Galen's method certain Maxims of Paracelsus,
and used Chemical remedies with very good success, grew so famous in Persia,
that the King himself proffered him very considerable allowances, to engage him
to continue in that Court. Nay, he grew into such repute, after he had
recovered some persons who had been given over by others, that the people began
to look upon him as an extraordinary man, insomuch that they brought to him
some that were lame and blind from the Birth, to recover their limbs and sight
who never had had them.

It is not of late that the Persians have applied themselves to the study of
Astronomy. Astronomy.
Heretofore they who made profession thereof were called Magi, and now they
call them Minatzim, and they do not busy themselves so much in observing the
motions of the Heavens and Stars, and the pure contemplation of that Science,
as in Prognosticating the effects which their influences may produce, and to
foretell those things, the contingency whereof they imagine to themselves may
be read in the course of the Heavens. So that it is rather Judiciary Astrology,
than Astronomy that they now Study, in regard the one would bring them no
advantage at all, whereas the other is the more beneficial to them in this
respect, that most of the Persians have this superstition, that they never
undertake any thing of consequence, but they first consult the Minatzi^. To
that end, the King and Great Lords have always one of these about them, who
perpetually observes the Heavens, and fore-tells whether the time be fortunate
or unfortunate for the business they would undertake. And out of that
reflection it is, that they say themselves, that Astrology, who is dependent on
Astronomy, is a rich Daughter, but comes from so poor a Mother, that she is
forced to preserve her Life, from whom she received her own. These Astrologers
are never without their Astrolabe, which they carry in their Bosoms, that they
may erect a Scheme at any time: but their skill is not great about Nativities,
especially those of persons of mean condition; which proceeds hence, that,
having no Clocks, they cannot get the precise hour, much less the minute of the
Birth, which great persons have exactly observed, by means of the Astrolabe.

For the teaching of Astronomy they have neither Sphere nor Globe, insomuch
that they were not a little astonished to see in my hands a thing which is so
common in Europe. I asked them whether they had ever seen any such before. They
told me, they had not, but said, that there was heretofore in Persia, a very
fair Globe, which they call Felek, but that it was lost during the Wars
between them and the Turks. They happily meant that which Sapor, King of Persia,
had caused to be made of Glass, so large, that he could sit in the Center of
it, and observe the motions of the Stars, and must no doubt be like that of
Archimedes, whereof Claudian speaks in the Epigram, which begins thus, Jupiter
in parvo cum cernerct aethera vitro.

Antiquity might happily admire these works; but what miracle would it be
thought, if they saw the Globe which his Highness the Duke of Holstein has
ordered to be made in his City of Gottorp. It is a double Globe, made of
Copper, ten foot and a half Diameter, so that within it, ten persons may sit at
a Table, which, with the seats about it, hangs at one of its poles. There a man
may see, by means of an Horizontal Circle within the Globe, how the Stars and
the Sun it self, coming out of its Center, moves of it self through its
Ecliptic degrees, and rises and sets regularly. The motion of this Globe
exactly follows that of the Heavens, and derives that motion from certain
Wheels, driven by the water, which is brought out of a Mountain hard by, and
let in, as it requires more or less, according to the swiftness of the Spears.

The Persians regulate their year according to the Moon, The Lunar and Solar
year in Persia.
as well as the Sun, so as that they have both Solar and Lunar years; to wit,
the latter, for their Festivals, and Religious Ceremonies, which are appointed
on certain days of the Month, and these Months beginning and ending with the
Moon, make their year shorter than ours by twelve days. Their Solar year is of
365. days, and was so accounted even in the time of Alexander the Great, as Q.
Curtius expressly observes in the 7. Chap. of the 3. Book of his History, where
he says, speaking of Darius's Retinue, that, after the Magi, followed three
hundred sixty five young Men, completing the number of the days of their
year, which consisted of so many days, that is to say, twelve Months of
thirty days a piece, and five days over and above. It begins, at that very
minute that the Sun, entering into Aries, makes the Equinox, and brings in the
first day of the Spring. That day they call Naurus, or Neurus, that is, the new
day. They count the years of their age, according to the course of the Sun, so
that to express how old they are, they say, they have lived so many Narus's,
that is, so many years. It is one of the principal functions of the Minatzim,
to observe, by the Astrolabe, the happy minute, in which the Sun comes to the
Equator, and as soon as he declares it is, they all begin to rejoice. Their
Epoche is the Hegira, or flight of Mahomet, which falls on the 10. of July, in
the 622. year of our Savior.

The Persians had heretofore their Almanac, or Takhuim, which was particular
to them, and every day of the Month had its name from some of their Kings or
Heroes, as Oromasda, Behemer, Adarpahascht, Scharias, etc. as we find it in
Scaliger, in his incomparable Treatise, de Emendatione Temporum, and in the
Ephemerides of Origanus: but they are not used now, no more than the Epoche of
Iesdetzird, or as Scaliger calls him, Iesdegird, who was the Son of Schaherjar,
and Grand Son of Chosroes, who was killed by Otman, the Son of Ophan, a
Sarasin, on the 16. of June in the 632. They had no other till the year 1079.
at which time Albu Arsalan, King of Chorasan, Mesopotamia and Persia, a
Sarasin, having brought together eight Astronomers, very Learned Men, reformed
the year of Iesdegird, and constituted another Epoche, which they began on the
14. day of the year, and which is called Tzelalee, or Sulthance, or, in the
Arabian, Tarich, altzelalit, that is, the Era, or Epoche, of Augustus, from the
word Tzelaf, which signifies Majesty, or Highness. Now, they have the Arabian
Calendar, and the names of their twelve Months are, M^harem, Sefar, Rebbi
Ewel, Rebbi Achir, Tzemadi Ewel, Tzemadi Achir, Retzeb, Scabahn, Schawal,
Dsilkade, and Dsilhatse. It is also to be observed, that the Persians have a
way of accompting by four years, much after the same manner as the Greeks
accounted by their Olympiads, and the Romans, by Lustra, which consisted of
five years, and then they give the first year of their account, the name of the
first Month of the year, to the four ensuing years, that of the second Month,
and so of the rest; so that to know that they speak of a Month, and not of
years, they add, to the names of the Months, the word Mah, which signifies a
Month. Abraham Ecchelensis gives the Etymology of it, as he does also that of
the days of the week, in his History of Arabia, page 204. etc. They begin the
week with Saturday, that the seventh day, which is the day of rest, may fall
upon Friday, which to them is as the Sunday is to Christians, and Saturday to
the Jews. The names of the seven days of the week are these, to wit, Saturday,
Scembe, Sunday, Iekschembe, Monday, Duschembe, Tuesday, Seschembe, Wednesday,
Tschaschembe, Thursday, Denschembe, and Friday, Adine, or Tzumeh, that is, the
day of Assembly, in regard that on that day, they meet at their Assemblies to
do their Devotions. They account Tscharchembe the most unfortunate day of all
the Week.

They are extremely addicted to Astrology, and in imitation of the Chaldaeans,
of whom, doubtless, they learnt that Science, they are so superstitious, that
they do not only credit all the Astrologers tell them, but also, persons of
quality do no business of any consequence, undertake no journey, nay would be
loath to put on a new Garment, get on Horseback to Ride abroad, or Bath
themselves, but they first consult the Minatzim, who is so much the more
credited by them, in that many times they heighten the Vanity of their Art by a
Profession, no less deceitful than the other, which is Medicine. This
persuasion of theirs is grounded on the opinion they have, as well as the
Arabians, that the Stars are governed by Intelligences, who have an absolute
power over sublunary things; so that it is no hard matter to make them
acquiesce in the prediction of the Astrologers. These are either Mountebanks,
or Magicians, who, by their equivocal expressions circumvent those who consult
them, purposely to disturb their Brains, and to put tricks upon them, as
Stephen Alexander did upon Heraclius, when he foretold him, that he should
perish in the water, obliging him thereby to fill up all the Lakes and Ponds
all over the Empire. After the same manner was also deceived John Menard, a
Physician of Ferrara, who was told he should perish in a Ditch. He avoided them
all, but that of a young Woman, whom he Married in his old age, and who visibly
shor^ned his days. They attribute to every hour in the day one of the Signs of
the Zodiac, to wit, to the first, Aries, to the second, Taurus, and so
forward; and they believe there are in every Month, some unfortunate days,
especially the 3. the 5. and the 23. and 25. of every Moon. Abraham
Ecchelensis, whom we cited before, relates, to this purpose, two remarkable
stories, taken out of the 9. Book of the Chronicles of Gregorius Barhebra,
where he says, that in the 198. year of the Hegira, there lived a Man, who,
among other things, had a Ring, which made him that had it on his Finger laugh
as long as it was on. He himself was the only man who could use it as another
Ring; and he had also a Pen, wherewith no body could Write, and which no body
was able to guide with his hand, but he himself. Whence it came, that the
Calif, Alamun, who lived in that time, would needs have his Nativity calculated
by the famous Astrologer Albumazar, who found that his Ascendent was in Taurus,
between whom and Jupiter, cauda draconis and Venus, there was a benevolent
aspect, and that the Sun and Moon were in the same degree of the Ascendent. The
other Story is of a Physician, named Tabet Harensis, who feeling a man's Pulse,
told him he had eaten Veal, and taken of a Broth, whereof the Milk was turned
in the boiling, yet had not any reason to give for what he said, save that the
Physician knew it by some particular instinct, and that he had received that
gift from secret influence.

Yet for all this prejudice they have for the influences of the Stars, they
attribute much to Chance, and endeavor to discover the secrets of things by
those means, especially such as are not yet come to pass, the knowledge whereof
is not so easy.

It Is true, they are for the most part Women, who address themselves to these
people, who have their Shops or Stalls in the Maidan, near the Dowlet Chane,
and foretell things by Lot, two manner of ways. Some of them, whom they call
Remal, have seven or eight Dice strung together upon two little pieces of Wire,
and they predict according to the falling of the Dice. The others, whom they
call Falkir, do their work with much more Ceremony. For they have before them,
upon a Table, thirty or forty little pieces of board, about an inch square,
very thinn and very smooth, which are marked with certain Characters on that
side which lies downwards. Upon one of these little pieces of board, he who
desires to know what is to befall him, is to lay down his Money, which the
Falkir immediately puts up, and no doubt this is that which is most certain in
the whole Mystery. That done, he turns over a Book that lies before him, about
three fingers thick, the leaves whereof are Painted with all sorts of Figures,
as Angels, Devils, Satyrs, Dragons and other Monsters, and he opens the Book
several times, till he finds one that has some rapport to the Characters upon
the little board. Neither is that done without Muttering between his teeth
certain inarticulate and not intelligible words; and this is the most
infallible prediction they have among them.

The political Government of Persia, The political Government of Persia.
differs not much from that of the Muscovites. Both are Monarchical, and so
Despotick, that the Prince governs with an absolute power, making his Will a
Law, and, without any account to be given of his so doing, disposing of the
Lives and Estates of his Subjects; who are so far his Slaves, that they do not
so much as murmur at the Violence, wherewith the greatest Lords of the Kingdom
are put to Death, without any kind of proceedings against them.

They call their Kings Schach, Paschach, and Padischach, words which have in a
manner all the same signification, to wit, that of King, or Lord. Yet does not
the Emperor of the Turks, when he writes to the King of Persia, give him the
quality of Schach, but that of Schich Ogli, that is to say, Ecclesiastic, or
Son, or Kinsman, of the Prophet. Those who say, the Kings of Persia assume the
quality of Choda, that is God, are mistaken. For Chodabende is the proper name
of a man, as Theodosius, Theodore, etc. and signifies, obliged to God, or a
Servant of God; though it must be confessed, that these Princes are
Vainglorious enough to assume extravagant Titles which make them equal to the
Sun and Moon, and Companions of the Stars; Ammianus Marcellinus says of Sapor,
King of Persia. It Is true on the other side, that they are as free to give the
same Titles to those Princes of Europe with whom they live in good
correspondence: for in the Letters which Schach Sefi writ to the Duke of
Holstein, he gave him the same qualities he assumed himself. They would not
have inscriptions of Letters filled with the Titles of the Kingdoms and
Provinces under their Jurisdiction: nay Schach-Abas would have no other title
at the head of a Petition than that of Schach, and one day said to a man that
had set several titles at the head of his Petition, Go thy ways, friend, thy
titles will make me neither more powerful nor more poor; Give me that of
Schach, since I am so, and think that enough.

Most Authors give the Kings of Persia of the last Race the quality of Sophi;
The quality of Sophi.
and the Kings themselves, especially those who have any zeal for their
Religion, are much pleased with the addition of that quality to their titles,
out of the affection they bear Schich Sofi, or Sefi, the first Institutor of
their Sect; as the Kings of France take the quality of most Christian; those of
Spain, that of most Catholic, and those of England, that of Defenders of the
Faith. Whence they say, Ismael-Sofi, Eider-Sofi: and of this a man must tax
notice in the reading of their History, inasmuch as if he do not, he may
confound the Names of the Kings, and attribute that to one which is to be
understood of another.

The Kingdom of Persia is Hereditary, The Kingdom of Persia Hereditary.
and may be enjoyed, not only by the Children lawfully begotten, but also, for
want of such, by natural Children, and the Sons of Concubines, who inherit the
Crown as well as the others, nay they are preferred before the nearest of the
Collateral Kindred, and the Nephews; since the Sons of Concubines and Slaves are
not accounted illegitimate in Persia, as we have said elsewhere. For want of
Sons, the Crown falls to the next of Kin by the Father's side, descended from
Sefi, who are as it were Princes of the Blood Royal, and are called Schich
Eluend. They enjoy many great Privileges and Immunities, but many times, they
are very poor, and have much ado to live. The Children of the Kings of Persia
make the Houses where they are Born, Free, and they are converted into
Sanctuaries; insomuch that if the Queen be delivered in any other place besides
the Metropolis, the House is compassed with a noble Wall, to be distinguished
from others.

If we may credit Q. Curtius, The arms of Persia.
the ancient Arms of Persia were the Crescent, as the Sun was that of the
Greeks. Now, the Turks take the Crescent, and the Persians, the Sun, which they
commonly put upon the back of a Lion. But upon the great Seal of the Kingdom
there are only Characters, It is about the bigness of a half Crown piece,
having within the Ring; To God alone, I Schich Sefi am a Slave with all my
Heart: and in the Circumference; Aly, let the World say what it please of Thee,
yet will I be thy Friend. He who before thy Gate does not account himself dust
and ashes, though he were an Angel, dust and ashes be upon his Head. In the
Letters he sends to Christian Princes, he observes this respect, that he does
not set the Seal on the same side with the Writing, but on the other side, at
the very bottom.

The Ceremonies performed at the Coronation of the Kings of Persia, The
Coronation of their Kings.
are not done at Babylon, as some Authors would have it believed, nor yet at
Kufa, as Minadous affirms, but in the City of Ispahan. They are not so great as
those done at the Inauguration of Kings in Europe. They set upon a Table, about
half an Ell high, as many pieces of Tapistry of Gold an Silver, or Embroidered
as there have been Kings of the same Family, before him who is then to be
Crowned; so that at the Coronation of Schach Sefi, there were eight; inasmuch
as he was the eighth King of Persia of that House, accompting from Ismael the
first. That done, the chiefest of the Chans present him with a Crown, which he
kisses thrice, in the Name of God, of Mahomet, and of Aaly, and having put it
to his Forehead, he delivers it to the Grand Master of the Kingdom, whom they
call Lele, who puts it on his Head; and then all present make Acclamations, of
Long live the King; God grant, that, during his Reign, one year may be
multiplied to a thousand; they kiss his Feet, make him great Presents, and
spend the remainder of the day in Feasting and Merriment. There is no such
thing among them as the taking of any Oath of Allegiance, or obliging the King
to swear to the Conservation of the Privileges, or Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, in regard their subjection is pure Slavery; whereas among Christians,
the condition of Kings is quite otherwise, for the obligation is reciprocal,
and the Kings are not absolute Lords, but are, or ought to be, Fathers of their
people.

The Kingdom is of great extent. Those Provinces which lie most remote from the
chief City, and the ordinary residence of the Kings, cannot be governed
otherwise than by Governors or Lieutenants, who, in Persia, are called Chans;
the word not signifying the employment they have in the said Governments, but a
quality which all great Lords assume to themselves. Of this we shall speak more
at large elsewhere, and here give a short account of the Kings of Persia who
have reigned within these hundred years; with some assurance, that the Reader
will think this digression the less tedious, when he finds me positively
affirming, that there is hardly any Author who has written the History of
them. We said before that the Emperor of the Turks, when he writes to the King
of Persia, give him not the quality of Schach, but of Schich-Ogli, in as much
as he is not descended from the ancient Family of the Kings of Persia, but from
a later, Ismael^^^
as we shall now make it appear.

Hassan Padschach, who was surnamed Vssum Cassan, that is to say Grand Signor,
by reason of the great Wars he managed, and where in he was always victorious,
was of the Family of the Asimbels, and lived about the end of the fifteenth
age. He was Governor of Armenia Major, and having gained several victories
over the Turks, he reduced several Poovinces by force of Arms, and among
others, Persia, whereof he made himself King. Vssum Cassan had three sons,
Vnger Mahomed, Calul, and Iacup. The first was strangled by the Father's order,
Iacup.
against whom he had taken up Arms; and the second was poisoned by the third;
so that Vssum Cassan dying, on the fifth of January 1485. Iacup succeeded him:
but he enjoyed not long the Kingdom he had got with the price of his Brother's
blood; for his own Wife poisoned him within a short time after his coming to
the Crown. After his death, Schich Eider, son-in-law to Vsum Cassan, surnamed
Harduellis, from the place of his birth, pretended to the succession; but it
was disputed against him, first by Iulaver, a Persian Lord, and afterward by
Baylinger, and Rustan.

The Turks, who slighted Schich Eider, by reason of the meanness of his birth,
(notwithstanding which Vssum Cassan had bestowed on him his Daughter Martha,
whom he had had by Despina, the Daughter of Calojean, King of Trebisond) and
hated him, particularly upon this account, that he had quitted their Religion,
presuming that a man, who pretended much to Devotion and Sanctity, would be
unexpert, if not unfortunate in the business of Arms, declared a war against
him, entered Persia with a powerful Army, gave him battle, and defeated him, in
so much that falling alive into their hands, they flead his head and pulled
down his skin over his ears. It Is true, there is so great discrepancy among the
Persian Authors, concerning this story, that we have been forced herein to
follow the common opinion; though there are some who affirm, that Eider was not
King, but that Rustan, King of Persia fearing he might come to be King, treated
him as we said before. Nay, some affirm, that this happened in the time of
Iacup, the son of Vssum Cassan. But what cannot well be denied of the story,
is, that, about that time, the Turks became Masters of most of the Provinces of
Persia; and that Rustan was succeeded by Agmar, Ismae^^
Carabem, and Aluantes.

Schich Eider, who first changed the quality of Schich, that is, Prophet, into
that of Schach, or King, left one son named Ismael: but he was so young, when
his Father died, that all could be done for him, was to secure his person at
the house of a certain Lord of the Province of Kilan, a Kinsman and Friend of
his Father's, named Pyr Chalim, who brought him up, and instructed him in the
same Sect his Father had been of. Ismael being come to years of discretion,
discovered himself to be a person of an excellent understanding and great
courage, and there were the greater hopes conceived of him, out of this
respect, that his Father, who was well skilled in Astrology, had Predicted that
his son should do wonders, as being the person designed for the restoration of
Persia, by the reduction of many Provinces, and the propagation he should make
of his new Religion. Accordingly, he made such advantage of the opportunity he
then had, while the Emperor of the Turks was at Constantinople, little
thinking what might happen toward Persia, that having, by the advice of Pyr,
sent Deputies into the neighboring Provinces and Cities, he so far satisfied
them of the right he had to the Crown, and prevailed with them to reflect on
the interest of the State, and the preservation of Religion, that having got
together an Army of twenty thousand men, with which he left Latretzan, in the
Province of Kilan, the Inhabitants of the other Provinces came in so fast, that
it was, of a sudden swelled to three hundred thousand. With this Army, he
marched straight to Ardebil, whence he forced away all the Turks, some few
only excepted, who were got into a street behind Schich Sefi's Sepulcher,
where they Petitioned for their lives, and promised to Embrace the Persian
Religion: and thence it comes, that the said street is, to this day, called
Vrume Mahele. It was upon this exploit that many Persians came to be surnamed
Kisilbaschs, as we have shown before.

Ardebil being thus reduced, Ismael went to Tabris Scamachie, and Iruan, and
recovered all the Cities and Provinces which the Truks had taken from his
Father, and had been possessed of ever since his death. He afterward entered
into Turkey, gave the Emperor battle, and defeated him. The particulars of
that War may be seen in the Letter which Henry Penia, who was then in Persia,
writ to Cardinal Sauli; and they agree with what the Persians themselves write
thereof. After this Victory he took Bagdat, Besre, Kurdestan, Diarbek, Wan,
Esserum, Ersingan. Bitlis, Adiltschouas, Alchat, Berdigk, Kars, Entakie. As
soon as he had secured the Frontiers against the attempts of the Turks, he
turned his Armies Eastward, and took, from the King of the Indies, the Province
of Candahar, and the next adjoining Province, the same good success, which he
had had against the Turks, still attending him. 'Twas after this last Conquest
that he went to Caswin, to be Crowned. He stayed there but just the time
requisite for that Ceremony, and to refresh his Forces, with which he
afterward went into Georgia, Defeated the King of that Country, whom the
Histories call Simon Padschach, and forced him to pay him, yearly, three
hundred Bails of Silk, by way of Tribute. The difficulties which Schach Ismael
Sofi met with in all these Wars, were not so small but the Persians grew weary
of them, though the zeal of their Religion induced them to suffer the utmost
extremities; even death it self, with resolution enough. But the consequence of
these Victories, and the good success which Ismael had in all his designs, was,
that they raised him to so high an esteem, that all the other Princes of Asia,
nay, several Monarchs of Europe courted his friendship, by solemn Embassies,
which gave our Writers the first acquaintance they had with the affairs of
Persia. And whereas he made a strict Profession of the Persian Religion, and
had a great Devotion for Aly, so far as to assume the quality of Sofi, thence
it comes, that our Historians speak of him as the principal Propagator, nay,
indeed, as the first Institutor of that Sect. He died at Caswin, in the forty
fifth year of his age, and was buried at Ardebil. He had the reputation of
being a great observer of Justice, but it is affirmed of him, that he made no
great difficulty to drink Wine, and eat Swines flesh; nay, that, in derision of
the Turkish Religion, he had a Hog kept in his Court, which he named Bajazeth.

Schach Ismael Sofi left four Sons, whereof the eldest, named Tamas, succeeded
his Father in the Kingdom of Persia, Schach Tamas.
but not in the virtues and great endowments, which had made him considerable
all over the World. The three others, to wit, Helcasi, Beiram, and Sor-Myrza,
had certain Territories assigned them. This change was perceived at the very
beginning of his Government. For Sulthan Solomon, Emperor of the Turks, taking
notice of the weakness of Schach Tamas in matter of Government, raised a
powerful Army, enters the Kingdom of Persia, under the Conduct of Sulthan
Murat Bascha, and recovered from the Persiaus all that Schach Ismael had taken
from the Turks, Bagdan and Wan only excepted. Two years after Solomon came in
person into Persia, where he took Tauris, and besieged Sulthania, Schach Tamas,
who was in the mean time at Caswin, having not so much courage as to raise the
Siege. But as good fortune would have it, it happened, that during the time of
the Siege, in the month of March, some few days before their Naurus, there
fell so great a Rain, accompanied by such a violent Tempest, that the Snow of
the adjacent Mountains dissolving, and the water overflowing all the Valleys,
Soliman who was incommodated thereby; and fround the water of a reddish color,
contracted happily from the ground, through which it had passed, was frightened
thereat, raised the Siege, and departed the Kingdom. In his retreat, he
destroyed all before him, but was engaged near Bitlis, where he was absolutely
defeated. Schach Tamas dying the 11. of May 1576. in the 68th. year of his age,
and the 42th. of his reign, left a very ill repute of himself among the
Persians, who speak of him with some prejudice, as well in relation to his
Conduct, as his Courage. They change him, among other things, that he was very
careless of doing Justice to his Subjects, and had committed the administration
of the affairs of his kingdom to his Ministers, as they are ordinarily wont to
do, who cannot love a people that has no affection for them. They blame him
for protecting Hamajum, the Son of Selim, king of the Indies, to whom he gave
Refuge and Protection, against the Persecutions of Tzelaleden Ekbet, his Uncle,
a younger Brother of Selim's, who had usurped the Crown, and demanded him of
Schach-Tamas, that he might be put to death. But that was a generous and just
action, and is not to be produced among the examples that are alleged of his
violence and injustice, especially with any parallel to the ensuing story.

Lavassap, Prince of Armenia, had two Sons, Simon and David, and left the
former, as being the Elder, the Government of the Country. David, who had too
much courage to be satified with a small Territory, found means to raise an
Army, such as might frighten his Elder Brother, who, being really afraid of an
insurrection, desired the assistance of Schach Tamas, who sent him four
thousand Horse, ordering him who had the Conduct of them, if possible, to take
David alive, and send him to him, nay, to Crown him, in case he should comply
so far as to be Circumcised, but with this Proviso, that he should prefer
Simon, if he would take the Crown upon the same terms. David being taken in the
first Engagement, soon hearkened to the King of Persia's Proposition, and
promised to change his Religion, and do homage for his Province, if the King
would establish him in his Brother place. Simon expressed a greater constancy,
and would not change his Religion; whereupon he was imprisoned, in the Fortress
of Kahak; and David, who after his Circumcision was called Dant-Chan, was
forced to content himself with the Government of Tiflis. Simon remained some
time a prisoner; but the Reputation he had of being a good Soldier, and a
knowing person, brought him, first, acquainted, and afterward very intimate
with Schach Ismael the second, the Son of Schach Tamas, who promised to deliver
him out of the Captivity, which he was to expect should have lasted as long as
he lived, and to restore him to his Territories, if he would change his
Religion. He did so, at left in outward thew, but Ismael dying soon after, he
was little the better for his Promises. He was indeed set at liberty some time
after his death; but Chodabende, coming to the Crown, minded not much the
performance of his Brother's promises, and forced Simon to content himself with
the employment he bestowed on him in the Wars he was then engaged in against
the Turks.

Schach Tamas had by several Wives eleven Sons, and three Daughters, and among
the rest, Mahomet, on whom upon his having shaken hands with all business, by
reason of the weakness of his sight, and embracing a devout kind of life, they
bestowed the Surname of Chodabende, that is (servant of God) Ismael, and Eider.
Tamas had a particular kindness for Eider, his third Son, and it was his design
to prefer him before the two Elder in the Government of the Kingdom, and to
make the more sure work, he permitted him, even in his life time, to assume
some part thereof. But after his death, the Lords of the Country sent to
Mahomet, to desire him to accept of the Crown, which was his right by birth;
and upon his refusal, they sent to Ismael, who was, by his Father's order a
Prisoner in the Castle of Cahak, for having, upon his own account, made
incursions into the Turks Dominions, though, in his Soul, he had an aversion
for the Persian Religion, and in effect made profession of the Turkish. Eider,
who was but seventeen years of age, was so impatient to get into the Throne,
that he had the insolence to put the Crown on his head, and present himself, in
that posture, before his Father, who was then near his death; and desirous to
make his advantage of Ismael's absence, and Mahomet's refusal, made use of the
interest which Periaconcona, his Sister, had with the Grandees, to mount the
Throne. The Princess, who had declared for the interest of the elder Brethren,
considering with her self, that in their absence, Eider might commit such
violences as might prevent her securing of the Crown for Ismael, thought it not
safe openly to oppose the pretensions of the younger Brother, but suffered him
to assume the title of King, and he was acknowledged as such all over the
Palace. But she had all the Avenues so well Guarded, that it was impossible for
Eider's friends to carry any tidings of it to the City. So that the young
Prince coming to distrust his Sister's carriage, and apprehending it might be
their design to sacrifice him to his Brother's ambition, concealed himself
among the Women, till such time as Schamal, a Georgian, his Uncle by the
Mother-side, found him out, and cut off his head.

Ismael 11. coming to the Crown, in the 43. year of his age, and reflecting on
his long imprisonment, confirmed, by his procedure, the ancient Proverb, which
says, that the reign of a Prince who returns from Exile, is ever cruel and
bloody. This man began his, with the executions of all the Kindred and Frinds of
Eider, and all those who had advised his Father to imprison him, pursuing those
whom he could not get apprehended, even as far as the Frontiers of Turkey, and
at his first entrance, discovered the inclination he had to the Turkish
Religion, which he openly professed. To find out how the Grandees of the
Kingdom were affected toward him, a report was spread abroad of his death, but
he rose up again too soon for those, who had been so imprudent as to discover
their aversion to his Government. For he brought to execution all such as he
conceived any jealousy of, and exercised so great cruelty, that, his own
Sister thinking not her self secure, thought it her best course to prevent her
own destruction by attempting the King's. Certain it is, he died a violent
death, on the 24. of November 1577. and that Periaconcona was the Contriver and
Instrument of it: but this was done so secretly, that it is yet not known, how
Persia came to be rid of this Tyrant.

Ismael II. being thus removed out of the way, Mahomet Chodabende,
they made a shift so far to satisfy Mahomet Chodabende, his elder Brother, of
the danger, whereto he exposed his Person and the Country, if he suffered the
Crown to come to a strange Family, that, at last, he resolved to accept of it,
but upon condition, that, before he were obliged to make his entrance into
Caswin, they should bring him the head of Periaconcona, who had imbrued her
hands in the blood of two of his Brethren, and in whose power it was in some
respects to dispose of the Kingdom. She prostituted her self to several of the
Grandees about the Court, but particularly to Emeer Chan, whom she had raised
into some hopes of enjoying the Crown. As soon as Chodabende came to the
Government, which was in the year ^578. he seemed not to mind any thing so much
as to imitate those among his Predecessors, who had contributed most to the
preservation and glory of the Kingdom of Persia. This is the Testimony given of
him by F. Bizarrus; but the Persian Authors affirm, on the contrary, that never
any Prince managed a Scepter with greater negligence and pusillanimity, in so
much that finding himself not fit for the carrying on of any Military design,
he spent all his time within the Palace, in Gaming, and diverting himself with
the Ladies. That he was unfortunate to his Wars, and that the common Enemy
tas^ing advantage of his poorness of spirit and effeminacy, made incursions
into Persia, to wit, the Turks on one side, and the Vsbeques Tartars, on the
other: That both these Nations possessed themselves of several Provinces
belonging to that Crown, and were not dispossessed of them, as long as Mahomet
Chodabende lived. Minadous observes, among other passages, that the Turks
killed, in one battle, five thousand Persians, and took three thousand
prisoners, whom the Turkish General ordered to have their heads cut off, and
having heaped them up together, he sat down upon the heap, and gave audience
to a young Prince of Georgia who was come to give him a Visit.

Mahomed Chodabende died in the year 1585. Emir Hemse.
leaving three Sons, Emir Hemse, Ismael, and Abas. The former, as being the
eldest of the three Brethren, was Crowned King of Persia; but Ismael, troubled
to see the Crown on his Brother's head, managed his affairs so well, and
insinuated himself so much into the affections of the chiefest Lords of the
Kingdom, that they conspired the death of Emir Hemse. Ismael III
Ismael got him killed, in the eighth month of his reign, by a sort of people
disguised in VVomens Clothes, who being covered with Veils, according to the
custom of the Country, came to the Schach's Chamber door, and told the Guards,
that they were the Wives of some of the Chans, whom the King had sent for, and
that they waited there in obedience to his commands. The Murderers were no
sooner got into the Chamber, but they fell upon the King and killed him. But
this death was soon after revenged upon the Contriver of it, as we shall relate.

Abas Myrza, that is to say, Prince Abas, Mahomet Chodabende's third Son, was
Governor of Herat, and was come thence, with an intention to see Emir Hemse,
his Brother; but hearing, in his way, of the Murder committed upon him, and
having some reason to fear, that the Murderer might be advised, to secure
himself in the Throne, by a double fratricide, returned back into his
Government. The year following Abas Myrsa being advanced as far as Caswin,
while the King was at K^^abach, there happened such frequent differences
between the people belonging to the two Brothers, that they heightened the
reciprocal distrust they had one of another. Abas Myrsa had about him a Lord of
great quality, named Murschidculi-Chan, who had acquired so great reputation by
his prudence and courage, that Chodabende had entrusted him with the conduct
and education of that young Prince. This Murschidculi, knowing that Ismael, who
had expressed but too much animosity against his Brother, would never pardon
him, and that his life absolutely depended on that of his Master; and
considering withal, that if he proved the occasion of raising that Prince,
whom he had Governed from his youth, to the Throne, he would have a great share
in the Government, resolved to prevent the King, who was already come into the
Province of Karabach, purposely to march in person against his Brother. To
effect this, some of the great Lords of the Court, who hoped to get into favor
with Abas Myrsa, corrupted one of Ismael's Barbers, named Chudi, who, coming to
trim him, Ismael III killed.
cut his Throat. The Lords, who were present at the execution, and thought it
concerned them to justify themselves, killed the Barber, cut his body into
little bits, and reduced it to ashes. Thus died Schach Ismael III. in the
eighth month of his reign.

Abas Myrsa had already so for gained the affections of the Persians,
Schach-Abas succeeds.
by his vivacity of spirit, and the moderation they had observed through the
whole course of his life, that he ascended the Throne with the general
satisfaction of all the people. But the favor of Murschidculi-Chan, who had
most contributed to his advancement, continued not long: for assuming to
himself the same authority over the King, which he had had before, while he was
only Myrsa or Prince, he became troublesome and insupportable, and that in so
high a degree, that, one day, the King, desirous to give his opinion upon an
affair of great importance, which had been proposed, Murschidculi-Chan had the
insolence to tell him, before a full Council, that he was not fit to speak of
affairs of that nature, they being such as were above the reach of his age and
understanding. The King dissembled, for the present, his Resentment thereof,
but considering, that that Authority of Murschidculi-Chan would eclipse his
own, and expose him to the contempt of his Subjects, he resolved to rid his
Governor out of the way. He complained of his Favorite's insolence to three
Lords of his Council, named Mehediculi-Chan, Mahomed Vstadscahi, and
Aliculi-Chan, of whom he thought he might be most confident; but finding they
demurred upon the business, and, being not too well assured what resolution the
King would take, in a business, which to them was of the greatest consequence
of any in the World, that they endeavored to dissuade him from it, he told
them, it was his will, that Murschidculi-Chan should die by their hands, and
that if they made any scruple to do it, he should find means to be obeyed, as,
on the contrary, he should not be backward in requiting their services, who
upon that occasion should implicitly execute his commands. This, extremity
forced them to follow the King into his Favourite's Chamber, into which he got
ere Murschidculi-Chan was awake; so that the King, having found him lying on
his back, with his mouth open, gave him the first blow over-thwart the mouth.
The rest gave him each of them a stab; but Murschidculi-Chan, being a very
stout man, had the courage to get off his bed, and put himself into such a
posture, as should have given them more fear, than he had received hurt from
them, and no doubt he had dispatched some of his murderers, had it not been
for one of his Grooms, who coming in at the noise, with a batle-axe in his
hand, the King said to him; I would have the life of Murschidculi-Chan, who is
become my Enemy; Go, dispatch him, and I will make thee a Chan. The Groom did
his work as the king commanded, went straight to his Master and dispatched him.

The next day, the king put to death all the relations and friends of
Murschidculi-Chan, that so he might be absolutely eased of all the
disturbances, which their discontents might have given him; and conferred on
the Groom the Dignity of Chan, with the Government of Herat. This Execution
happened in the year 1585. which was the first of the reign of Schach Abas.

The first actions of Schach-Abas made a sufficient discovery of his
abililities in order to Government, and that there was no necessity of his
being any longer under the Eye and Conduct of another. All his thoughts were
bent upon recovering the great Provinces, which the Turks and Tartars had
usurped from the Crown of Persia, and he made an absolute resolution to declare
a War against both those Nations, upon that score. Being one day at Caswin, he
took a walk out of the City, and asked the Lords who followed him, whether
there could be a nobler Country than that where they then were. There were
some took the freedom to tell him, that it was iudeed an excellent good
Country, yet was it not to be compared with the Province of Fars, much less
with that of Chorasan, especially that part of the said Province, which the
Vsbeques had taken from Persia, Engages in a War against the Tartars.
in the time of his Father's reign. Upon this discourse, he immediately
resolved upon a War against the Tartars, and having raised a powerful Army, he
entered Chorasan. Abdulla, Prince of the Vsbeques, met him, and, at first, with
some advantage over him, in regard the Plague, which was got into Schach Abas's
Army, and the unseasonable weather kept it from being in action. The two Armies
were near six months in sight one of the other; but at last Schach Abas set
upon Abdulla, and forced him to retreat to Mesched. Schach Abas continued three
years in Chorasan, Abdulla being not in a condition to disturb him in his new
Conquest, and when he attempted it, he was so unfortunate, that his Army was
not only defeated, but also he himself, with Tilem-Chan, his Brother, and his
three Sons, who were in the Army, fell into the hands of Schach-Abas, who
ordered them all to have their heads cut off. Afterward Schach-Abas went to
Ispahan, and found it so excellently well situated, and the Country about it
so pleasant, that he resolved to make it the Metropolis of the Kingdom,
beautifying it, to that end, with many Magnificent Structures, and among
others, the Allacapi, or Sanctuary, and the Sumptuous Mosquey Mehedi, of which
we have given an account already. In which Magnificence the Lords of the Court
were desirous to imitate him, by building many rich and noble Palaces.

After these victories, And against the Turks.
he marched against the Turks, and having understood by his Spies, that the
Garrison of Tabris thought of nothing less than a War, he got together, with as
little noise as might be, a little Army, with which he went in less than six
days from Ispahan to Tabris, though it be ordinarily eighteen days journey
for the Camels. Being come to the passage of Scibli, within four leagues of
Tabris, where the Turks kept a party, rather to receive the customs upon
Commodities, than to hinder the entrance of the Persians, he, with some
Officers left the Army, and advanced as far as the Turn-Pike. The Turks
imagining they were Merchants, the Secretary of the Custom-house addressed
himself to Schach-Abas, and asked him for the duties. Schach-Abas told him,
that he who carried the Purse was coming behind, and, having caused
Dsulfakar-Chan to come up to him, he bid him give the other some money; but
while the Secretary was telling it, he ordered one to dispatch him, made the
Soldiers who kept the Post to submit, and passed over his Army. Aly Bascha,
Governor of Tabris, having intelligence hereof, got some Troops together, at
lest as many as the distraction of his affairs would permit him to do, and went
to meet Abas, but there being a great inequality between the Forces on both
sides, he was overcome, and fell into the hands of the Persians. In the midst
of the City, there was a Citadel, built by Hassan Padschach, otherwise called
Vssum Cassan, which the Turks kept a month after, but, at last, it was taken,
by intelligence, and afterward demolished. Thence he went to Nachtzuan; but
the Turkish Garrison quitted the place, upon the first news they received of
the Persian Army's coming toward it, and retreated to Iruan. Schach-Abas
ordered also the demolishing of the Citadel of Nachtzuan, called Kischikalaban,
and went and lay before Iruan, which he took after a siege of nine months.
This Conquest facilitated his reduction of all the other Cities and
Neighboring Provinces, all which were reduced, save only the Fortress of
Orumi, the strong and advantageous situation whereof, being on the point of a
Rock, putting him out of all hope of taking it by storm. He besieged it eight
months together, but finding that the Kurdes did him more mischief than the
Turks themselves, though they were a free people, and had no dependence on the
Grand Seignor, he gained the affections of the chiefest among them by Presents
and Promises, putting them in hope of all advantages on his side, if they would
help him to take in that place, and promised them all the booty they should
find there. The Kurdes, who live only by Rapine, were willing to serve him
upon those terms. But Schach-Abas having received that service from them, and
taken the Fort by their means, sent to invite the chiefest among them to come
and Dine with him. He had his Tent made with so many turnings and windings, and
had those so done over with Clothes, that they who came in saw not such as were
but six places before them. He had planted two Executioners in the way, who
dispatched his Guests as they came into the Tent; and this course he took with
them, out of an apprehension they might do the Turks the same services he had
received from them. He made Kahan Chan, Governor of Orumi and the neighboring
Province, and marching still on, he became Master of all between the Rivers of
Cyrus and Araxis, and reduced into his power the City of Scamachie, after a
siege of seven weeks, together with the whole Province of Schirun, which he
left under the Command of Dsulfakar-Chan his Brother-in-law, The Inhabitants of
Derbent, hearing what success Schach-Abas had had against the Turks, killed
their Turkish Garrison, and submitted to the King of Persia. Then he entered the
Province of Kilan, and reduced to obedience those people who fell off from the
King's of Persia, in the time of Schach-Tamas. He ordered to be made near
Lankeran, where a great Fen in a manner covered that whole Province, and made
the entrance into it very difficult, a way or Bank of Sand, and settled Chans in
several places of the Province; to wit, Baindurc-Chan, at Astara, Mortusa
Kuli-Chan, at Kesker, Heider-Chan, at Turkabun, a Visir, at Rescht, Adam
Sulthan, in Mesanderan, and Hosslein-Chan, at Astarabad.

It was Schach-Abas his intention to sit still with these Conquests, but the
quiet he had after them was so little, that he had hardly the time to have his
Sovereignty acknowledged. For, being at Ispahan, about a year after this War,
intelligence was brought him that the Turk was coming into Persia, with an Army
of five hundred thousand men; whereupon he got together all the Forces he
could, and appointed them their Rendezvous at Tabris, and ordered all the
Inhabitants of the Frontiers, to retire, with their Cattle, into Cities and
Walled Towns, to destroy all in the Fields, that the Enemy might make no
advantage thereof in order to his subsistence. The Turk having advanced, and
encamped near Tabris, the King of Persia caused it to be published through his
Army, that such as were willing to serve as Volunteers, should list themselves
apart, and that for every Turks head they brought him, he would pay fifty
Crowns. About five thousand Persians listed themselves upon that account; so
that not a day passed, but some heads were brought in, and at his rising every
morning, a good number was presented to him. Nay, one Soldier, named Bairam
Tekel brought him one morning five together, and by that means gained the
favor of Schach-Abas, who raised him to the Dignity of Chan.

At the end of three months Tzakal Ogli, who commanded the Turkish Army, sent
a kind of Challenge to Schach-Abas, telling him, that if he had as much
confidence in God and the Justice of his cause, as he would have the World
believe, he should not be afraid of accepting a general Engagement, which he
thereby profer'd him. Abas was content, and having divided the ground, the Sun
and the VVind with his Enemy, gave him battle. It lasted all that day; and the
night following, the Turks, who had lost many of their men, retreated. The next
day word was brought to the Camp, that the Turks were retreated; but Abas, who
feared it might be a stratageme of theirs, stood on his Guard for three days,
keeping the Army upon continual duty, and not so much as going himself into his
Tent during that time; till that the Scouts having at last brought him word,
that the Enemy was effectually retreated toward the Frontiers, he advanced to
the Mountain of Sehend, where he Encamped, and there it was, that Mahumed Chan
Kasak, Schaheruch-Chan, Esschar, and Iischan, Kurtzibaschi, were cut to pieces,
for having given the king poison, who immediately taking an Antidore, received
no hurt thereby.

Two years after this War, the Turk made another invasion into Persia, with an
Army of three hundred thousand men, and besieged the Fortress of Iruan, in the
Province of the same name: but he was forced to raise the siege and to retreat.
About two years after that, Murat Bascha, General of the Turkish Army, besieged
and took Tabris, and kept it four months, within which time there happened
five set battles between those two Nations, with little advantage to the
Persians. And yet at last Schach-Abas defeated the Turks, and recovered the
City out of their hands. Being after this expedition, returned to Ardebil, he
there caused to be killed Dsulfakar, Chan of Scamachie in the manner we have
related before, and put into his Government Iusuf-Chan, an Armenian by birth,
and by condition a Slave, who had a long time served him as on ordinary
Footman.

After this, Persia enjoyed a Peace of twenty years together, at the end
whereof the Turks entered it again with a powerful Army, under the Command of
Chalil Basscha, with whom joined also several parties of the Tartars of Crim
and Precop. Schach-Abas sent against them Kartzschuckai-Chan, the most Valiant
and most Fortunate of all his Captains, who wearied them out, and forced them
to retreat, after several Engagements, or Skirmishes rather, wherein he took
Prisoners two Tartar-Princes, Omersbeg, and Schahinkerai-Chan, and the Bashaws
of Egypt, Aleppo, Erserum, and Wan, The King, instead of treating them ill,
presented each of them with a Garment and an excellent Horse, and sent them
back without paying any Ransom.

Afterward, Schach-Abas went into Georgia, where he staid nine months. During
his abode there, Tameras-Chan, the Son of Simon had the confidence to enter
with an Army into the Province of Seggen, in the midst of Georgia, and to give
battle to Schach-Abas; but he was forced to retreat with great loss. While he
was in those parts, he paid his Army twelve Musters together, and hearing that
his Soldiers spent most of their money in Tobacco, he forbad the use of it,
with such severity, that he caused their Noses and Lips to be cut off, who were
found to have taken of it, An excessive severity.
contrary to the Prohibitions: and having understood, that a Merchant, who knew
not that the king had forbidden the use of Tobacco, and brought several Bags of
it into the Army, in hopes to make a greater advantage thereof among the
Soldiers, he ordered him to be set on a heap of Fagots, with all his Tobacco
about him, which being set on fire, he, and his Commodity were reduced to smoke
and ashes.

After this was it that Schach-Abas went into Kilan, where he put to death his
eldest Son, as we shall relate anon. Schach-Abas had three lawful Wives, and
four or five hundred Concubines. By his three Wives he had so many Sons, to
wit, Sefi Myrsa, Chodabende Myrsa, and Imanculi Myrsa. He ordered the two
younger to have their eyes put out with fire, and confined them in the Fortress
of Alamuth, under a very strict Guard. The eldest Son was born of a Christian
Slave, of Georgia. This Prince having cast his Eye on a very handsome young Maid
of Circassia, whom a Merchant of Scamachie had presented to Schach-Abas, fell
in Love with her, and entreated his Father to permit he should marry her. The
king who dearly loved that Prince, by reason of the great compliance he had for
him, consented thereto, and ordered her to be brought up in the Seraglio, near
the Mother of Sefi Myrsa, who had by her Sain Myrsa, since king of Persia,
under the name of Schach-Sefi.

The Over-severe, Schach-Abas puts to death his eldest Son.
or rather, Cruel, and Tyrannical reign of Schach-Abas, began to grow so odious
and insupportable to the Grandees of the kingdom, that some had the confidence
to cast a Note into Sefi Myrsa's Chamber, whereby they discovered to him, that
if he would not stand in his own way, he might immediately succeed the king his
Father, and that if he would consent to the Execution of the Design they were
engaged in to that end, they would soon show him how the business was to be
effected. Sefi conceived a horror at the Proposition, whereby he was to be a
complice in his Father's death, and thereupon carried the Note to the king,
accompanying his free and innocent proceeding with so many protestations of the
sincerity of his intentions, and an absolute dependence on his Father's will,
as might well satisfy any other mind less distrustful than that of
Schach-Abas. He could not forbear expressing outwardly, that he was very well
satisfied with his Son, and commended his affection and piety: but he
afterward fell into such frights, as deprived him of all rest, and obliged him
to change his Lodging twice or thrice in a night, with such disturbances, as he
conceived he could not be delivered of otherwise than by the death of his Son.
According to these apprehensions, being one day at Rescht in the Province of
Kilan, with the whole Court about him, a Flatterer so heightened the
distractions of his mind, by the false Alarm he gave him of a new Conspiracy of
Sefi Myrsa's, with several of the great Lords of the kingdom against him, that
he resolved he should dye.

He thought, at first to employ, in that Commission Kartzschuckai-Chan, General
of the Army, or Constable of Persia, and would have obliged him to kill his Son
with his own hands. This Lord, was Originally descended from an Armenian
Family, born by Father and Motherside of Christians, and had been stolen away
in his youth by the Tartars, who had Circumcised and sold him to Schach-Abas.
The freedom and sincerity of his disposition and demeanor, had gained him the
friendship of the whole Court, and his courage had so well settled him in the
king's favor, that having, by his means, had several great victories over his
Enemies, he had conferred on him the Command of his Army, and looked upon him
with such respect, that he never called him by any other name than that of Aga,
that is, the Captain.

The king would needs put him upon this important service, as considering him
to be the person, who of any in his kingdom was the most obliged to him for his
Fortune. But the grave old Man, having laid down his Sword at the kings feet,
and cast himself by it, told him, that he was so infinitely obliged to his
Majesty, that he would rather lose a thousand lives, than that he should be
ever reproached to have imbrued his hands in the blood of any of the royal
Progeny, so far was it against his Soul to commit a Crime of that nature, and
by putting to death the Heir of the Crown, execute a command which the king
could not impose upon him without regret, and which were no sooner put in
Execution, but he would repent him of it. Schach-Abas was satisfied with this
excuse, from him, and made the same Proposition to a Gentleman, named
Bebut-Beg, whom he found not so scrupulous as Kartzschuckai-Chan. This man
having undertaken that Commission went immediately to Sefi Myrsa, and having
met him coming out of a Bath, riding on a Mule, and accompanied only by a
single Page, lays hold on the Bridle, stays the Mule, and says, Alight, Sefi
Myrsa, it is the pleasure of the king thy Father that thou should die, and
thereupon throws him down. The unfortunate Prince, joining his hands together,
and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, cries out. O my God! what have I done to
deserve this disgrace? Cursed be the Traitor who is the occasion thereof. But
since it is the pleasure of God thus to dispose of me, Gods will and the King's
be done.

He had hardly the time to speak out those words, ere Bebut gave him two stabs
with a Chentze, which is a kind of Poniard, ordinarily worn by the Persians in
their Girdles, wherewith he laid him dead upon the place. The body was dragged
into a Fen not far thence, where it continued above four hours. In the mean
time, the news of this Murder being brought into the City, the people ran in
multitudes to the Palace, threatened to force the Gates, and would have the
Authors thereof delivered up to them, in so much that the Chans, who were
afraid, that in the fury of their first insurrection, the people would wreak
their malice indifferently on all they met, forsook the king, and got away. The
Queen, Sefi Myrsa's Mother, understanding that her Son had been killed by the
king's express order, was so overcome with grief, that not minding the humor
of the Prince she had then to do withal, who could not endure the lest
opposition, she ran into the king's Apartment, and not thinking it enough to
reproach him with his inhumanity, and the barbarous death of an innocent
Prince, and one whom he had tenderly loved, she flew in his face, and beat him
with her first. But the king, instead of being angry with her, was at an
absolute loss, and at last made her answer with tears in his eyes; What would
you have had me to do? News was brought me that he had a design upon my life.
There is now no remedy, what is done cannot be recalled.

On the other side, Schach-Abas had no sooner heard of this execution, but it
repented him of having commanded it, and expressed no small regret, that he had
proceeded with so much precipitation in a business of that importance. He
thought it not enough to acknowledge it done by his order, but would needs
continue ten days shut up in a place where he would not see the light of the
Sun, as having all that time a Handkercher over his eyes. He lived a whole
month, and eat no more than what was purely necessary to keep him from
starving. He went in mourning a whole year, and all his life after he wore not
any thing about him, that might, as to matter of Clothes, distinguish him from
the meanest of his Subjects. And in some fort, to eternize the memory of the
Prince, he caused the place where he was killed, to be encompassed with a high
Wall, made a Sanctuary of it, and allowed it a certain Revenue, for the
entertainment of a great number of poor people. The first ten days of his
greatest mourning being over, he went from R^scht to Caswin, where he would
needs entertain the Chans, whom he any way suspected, and the Flatterer, who
had made him jealous of the Prince, at a Dinner, but he caused poison to be
mixed in their Wine, and kept them so long at Table till he saw them all dead in
the place.

The action of Bebut-beg was indeed recompensed with the charge of Daruga, of
Caswin, and some time after with that of Chan of Kesker; but he could not avoid
the punishment which so base a compliance too well deserved. For the first
journey the king made to Caswin, after that we spoke of before, he commanded
Bebut, to go and cut off, with his own hands, his Son's head, and to bring it
him. He was forced to obey, and Schach-Abas seeing him coming into the Room
with his Son's head, asked him how he did. Bebut made answer, Alas my Liege, I
think I need not tell you; I have been forced with my own hands to kill my only
Son, whom I loved above any thing in the World; the grief I shall conceive
thereat will bring me to my Grave. The king replied, Go thy ways, Bebut, and
consider how great must have been my affliction, when thou broughtst the news
of my Son's death, whom I had commanded thee to put to death. But comfort thy
self, my Son and thine are no more, and reflect, that thou art in this equal to
the King thy master.

Not long after this unhappy Paricide, Assassinate punished.
Bebut ended his life after an extraordinary manner. For, soon after he had
taken possession of the Government of Kesker, one of his servants, giving him
water to wash after Dinner, according to the Persian custom, poured it on so
hot that it scalded his hands, which incensed him so that he threatened to have
him cut to pieces; but the Slave prevented him, and considering that he who had
been so barbarous as to murder his Prince and his own Son, would make no great
difficulty to rid the World of a servant, he conspired with some of his
Gamerades, who expected no better treatment from their Master, and killed him
the night following in his drink. Schach-Abas was not much troubled, that that
hateful object was removed out of his sight, and would not have prosecuted the
Murderers, had not the other Chans represented to him, that, if they were not
made examples, no Lord could think himself secure among his servants, after he
had given them some theatning language.

But Schach-Abas's affliction, and the regret he expressed for his Son's death,
how great soever they might be, took not off the just apprehensions the Widow
conceived, that he had a design to put to death his Grandchild Sain Myrsa.
Whence it came, that she kept him a long time concealed, and would not suffer
him to be brought to Court, though the King, who saw his two younger Sons,
whose eyes he had caused to be put out, were excluded the Government, by the
Laws of the Kingdom, designed that little Prince to succeed him. It Is reported
he had a great tenderness for him, and yet lest he should appear to soon, and
the vivacity of his spirit revive the affection which the people had expressed
toward his Father, he endeavored to have his senses dulled, and commanded
there should be given him every day about the begness of a Pea of Opium, the
use whereof is very common in Persia, as we have said elsewhere; but that the
Mother, instead of giving him that Drug, made him often take Treacle, and
several other preservatives against the poison, which she conceived she had
some cause to suspect might be given him.

While Schach. Abas was in Kilan, Tamaras-Chan, taking advantage of his
absence, entered again with an Army into Georgia, and recovered all those
places, out of which he had been forced. The King sent thither Aliculi-Ghan;
Mahumed-Chan, Kasack, and Mortusaculi, Chan of Talisch, and several other
Chans, who could do no good there, but brought word back, that they had found
the Enemy so advantageously posted, that they durst not set upon him. The King
punished their seeming prudence with death, and went the next year in person
into Georgia, protesting at his departure, that if he returned victorious from
that War, he would sell the Georgians, at an Abas, or fifteen pence a head.
Upon which occasion they say it happened, that the King being Master of the
Field, and having taken a great number of Prisoners, a Soldier came to him,
with two Abases in his hand, and desired him to sell him two handsome young
Maids, who were among the Prisoners, and that the King remembering his Oath,
permitted him to take his choice. It was about this time, that most of the
Georgian Christians, who lived at Ispahan at the time of our being there, came
out of their Country to settle themselves in the Metropolis of the Kingdom.

Much also about the same time, was it, that Schach-Abas received Letters from
Bekirkcha, who, under the Grand-Seignor, commanded the Garrison of Bagdat or
Babylon. This man, dissatisfied with the Court, upon his being denied the
Government of that place, at the Bassa's death, under whom he had had the
Lieutenancy, proffered Schach-Abas to deliver up the City to him. The King
hearkened to that Proposition, and immediately took his march with a good Army
toward those parts; but ere he got thither, Bikirkeha's discontent was over,
so far that he sent Schach-Abas word, that he had only Powder and Bullets at
his service. He was so netled at the affront, that he protested not to return
thence till he had taken the City, though it should cost him his life.
Accordingly, having passed over the Ditch, after a siege of six months, and
having set fire to a Mine, which work the Persians are very excellent at, he
caused an assault to be given, entered the breach, and became Master of the
City, without any composition. Bikirkeha being found among the Prisoners, was
sown up in a raw Ox-Hide. and in that condition placed near the Highway, where
the King ordered him to be sed, till such time as the heat of the Sun having
made the Hide shrink together, he died a very painful death. His Son cast
himself at Schach-Abas's feet, and satisfied him so far of his being wholly
unconcerned in his Father's proceeding, that having begged his Pardon, he by
that submission obtained the Government of Schiras, which Schach-Abas made no
difficulty to bestow on him; in regard that lying at a great distance from the
Frontiers of Turkey, he feared not his proving unfaithful to him.

The year following, the Emperor of the Turks caused Bagdat to be besieged, by
the Bassa, Hasis Ahmed; but Abas forced him to raise the siege, and continued
eight months together in sight of the Turkish Army, till such time as sickness
having consumed a great number of the Turks, who were not so well able to
endure the great heats, as the Persians, Hasis was obliged to retreat to
Constantinople. At his return from this expedition, Schach-Abas began to build
the City of Ferabath, in the Province of Mesandran, upon occasion of a
Village, named Tahona, situated upon a pleasant River, which, not far thence,
falls into the Caspian Sea.

This Victory procured him but two years rest. For the Turkish Emperor,
desirous to recover Bagdat, sent Chalil Bassa, with an Army of five hundred
thousand men, to reduce it. Schach-Abas commanded Cartzschugai-Chan to march to
the relief of the City, with a small Brigade, but consisting of choice men,
and he followed him in person, with the whole Army. He himself got into the
City, and sent Kartzschugai-Chan to meet the Turk, whom he wearied out with
perpetual skirmishes for six months together. At last he gave him battle,
disordered, and defeated him, forcing him to fly as far as Netzed. Upon the
first news of the Victory, Schach-Abas left the City, to go and meet
Kartzschugai-Chan, and being come near him alighted, and said to him; My
dearest Aga, I have by thy means and conduct obtained so noble a Victory, that
I would not have desired a greater of God, come, get up on my Horse, it is fit I
should be thy Lackey. Kartzschugai was so surpised at this discourse, that he
cast himself at his feet, entreated his Majesty to look on him as his slave,
and not to expose him to the derision of all the World, by doing him an honor
so extraordinary, as that it was impossible he could any way deserve it. But
notwithstanding all his entreaties, he was forced to get up, the King and the
Chans following on foot, only seven paces. Schach-Abas had many other Wars
against the Turks; but the most signal Victory he ever got over his Enemies,
was at the reduction of the City of Ormus, which he recovered from the
Portuguez, six years before his death. Of that an account shall be given in the
subsequent Travels of Mandelslo.

About the end of the year 1629. he took a journey to Ferabath, in the Province
of Mesanderan, which was the place he most delighted in of any in his Kingdom;
but he there fell so ill, that, perceiving he should not escape, he sent for
four Lords of the chiefest of his Council, to wit, Isa-Chan, Kurtzibaschi,
Seiul-Chan, Tuschmal, or Councellor of State, Temerbey, Ouwogly, or Lord
High-Steward, and Iusuf Aga, chief Gentleman of his Chamber, who being come to
his Bedside, he told them. That, firmly believing the sickness he was then in
would be his last, it was his pleasure, that his Grandchild, Sain Myrsa,
should succeed him, and assume his Father's name, obliging them all solemnly to
promise him, that, after his death, they would religiously execute his Last
Will. The Astrologers had told Schach-Abas, that Sain should reign but eight
months at most; but when these Lords would have spoke to him of that
Prediction, the King made answer, Let him reign as long as he can, though it
were but three days; it will be some satisfaction to me, to be assured, that
he shall one day have on his head the Crown which was due to the Prince his
Father.

'Twas conceived, he had had some poison given him, upon which presumption the
Hakim Iusuf, his Physician, ordered him hot bathing for eight days together,
and for four days afterward another kind of Bath, of Cows milk: but all these
remedies being either ineffectual, or too weak, he seriously prepared himself
for death, even to the appointing of the place where he would be interred. But
that the people might not certainly know it, he commanded the Ceremonies of his
Funeral should be Celebrated in three several places, at the same time, to wit,
at Ardebil, Mesched, and Babylon; but the more general report is, that the body
was carried to Babylon, and thence to the Netzef, of Kufa, near the Sepulcher
of Aly, upon this account, that Schach-Abas, going to Kufa, soon after the
reduction of Babylon, and looking on the Netzef, said, he had never seen a more
delightful place, and that he should wish to be there interred after his
death. What ere became of his body, certain it is that he died, in the year
1629. having lived 63. years, and reigned 45. He discovered the strength of his
memory and understanding, in the order he took, at his death, that it might be
kept secret, till his Grandchild were assured of the Succession; commanding
that they should expose his body every day in the same Hall, where he was wont
to administer Justice, set in a Chair of State, with his eyes open, his back
turned to the Hangings, behind which stood Iusuf Aga, who ever and anon made
him lift up his Arm, by means of a silk string, and answered those things which
were proposed by Temir-beg, on the behalf of such as were at the other end of
the Hall, and who were thereby persuaded that Schach-Abas was still alive. This
was so well personated, that his death was concealed, for the space of six
weeks.

The Persians have a Veneration for the memory of this Prince, The Persians
honor the memory, of Schach-Abas.
and speak of him as of the greatest King that Persia has had these many ages.
And indeed, take but out of his life, the examples of cruelty we have touched
at before, it must be acknowledged, that, if we may not number him among the
good, yet must we assign him a place among the greatest Princes, of any
mentioned in the modern Histories. He was Wise and Valiant, and has heightened
the glory of Persia by the great Victories he obtained over his Enemies,
extending by that means the Territories of his Kingdom of all sides, toward
the Indians, the Turks and the Tartars. The Augustine Friars told us, that, he
was so far from having any aversion for Christian Religion, that, on the
contrary, he often came to their Monastery, made them Dine with him, sent for
them in the night, put their Beads about his Neck, sighing, and saying, that he
knew not which Religion he should embrace, and discoursing very familiarly with
them. He had a great sense of the miseries of the Poor, and took a particular
care for their subsistence. Whence it came that it was ordinary with him, after
his departure out of some City to return into it again incognito, to go to the
Market, and to examine their weights, and the goodness of their Bread and other
Provisions, severely punishing such as he found guilty of any Circumvention.
Being one day at Ardebil, he ordered to be put into a red hot Oven, a certain
rich Baker, who refused to sell Bread to the Poor, under pretense that he was
obliged to keep it for Abas, and his Soldiers, who, as he said, could never be
satisfied; and he caused to be fastened, by the back, to the hooks on which the
Mear had hung, a Butcher, whose weights had been found too light. He took a
pleasure in bestowing, in Alms, the money he got from public places, as being
persuaded they could not be acceptable to God, if that sacrifice were made of
that money which is taken from the people. He could not endure those Judges who
received money on either side, and severely punished such as were guilty of
Concussions, and manifest injustice. For, coming to understand that a Kasi, or
Judge of Ispahan, after he had taken Presents from both sides, to wit, some 70.
l. sterling. from each, would have persuaded them to come to accommodation, he
ordered him to be set on an Ass, with his face toward the tail, which served
him for a Bridle, and upon his Judge's Robe caused to be put the Entrails of a
Sheep newly killed, cut in several places, and in that posture he made him take
several turns about the Maydan; having it cried before him, that this should be
the punishment of a corrupt Judge.

While Temir-beg, Schach-Sefi succeeds his Grandfather.
and Iusuf Aga, exposed, at Ferabath, the Carkase of Schach-Abas, as we said
before Seinel-Chan made all the haste he could to Ispahan, whither he brought
the news of the King's death to the Daruga, Chofrou Myrsa, and having consulted
with him about the means they should use to advance Sain Myrsa to the Throne,
they went together to the Appartment of the Princess, his Mother, which is
called Taberick-kale, and entreated her to put the young Prince into their
hands. The Mother, who still had before her eyes the violent death of her
Husband, believing it was some fiction, and that they had order from
Schach-Abas to Murder the Prince, locked her self up in her Chamber, and made
all passages so fast, that these two Lords being out of all hopes to persuade
her, and being afraid to let slip the opportunity of executing the deceased
Kings last Will, after they had lain three days at the Princesse's Chamber
door, sent her word, that if she would not open, they should be forced to break
it. Upon this message she at last opened the door, and presented to them the
Prince her Son; but, conceiving it was in order to his present execution, with
these words; Go child to the same place where thy Father is, here are the
murderers ready to dispatch thee. But when she saw those Lords prostrate
themselves, and kissing the Prince's feet, her fright was turned into perfect
joy. The Lords conducted the Prince to the Palace-Royal, where they set him in
the Divan-Chane, upon a Table of stone, on which were as many Carpets, (which
they call ( Kalitse Ahdalet, or Carpets of Justice) as there had been Kings of
Persia of his Family, (in as much as every King, at his first coming to the
Crown, causes one to be made for him) and having sent for all the Chans and
Lords who were about Ispahan, they Crowned him, kissed his feet, and wishing
him a long and happy Reign, settled him in the Throne of his Ancestors.

Immediately after the Ceremonies of his Coronation, he took the name of Sefi,
according to the desire of Schach-Abas, and bestowed on the Chosrou Myrsa the
Dignity of Chan, with the name of Rustam, as desirous, by that means, to
revive, in his person, the memory of the great Hero, so highly Celebrated in
their Histories and Romances.

It is reported that Schach-Sefi came into the World with his hands all bloody,
The beginning of his reign cruel,
and that Schach-Abas, his Grandfather, hearing of it, said, that that Prince
should often bath his hands in blood. Accordingly, till the time of our
Embassy, his reign had been so cruel and bloody, that Persia had not, for many
ages before, seen so many executions. For immediately upon his coming to the
Crown, he followed the counsel of the Chancellor, Predecessor to him whom we
knew, and made away Rustan-Chan, whom he had made Generalissimo of the Armies
of Persia, and Governor of Tiflis, and several other Lords, and caused to be
cut in pieces, or killed with his own hands, all his own relations, and what
other persons soever he was any way distrustful of, by that means so
accustoming himself to blood, that, when he was incensed, he spared none, and
killed or ordered to be killed, upon trivial occasions, such as he was any way
displeased with. I shall here produce a few examples thereof, that the Reader
may, by them, as a Pattern, judge of the rest of his life.

He began his cruelties, by an only Brother, though born of a Concubine, whose
eyes he caused to be put out. Chodabende, and Imanculi Myrsa his Uncles,
younger brethren to Sefi Myrsa, whom Schach-Abas, their Father, had confined in
the Castle of Alamuth, thirty Leagues from Caswin, after he had put out their
eyes as we said before, were cast down headlong from a high Rock, for this
reason, as Sefi said, that, having lost the benefit of their sight, they were
useless in the World. Afterward he dispatched Isa-Chan, his Uncle, after he
had cut off the heads of his three Sons, upon the following occasion.

Isa-Chan was so much in favor with Schach-Abas, that the King, willing to
make it appear what extraordinary respect he had for him, bestowed on him his
Daughter, by whom he had the three Sons, Kills another Uncle and his three Sons.
whom Sefi put to death. She was a very handsome Woman, and of a pleasant
conversation, insomuch that Schach-Sefi, her Nephew, was extremely taken with
her company. This Princess, being one day with the king, took the freedom to
jest with him, and to tell him, she much wondered, that he, who was so young
and vigorous, and had so many great beauties to command, could get no Children,
whereas she had had three by her Husband. The king made answer, that he was
young, and having, as he hoped, many years to reign, there would be time enough
to get Heirs to inherit the Crown after him. But the Princess desirous to keep
on the jest, replied, that, ground not well cultivated would hardly bring
forth any thing, imprudently adding, You speak very well, my Liege, but I fear
me, that after your death the Persians will be glad to pitch upon one of my
Sons to succeed you. The king was extremely troubled at the boldness and
bitterness of the jest, but made a shift to dissemble it, and to get out of
the Room, without the Princesse's perceiving that he was incensed against her.

The next day, the King commanded the three Sons of Isa-Chan to be brought to
him; the eldest was 22. years of age, the second 15. and the third 9. and
having conveyed them into a a Garden, he caused their heads to be cut off, and
at Dinner time having disposed the three heads into one of those covered Pots,
in which the Persians bring the Rice and Meat to be set on the Table, and
sending for the Mother, he ordered them to be taken out one after another, by
the Nose, and said to the Princess; See the children of a Woman who bragged so
much of her fertility; go, thou art young enough to bear more of them. The
Princess was so astonished at that horrid Spectacle, that she was not able to
speak a word; but perceiving in the Kings eyes and countenance the eruptions of
his indignation, which she imagined might break forth to her unavoidable death,
she cast her self at his feet, kissed them, and said to him, All is well, all
is well; God grant the King a long and happy life. This forced compliance saved
her life. But as soon as she had left the Room, Sefi sent for Isa-Chan, and
pointing with his finger to the heads of his Children, asked him what he
thought of that pleasant Spectacle. Isa-Chan, who knew what humor the Prince
was of, and whom he had to do withal, smothered the tenderness of a paternal
affection, and made answer, that he was so far from being displeased thereat,
that if the King had commanded him, to bring the heads of his Sons, he would
have been the Executioner himself, and that he would have no Children, if the
Kings pleasure were it should be otherwise. This base and brutish flattery
saved Isa-Chan's life at that time; but the King reflecting, that he could not
be faithful to him, at lest that it was impossible he should love him, after
he had been so treated by him, gave order his head should be also cut off.

We said before, Kills Seinel-Chan with his own hands.
that Isa-Chan was one of those who had most contributed to the advancement of
Schach-Sefi to the Throne of his Predecessors. Seinel-Chan had also done much
in that business; whence it came he was not to expect any better treatment than
the other, from him whom he had raised to a condition to commit so many
inhumane actions. Schach-Sefi, having forced the Turks, to raise the siege they
had laid before Bagdat in the year 1632. encamped with his Army near Hemedan,
at which place, several Lords, reflecting on the executions wherewith the King
had signalized the beginning of his reign, said among themselves, that since in
his tender age, he could commit so many cruelties, it was likely he would in
time, extirpate all the Grandees of Persia. Seinel-Chan, who was present at
this discourse, went immediately to the King, and gave him an account of what
had past in that conference, advising him to rid himself of those who had most
credit among them, and so secure his own life. The King made him answer; Thy
advice, Seinel-Chan, is so good, that I will immediately follow it; and I will
begin with thee; for thou art the person of greatest age and most authority
among them, and must needs be of the conspiracy. And I shall in that follow the
example of the King, my Grandfather, whose reign was neither safe nor happy,
till he had executed him, who had the same charge of Kurtzibachi, which thou
now enjoyest. Seinel-Chan replied, that that would be no hard matter for him to
do; that, for his part, he was arrived to the greatest age man could attain,
and that it would not trouble him much, his life should be shortened some few
days: but that his Majesty would happily one day be troubled, that he had put to
death one of his most faithful servants, and that he should rather consider
the importance of the discovery he had made to him, and the earnestness he had
therein expressed to serve him. This answer delayed the execution of what the
king had resolved to do; so that he thereupon went to his Mother, who had
followed him in his expedition, with the other Ladies of the Seraglio,
according to the ancient custom of Persia, to acquaint her with what he had
heard. The next morning the Princess sent for Seinel-Chan to her Tent door, to
hear from him all the circumstances of that Conspiracy, but as soon as the king
heard that Seinel-Chan had spoken to his Mother, he was so incensed thereat,
that he went and killed him with his own hands, in the presence of the Princess.

This certainly was one of the greatest persons in the kingdom, who ought his
fortune to his conduct, and the trust wherewith he had served Schach-Abas in
several affairs of great importance; whereof we shall here allege only one
example.

Schach-Abas being to send a solemn Embassy to Lahor, to the Great Mogul, about
the differences there were between them for the Frontiers of Candahar, would
needs employ in it Seinel Chan, as being the person, whom, of all his
Ministers, he reposed greatest confidence in; and as he took leave of him in
order to his departure, he said to him: For this employment, I have made choice
of thee, Seinel, out of the assurance I have of thy fidelity, whereof I expect
the utmost demonstration in this Embassy. For as this shirt sticks close to my
back, so would I have thee to be so tenderly concerned in my interests, that
thou do no thing in this charge that may be prejudicial either to my reputation
or my service. Seinel-Chan promised him his utmost care, and was as good as his
word. For being come to the Moguls Court, he refused doing him reverence,
according to the custom of the Country, by putting both hands first to the
ground, and afterward upon his head, but he entered the Room with a grave and
settled gate, and only saluted the king with his Salomalek. The Indian Prince
was so troubled at it, that he sent to entreat him to demean himself otherwise,
and to render him the same respects, as the Ambassadors of Persia were wont to
approach him withal. Nay, he would have prevailed with him to do it, by the
proffers he caused to be made him of several considerable Presents; but
perceiving, that nothing would work with him, he bethougth him, to make,
opposite to his Throne, a Door so low, that Seinel-Chan could not come in at
without stooping, and consequently not avoid doing him reverence. But
Seinel-Chan found means to elude that Artifice, and entered the king's Chamber
backwards, so that the first part that came within the Door was his britch.
This irreverence put the Mogul out of all patience; so that, he not only
forbore making him those Presents, which are ordinarily made Ambassadors, and
in those parts are of no small value, but also forbad his people to supply him
with the ordinary Provisions; which reduced him to such extremities, that he
was forced to sell his Plate, and what ever there was of Gold or Silver about
the Saddles and Trappings of his Horses, to subsist. The Mogul made his
complaints to Schach-Abas, of this demeanor of Seinel Chan, and the king
pretended to be troubled at the little respect he had rendered the Mogul; but he
made it appear, on the contrary, that he was well satisfied with his behavior
toward that Industhan Prince. For not long after he honored him with the
Title of Chan, and bestowed on him the Government of Hemedan, Terkisin,
Kulpcjan, etc. to be enjoyed by him during his life, but upon condition, he
should be always about the Court, as having one of the chiefest places in the
Council.

Seinel-Chan being thus killed, the Princess, Schach-Sefi's Mother; who
conceived a horror thereat, represented to him how much he was to blame, for
treating in that manner one of his Grand-Father's most ancient servants, one
that had done himself so great services at his coming to the Crown; and the
king seemed to be somewhat troubled thereat. But he reflected not much on those
Lectures, since that not many days after, the Chancellor, the Lord high
Steward, nay, his own Mother found not better treatment from him; as may be
seen in the following relation.

The king being, Puts to death his Chancellor and others.
during the foresaid expedition, encamped in the Mountain of Sehend, within a
League of Tauris, and the Lord High Steward, named Vgurlu-Chan, being one day
to command the Guard about the king, at which the Chans are obliged to be
personally present, when the king is in the field, it was his misfortune to go
and Sup with Tabub-Chan, Chancellor of the kingdom, who had also invited the
Dawatter, that is, the Secretary of the Closet, whose name was Hassan-beg, and
a certain Poet. Supper being near ended, the Kischitzi-baschi, that is, the
Captain of the Guard, named Mortusaculi-Chan, came to give Vgurlu-Chan notice,
that it was time to come to the king's Tent. But the Chancellor, unwilling to
dismiss his Guests, sent away the Kischitzi-baschi, and told him that there was
no great necessity of Vgurla-Chan's being there in person, and that the king,
being but a Child, would take no notice of Vgurla's absence, and so he might
set the Guard well enough without him.

The Captain reiterated his instances for his coming away, and pressed the high
Steward to come and do his duty, and told him, that otherwise he should be
obliged to make his complaints thereof to the king. The Chancellor, importuned
with this discourse, commanded his people to thrust Mortusaculi-Chan out of
Doors; which they did, but so roughly, that he was hurt in the face. He went,
all bloody as he was, to the king, and gave him an account of what had passed
at the Chancellor's. The king commanded him to say nothing of it: but the next
day, the Chancellor being at Dinner with the king, and sitting in his ordinary
place, the king having commanded him to come near, said to him; What does he
deserve, who, eating the bread, and living by the pure favor of his Master, is
so far from paying the respect due to him, that he slights him? The Chancellor
made him answer, he deserves death. Whereto the king replied, Thou have
pronounced thy own sentence; Thou art the person, who living only by my favor,
and eating at my Table, have had the insolence to treat me as a Child, in the
discourse that passed yesterday, between thee and Mortusaculi-Chan. The
Chancellor would have justified himself; but the king not giving him the time
to do it, run him into the belly with his Cymitar. The Chancellor, as he fell
down, only cried out, Ha Padschach-Aimahn, and the king commanded his Rika, who
are a part of his Guard who carry Pole-Axes, and many times do the work of
Executioners, to cut his head into little bits. There happened to be one of the
Pages, who conceiving a horror at that cruelty, turned aside, and would not
look on it, which the king observing, laid to him; since thy sight is so
tender, it will be of no great use to thee, and commanded his eyes to be
immediately put out.

The Execution of Tabub-Chan was soon followed by that of Vgurlu-Chan, who
received his by the king's command, from the hands of Aliculi-Chan, Divanbeg,
or President of the Counsel, who was sent to bring him his head. Vgurlu was
coming out of the Bath, and going to put on his Clothes when Aliculi-Chan came
to him. Vgurlu seeing him coming in, attended by two servants, was a little
startled at it, though they were very good friends, and said to him, Woe is me!
dear friend, I fear thou bringst me no good news. Aliculi-Chan made answer,
Thou art in the right, my dear Brother, the king has commanded me to bring him
thy head, the only way is to submit; whereupon he closed with him, cut off his
head, made a hole in one of the cheeks, thrust his finger through it, and so
carried it to the king, who looking on it, touched it with a little Wand, and
said; It must be confessed thou were a stout man, it troubles me to see thee in
that condition, but it was thine own fault; `tis pity, were it only for that
goodly beard of thine. This he said, by reason his Mustachoes were so long,
that, coming about his neck, they met again at his mouth, which is accounted a
great Ornament in Persia.

Mortusaculi had his charge conferred on him. Hassan-beg, who had also been at
the Chancellor's Feast, received the same treatment; and the Poet, who was
afterward fasly accused of having put this Execution in Verse, and sung them
in the Maidan, was conducted to that place, where they cut off his Nose, Ears,
Tongue, Feet, and Hands, whereof he died some few days after.

Not long after this Execution, the king sent for the Sons of these Lords, and
said to them; You see, I have destroyed your Fathers, what say you of it?
Vgurlu-Chan's Son said very resolutely, what does a Father signify to me? I
have no other than the king. This unnatural answer restored him to the Estate
of the deceased, which otherwise would have been Confiscated to the king: but
the Chancellor's Son was reduced to great misery, and had not any thing allowed
him of all his Father had enjoyed, for his expressing a greater Resentment of
his death, than Compliance for the king.

The king, being come to Caswin, issued out his commands, that all the Lords
and Governors of Provinces should come to Court. They all obeyed this order,
save only Alymerdan-Chan, Governor of Candahar, and Daub-Chan, Governor of
Kentze, who thought it enough to assure the king of their fidelity, by sending
him, each of them, one of their Wives, and one of their Children, as Hostages;
but the king thought not that submission sufficient; whereupon Alymerdan-Chan
absolutely revolted, and put his person and the Fortress of Candahar under the
Protection of the king of the Indies. Daub-Chan, understanding by the Achta, or
Groom of the king's Chamber, who had been sent to him, how dangerous it were
for him to come to Court, took the advice of his friends, and resolved to
retire into Turkey. To effect his design, he thought good to try how his
servants stood affected toward him, and having found there were fifteen among
them who were unwilling to follow him, he caused them to be cut to pieces in
his presence, writ a very sharp Letter to the king, and carried away all his
Wealth along with him, to Tamaras-Chan, a Prince of Georgia, his
Brother-in-law, and went thence into Turkey, where he still lived at the time
of our Embassy, and was much respected by Sulthan Ibrahim, Emperor of
Constantinople. The king, to be revenged of both, sent their Wives to the
houses of public prostitution, and exposed the Son of Daud-Chad to the
brutality of the Grooms about the Court, and the common Executioners of the
City; but Alymerdan's Son, by reason of his beauty, was reserved for the king's
own use.

Sometime afterward, the king sent orders to Imanculi-Chan, Governor of
Schiras, Brother to Daud-Chan, to come to Court. He had notice sent him of the
intention the king had to put him to death: but he made answer, that he could
not be persuaded they would treat him so ill, after he had done such
considerable services to the Crown: but however it might happen, he would
rather lose his life, than be out of favor with his Prince, and become a
Criminal by his disobedience.

According to this imprudent resolution, he came to Caswin, where the Court
then was; but he was no sooner come, ere the king ordered his head to be taken
off. Schach-Sefi intended to save the lives of Imanculi's Children, and, no
doubt had done it, had it not been for the ill Office which was rendered them by
a wicked Parasite, who, seeing the eldest Son of them at the king's feet, aged
about 18. years, his friends it seems having advised him to make that
submission, told his Majesty, that he was not the Son of Imanculi, but of
Schach-Abas, who had bestowed one of his Concucines in marriage on the Father,
being before hand with Child by him.

That word occasioned the death of that young Lord, and fourteen of his
Brethren, who being conducted to the Maidan, were all beheaded near their
Father's body. The Mother made a shift to get away, with the sixteenth, into
Arabia, to her own Father's, who was a Prince of those parts, and as we were
told. he was living at that time, and had his Habitation at Helbise, three
days journey from Besre, or Balsara.

The bodies of these executed persons remained three days in the Maidan in the
open air, till that the King, fearing the lamentations, which the Mother of
Imanculi made there day and night, would have raised the people into an
insurrection, commanded them to be taken away.

The Persians do still bemoan the death of this Imanculi-Chan, out of a
remembrance of his liberality. He was the Son of Alla-Werdi-Chan, who, upon his
own charge, built the Bridge of Ispahan, and who was as much looked on as any
Lord in Persia, for the noble actions he had done in the Wars.

The King's cruelty was as great toward the Ladies, as his inhumanity toward
the men. For, about that time he killed one with his own hands, and committed
several other murders. When he intended any Execution, he was ordinarily clad
in Skarlet, or some red stuff, so that all trembled when he put on any thing of
that color. These unheard of cruelties frightened all that came near him, and
put some upon a resolution to shorten his days by poison: but that which they
gave him proved not strong enough, so that he escaped the effects of it with a
sickness of two months. As soon as he was recovered, he caused and exact
enquiry to be made, whereby it was discovered, by means of a Woman belonging to
the Seraglio, who had been ill-treated by her Mistress, that the poison had
been prepared in the appartment of the Women, and that his Aunt, Isa-Chan's
Wife, had caused it to be given him. He revenged himself sufficiently the night
following: for the Seraglio was full of dreadful cries and lamentations, and
it was found the next day, that he had caused a great Pit to be made in the
Garden, wherein he had buried forty Women alive, whereof some were Ladies of
the Seraglio, others their servants, and such as attended on them. It was also
much about the same time, that a rumor was spread abroad, that his Mother died
of the Plague; but it is more likely the accompanied the forty Ladies, who had
been buried alive, as we said before.

He expressed, when occasion required, courage enough, and it is certain the
beginning of his reign was remarkable for the great Victories he gained over
his Enemies. He ^^press'd more te^^rity than courage in his actions.
He defeated Karib-Schach in the Province of Kilan. He forced the Turks to
raise the siege of Bagdat, and took by as^ault the Fortress of Eruan; though,
to speak impartially, the glory of these good successes be due to the Valor
and Conduct of his Generals, and to fortune rather than his prudence: for he
discovered not much in any of his actions, which were for the most part
temerarious, and without any dependence one of another. To prove this, we need
only instance the reduction of Eruan.

The King, finding that, after a siege of four months, his affairs were little
advanced, fell into that impatience and despair, that he would go in person
upon the assault of the place, saying, he would rather dye in the in the
attempt, than with infamy rise from a place, which the Turks had heretofore
taken in three days. He had already put on the Clothes of one of his Footmen,
that he might not be distinguished from others, and had given order for the
storming of the Place, when the Lords, who durst not contradict him, entreated
the Princess, his Mother, to represent to him, how impossible it was to take a
place before there was a breach made, and that the danger whereto he would
expose himself, would have no other effect, than his own death and ignominy,
with the destruction of the whole Army. All the answer she could get to these
representations, was, a good box o'th'ear, the King being still bent upon his
former resolution of assaulting the Place, and to that purpose he had taken a
Pole-Ax in his hand to lead them on. But the principal Lords cast themselves at
his feet, and entreated him to grant them but one day more, wherein they
promised to do all that lay in the power of men against the Place. They
obtained their desire, ordered the Whole Army to fall on, even to the boys, and
carried the Place by storm; but they lost in the action above fifty thousand
men.

The good success, which till that time had attended his designs, soon changed,
after the executions of so many great persons as he had put to death: and of
this there was a remarkable instance in the loss of Bagdat, which the Persians
were not able to maint^ain against the Turks, who recovered it out of their
hands, twenty six years after they had taken it from them.

The only good action he did during his whole reign, is, that he sent back to
their several Habitations those poor people whom Schach-Abas had taken out of
Eruan, Nachtzuan, Chaletz, and Georgia, to the number of seven thousand, and
had brought to Ferabath, where they were employed in great buildings, and lived
in a miserable slavery: yet were there not above three hundred that made their
advantage of this good deed of his, all the rest having perished through
misery, and been starved.

He took great pleasure in drinking, Subject (...) wine.
and had a great kindness for such as bore him Company in that exercise: but
his ordinary divertisements were Women and Hunting, not much minding matters of
Government, or the administration of Justice to his Subjects.

He had three lawful Wives, His Wives*
one whereof was the Daughter of a Colonel; whose employment it had sometime
been to drive the Mules which brought water to the King's Kitchen, and came to
be known to Schach-Abas, by a service he did him one day while he was Hunting,
in helping him to some fair water, the weather being extremely hot, when no
other could meet with any. This service was requited by the Present the King
made him of the Village of Bilou, near Nachtzuan, where this Mule-driver had
been born. This was the first step or his advancement, and what made him noted
at Court, where he found means to get an Office, which is no hard matter in
Persia for such as have money, and having some time after taken an employment
in the Wars, he proved so fortunate therein, that he got the command of a
Regiment of a thousand men. Schach-Abas thought his Daughter so handsome, that
he made a Present of her to his Daughter-law, Sefi-Myrsa's Widow, and
appointed her to be brought up in order to a Marriage between her and his Son
Sain-Myrsa, since named Schach-Sefi, who, at his coming to the Crown,
accordingly Married her.

The second Wife was a Christian, the Daughter of Tameras-Chan, a Prince of
Georgia; and this Marriage confirmed the Peace which Schach-Abas made with that
Prince.

The third was a Tartar of Circassia, the Daughter of Bika, and Sister to
Prince Mussal, of whom we have often spoken heretofore. The Mother brought her
as far as the River Bustrou, at the time of our Travels, and writ to
Schach-Sefi, that she sent him her Daughter, not as a Concubine, or Slave; but
as his lawful Wife; That is was her hope he would look on her as such, and
that she should find from him a kindness and affection equal to that she her
self had expressed toward the Princess, his Mother, who, though she had been
her Slave and had often undressed her even to her Stockins, had been treated,
and looked on by her, as if she had been her own Daughter; That, on the
contrary, rather than her Daughter should be ill treated, she wished her
drowned, with all the misfortune that might happen to her, in the River Bustrou.

Besides these lawful Wives, His Concubines.
he had above three hundred Concubines; for, all the handsomest Maids all over
Persia were brought to him. The greatest Lords themselves Present him with the
Maids they either have brought up in their own houses, or are found among their
relations. Of this we had an instance in our time in the Calenter of Scamachie,
who having had some ill Offices done him at the Court, recovered the King's
favor, by presenting him with his own Niece, one of the greatest beauties of
the Country, and a sum of money sent to the Chancellor.

The Armenians, to prevent the searches which are often made amongst them for
Maids of twelve years of age, dispose of them in Marriage, if they are handsome,
before they come to that age. By reason of this great number of Concubines, it
happens, that the King lies with some of them but once, and then bestows them
on those Lords of the Court who are most in his favor.

Schach-Sefi died in the year MDCXLII. His death:
in the twelfth year of his reign, or, to speak more truly, his Tyranny. It Is
conceived his life was shortened by poison, as the only remedy they could make
use of against his cruelties, which they must needs be afraid of, who had so
many examples thereof perpetually before their eyes, wherein they sound that
neither Age nor Sex could secure any person from his inhumanities. As to his
person, there was nothing of this cruelty to be read in his countenance, but on
the contrary it was amiab^e, of a mild aspect, and his complexion so good as
gave but little grounds to infer he had so barbarous a heart. He was of a mean
stature, and very well shaped as to his person, and at the time of our Embassy,
Schach-Abas succeeds his Father.
he had but one Son, named Abas, who succeeded him in May the same year 1642.
being then but 13. years of age: and he it is who now reigns.

The Kings of Persia have the Provinces and Cities of their Kingdom Governed by
Chans, Sulthans, Calenters, Darugas, Visirs, and Kauchas, dignities and
employments which are conferred there according to valor and virtue, and not
in consideration of birth and extraction. Thence it comes that there are so
many persons of such resolute courage, that they cheerfully hazard their lives,
as knowing it is the only way to get into the greatest charges of the Kingdom,
which are neither hereditary nor venal in Persia. It Is true, the Children of
these Lords are looked upon, Dignities not Hereditary.
with some respect to their Fathers, and that they enjoy their Estates, but
they are never advanced to their dignities, but purely upon the account of
worth and services, from which they are inseparable. The King never makes any
Chan, but with the title, he gives him where withal to maintain it, and that
during his life, which many of them lose merely that they might be deprived of
their quality.

Every Province has its Chan, and its Calenter, who have their several
Habitations in the chief City. The Chan is as it were the Governor of the
Province, and is entrusted with the administration of Justice, with the power
of putting his Judgments in Execution, notwithstanding any Appeal. The
Calenter has the oversight of the King's Demesne, and the Revenues of the
Province, which he receives, and gives an account thereof to the Council, or,
by order from the King, to the Chan. The Daruga is, in a City, and the Kaucha,
in a Village, what the Chan is in respect of the Province. The Daruga does also
Execute the Function of the Calenter in his Jurisdiction, but with a dependence
on the Governor of the Province. The King employes the Chans and Sulthans in
the Embassies he sends to foreign Princes* but they are not so chargeable to him
as some conceive, in regard he finds but one half of the Presents which the
Ambassador carries along with him, the Province, whereof he is Governor, being
obliged to defray all the rest of the Charge.

Most of the Chans are obliged to maintain a certain number of Soldiers, who
are to be ready to serve in the Armies, when any occasion requires: and in this
is all the Revenue of the Province spent, not including what is raised by way
of Imposition, which is carried into the Exchecquer. Besides that, they also
send the King certain New-years-Gifts, which are very considerable. The
Provinces and Cities, which have no Chans, and are Governed by a Daruga, as
part of Georgia, the Cities of Caswin, Ispahan, Kascham, Theheram, Hemedan,
Mesched, Kirman, Ormus, etc. maintain no Soldiers, but pay Taxes to the King.
The order they observe, especially in the Frontier-Provinces, for the
subsistence of so great a number of Soldiers, is such, that it is no hard
matter to raise a powerful Army in a short time. And indeed this the Schach
makes very much his advantage of against the Potent Enemies he has about him,
and by whom he is in a manner encompassed of all sides, as the Vsbeques
Tartars, the Turks and Indians. He is never at quiet with the former,
concerning the Frontiers of Chorasan; with the Mogul, about those of Candahar,
and with the Turk, about the Provinces of Bagdat and Eruan, for which they are
in perpetual War, whence it comes that they often change Masters.

Their Armies consist only of Horse; The Persian Army consists only of Horse.
for the Infantery, which is, upon occasion, to serve on foot, is, in its
march, mounted as our Dragoons. The ordinary Arms of the Foot are Muskets; but
the Horse are Armed only with Darts and Javelins. They have used Muskets and
great Guns but since the reign of Schach-Abas, nor do they use the latter so
much in the assault as defense of places; in as much as their Armies making
ordinarily great days marches, and with little or no Carriages, it would be
troublesome to them to take great Guns along with them, as such as would much
retard their Expeditions. No slight or stratagem in War but they are apt enough
to make their advantage of. At the siege of Iruan, in the year 1633. they had
the invention of casting into the place, with their Arrows, small Glasses full
of poison, which so infected the air, that the Garrison was extremely
incommodated thereby, and made incapable of handling their Arms, Their Military
Offices.
for the defense of the place. They call the General of the Army Serdar, a
Colonel of ten or twelve thousand Horse Kurtzibaschi, him, who commands a
thousand men, Minbaschi, a Captain of a hundred men, Iusbaschi, and a Leader up
of ten men, Ohnbaschi.

At the time of our being there, all the Military Commanders were persons of
very mean extraction.

Ar^b, Schan of Schiruan was the son of a poor Countryman of Serab, and his
first employment had been in the Train of Artillery, wherein he made such
Discoveriers of his Conduct and Courage, that Schach-Abas bestowed on him that
Government, which is one of the most considerable in the Kingdom.

Aga-Chan was the Son of a Shepherd near Merrage. This man ordered his
business so well, at the siege of Wan, that his services were recompensed with
the Government of his Country.

Kartzschucai-Chan, was the Son of a Christian, of Armenia, and had been sold
to Schach-Abas, who made him a Chan, and afterward General of his Army. He
acquired so great reputation in that employment, that the Schach himself would
needs be his Lacquey, as we said elsewhere.

Salma-Chan, a Kurde by birth, had some time been an ordinary Groom.

Emir-Kune-Chan was the Son of one of that kind of Shepherds, who live in
Tents or Huts upon the Mountains, and grew so famous at the siege of Eruan,
that the King entrusted him with the Government of the whole Province. What a
particular kindness Schach-Abas had for this person, may be guessed by the
ensuing story.

The Turks, who lay before the City of Eruan, having raised the siege,
Schach-Abas got into the place, where he spent the best part of the night in
drinking with Emir-Kune, woe grew so familiar with him, that taking the King by
the Mustachoes, he kissed his very mouth, yet did not the King take it any way
unkindly. Emir-Kune who remembered not what he had done in his Wine, was much
astonished when some gave him an account of what had passed the next day, and
so frightened thereat, that hanging his Cytimar about his Neck, he went in that
posture to the King's Chamber door, according to the custom observed by such as
know they have deserved death, and by that submission beg their Pardon. The
King sent him word he might come in, whereto the other having made answer that
he was not worthy to set his foot within the King's Chamber, having abused his
goodness as he had, Schach-Abas comes out of the Room, and took off the Cymitar
from about his Neck, and delivered it to him, as an assurance of his favor.
But he strictly forbad him the drinking of any Wine ever after, in as much, as
being got drunk, he knew not what he did. Some time after Emir-Kune-Chan having
in a fight, been wounded in the Arm, and the Physicians having given it as
their opinion, that that abstinence would be prejudicial to his health, the
King did not only take off the prohibition he had made him, but sent him a
certain number of Mules laden with the best Wine in the Country.

The Persians hate and contemn Cowards, The Persians hate Cowards.
and the Officers who neglect their duty in the Wars are most severely
punished. An instance hereof was seen in Aliculi-Chan, Governor of Shorosan,
who having let slip the opportunity of engaging Tameras, Prince of Georgia,
though he might have fought him with advantage, Schach-Abas caused him to be
dressed in Woman's Clothes, and so sent him to the Army, where he was walked up
and down all day among the Soldiers. The allowance of a Hors-man is three
hundred Crowns per ann. toward the keeping of himself and his Horse; and that
of a Muskettier two hundred. They have the reputation not to be over-scrupulous
in the keeping of their word, as was seen in the Capitulation they granted the
Garrison of Iruan, which was very ill observed.

Those who speak of the Wealth of the King of Persia, The Schach's Revenue.
think they speak of a vast and incredible sum, when they assign him a yearly
Revenue of eight Millions of Gold, and imagine they raise the Reader into
admiration, when they affirm that the Province of Candahar alone brings in
yearly near a Million of Gold; that the Cities of Bagdat and Iruan, with the
Country thereabouts, pay in a manner as much, and that it has been found by
the Register's Office of the Chancery, that the King gets out of the Suburbs of
Ispahan, and the Villages within the Baylywick thereof, near forty thousand
Crowns. But those who know, that the Province of Normandy it self pays yearly
such a sum as amounts to almost as much as all the King of Persia's Revenue,
will grant there is no hyperbole in what we have affirmed. This Revenue was
very much diminished in the time of King Tamas, when the Turks and other
neighboring Princes overrun Persia, so as that they were possessed of several
Provinces belonging to that Crown. Besides, there is hardly any Bridge or
Passage, not only upon the Frontiers, but also all over the Kingdom, nay, in
all Cities almost, but there is somewhat to be paid, without any distinction of
persons, Foreiners or Natives. All Merchandises pay, and the King takes, upon
every Bail of Silk, ten Crowns. There is no Horse sold, but pays xv. d. to the
King; an Ox as much, and an Ass one half, and a Sheep, which are as thick as
Ants all over the Country, iij. d. a piece. The King lets out the
Caravanseras, which are in Cities, and are appointed for Lodgings for Foremers
and VVare-houses for Merchants, especially at Ispahan, where there are twenty
five of them, of which not any pays less then five thousand Crowns per ann.

He Farms out also the Fishing of the Rivers, the Baths, and Stoves, the places
of public Prostitution, and the Springs of Nefte. He sells also the water
which comes into the Fountains, and raises only from the River of Senderut, at
Ispahan, the yearly sum of sixteen thousand Crowns. All the Armenian
Christians, whereof there is a very great number in Persia, pay yearly a
Poll-money, of two Crowns for every head. Nay, what is more, there is not a
person, those only excepted, who are maintained by, or have some relation to
the King, but pays a Tax proportionably to what he gets, even to the very
Midwife, I say nothing here of the Presents brought the king from all parts,
and which fall by several Channels into the Prince's Treasury. The great Lords,
though they make good the king's Revenue, yet abate naught of their own
advantages, and find ways to fleece the Country, so as that it is not to be
admired there is so little wealth to be found among the people. For there is
nothing so true as what a certain Emperor sometime said, that it is impossible
the spleen should be swollen in any body, and that the other Members of the
same body should not be wasted and become Hectic.

'Twas also Schach-Abas, who ordered the melting down of seven thousand and two
hundred Marks of Gold for the making of the P^ate we have mentioned elsewhere,
which his Successors still produce at the entertainments they make Foreiners,
and consists for the most part in Dishes, Pots, Flaggons, and other
Drinking-Cups.

What we said before of the Military Officers, Officers of the Court.
to wit, that they were most of them but meanly clad, is as true in those
Officers who belong to the Court. For there was hardly any one, who could make
ostentation of but ordinary Parentage.

The Eatemad Dowlet, Chancellor.
or Chancellor, who was the President of the king's Council, the Soul of
affairs, the principal Minister of State, and as it were Viceroy of Persia, was
the Son of one who got his livelihood by writing at Mesanderan, as we have said
elsewhere. These Scriveners, as I may call them, are employed only in the
Coppying and Transcribing of Books, in regard they have not as yet, ia this
Country, the use of Printing, as we have in Europe. He is called Eahtemad
Dowlet, in regard he has the oversight of the kings Revenues and Treasury.
This was the most self-concern'd person of all that ever had the management of
public affairs, as a Minister of State. For there was no business done at
Court, whereof he made not some advantage; and there was no charge or
employment to be gotten, but the person petitioning for it must have made his
agreement with the Chancellor; whose exactions were, in this particular,
excessive, not only upon the account of the Presents, which, being made by him
twice every year to the Court, rendered the king himself in a manner a complice
of his concussions, but also upon this consideration, that being an Eunuch, all
the Wealth he got was at his death to fall to the king.

The Kurtzi-baschi, Kurtzi-baschi.
who had the command of ten thousand Horse, whom Schach-Ismael appointed as a
standing Army, to be constantly maintained, named Tzani-Chan, was a Peasant's
Son of Schamlu, who, in the time of Schach-Abas, had been a Menial servant to a
Lord of the Court. These Horse, in time of Peace, retire to their own
Habitation, yet are paid as duly as if they were in actual service, and meet
not again till there be an Army on foot, enjoying in the mean time diverse
Privileges and Exemptions, which the other later kings of Persia have granted
them.

The Meheter, Meheter.
that is the Lord Chamberlain, or chief Gentleman of the Chamber, named
Schaneser, was a Gcorgian born, of Father and Mother Christians. He had been
carried away in his infancy, and sold to the Court of Persia, where they had
made him an Eunuch, so that he needed not be Circumcised to receive the
Character of the Persian Religion. He had been a Page, attending in his
Chamber, to Schach-Abas, and was much in favor with Schach-Sefi, upon this
account, that being always near the king's person, in all both Public and
Private Assemblies, nay, even within the Seraglio, he had the king's Ear, and
knew how to comply with his humor, and make his advantage of the opportunities
he had to speak to him, by which means he obtained those favors of him, which
another could not have asked.

The Wakenhuis, The Secretary of State.
that is, the Secretary of State and of the King's Revenue, who having forty
Clarks under him, perpetually employed, issues out all the orders and
dispatches which are sent into the Provinces, and takes an account of all
that is received toward the charge of the King's house, was called Myrsa Masum.
He was a Peasant's Son of the Village of Dermen, in the Mountain of Elwend,
near Caswin, where there are, among others, two Villages, to wit, Dermen and
Saru, whence come the best Penmen of any in the Kingdom, in regard there is not
an Inhabitant but puts his Children to writing as soon as they are able to hold
a Pen, and keep them so constantly employed therein, that even in the fields,
and as they keep their flocks, they pass away their time in that Exercise.

Aliculi-Chan, Diwanbeki.
who had the charge of Diwan-beki, that is, President of the Council for the
administration of Justice, was the Son of a Christian, of Georgia. He had been
taken during the War which Schach-Abas had in those parts, and sold at Ispahan,
where he had served as a Lacquey, which had also been the condition of his two
Brothers, Rustam-Chan, Governor of Tauris, and Isa-Chan, Iusbaschi, who were
made Eunuchs as he was himself. The functions of his charge consisted
principally in presiding at the judgment of Criminal causes, jointly with the
Seder and the Kasi, and the other Ecclesiastical and Secular Judges, whom they
call Schehra, and Oef, under the Portal of the King's Palace, at the place
named Diwan-Chane; and to be personally present at the Executions of
Malefactors.

The Kularagasi, Kularagas^
that is, Captain of the Kulam, or Slaves, who are sold to the King, to serve
in the Wars upon any order they receive to that purpose, was called Siausbeki,
and had been one of Schach-Abas's Footmen. Of these Kulams there are about
eight thousand, and are permitted to live at their own Habitations, as the
Kurtzi are, and have the same pay; but they enjoy not the same Privileges or
Exemptions, having nothing of that kind which is not common to them with the
king's other Subjects.

The Eischikagasi-baschi, Eischikagasi-baschi
or Lord high Steward, who has the oversight of forty Stewards that serve
under him, called Mortusaculi-Chan, was the Son of a heard-man, or one of those
people whom the Persians call Turk, who have no settled Habitation, but remove
their Tents and Huts to those places, where they think to find the best Grass
for their Cattle. I said these Eischikagasi were a kind of Stewards, of whom
there are at all times four or five at the Court, who stand at the door of the
king's Appartment, and serve by half-years, under their Baschi, or Chief, who
carries the staff they call D^ken^k, and stands before the king when he eats in
public, on days of Ceremonies. He is also one of the two who take Ambassadors
under the Arms, when they are brought to audience. We have already related, how
Mortasaculi-Chan succeeded, in this charge, Vgurlu-Chan, whose head Schach-Sefi
had caused to be cut off. Imanculi Sulthan, whom the king of Persia sent upon
an Embassy to the Duke of Holstein, our Master, had the quality of Eischakagasi.

Schahe Wardi, The Master of the Ceremonies.
who was Iesaul Scebet, or Master of the Ceremonies, was the Governor of
Derbent's Son, but his Grandfather was a Peasant, of the Province of Serab.
The Iesaul Scebet carries also a staff, and his principal function consists in
placing strangers at the king's Table, and at public assemblies.

The Nasir, The Controller.
or Controller of the king's house, whom they also give the quality of Kerek
jerak, because he executes the function of a Purveyer, whose name was Samambek,
was the Son of one of the ordinary Inhabitants of Kaschan.

The Tuschmal, Tuschmal*
who has the oversight of all the Officers belonging to the king's kitchen,
was called Seinel-bek, and was the Son of Seinel-Chan, whom the king killed
with his own hands, in the presence of his Mother.

The Dawatter, Secretary of the Closet.
that is, the Secretary of the Closet, whose name was Vgurlu-bek, was the Son
of Emirkune-Chan, He had, in that charge, succeeded Hassan-beg, who was killed
by the king's order, because he had been at Supper with Talub-Chan, as we
related before The word Dawatter is derived from Dawat; which signifies an
Ink-horn, in as much as the principal function of this charge consists, in
carrying the Ink-horn, and presenting that part thereof where the Ink is to the
king when he is to sign any thing. For the king himself carries the Seal about
his Neck, and Seals or Signs himself, by pressing the Seal upon the Paper,
after he had put it into the Ink.

Aly-baly-bek, Master of the Horse.
who was Myra-chur-baschi, that is chief of the Gentlemen of the Horse, or
Master of the Horse of Persia, was a Senkene by birth, and his Father was a
Drover, who traded altogether in Oxen.

The Mirischikar, Grand Faulconer.
or Grand Faulconer, whose name was Chosrow Sulthan, was a Christian, an
Armenian born, one, notwithstanding his Religion, very much in the king's
favor.

Karachan-bek, Huntsman.
who had the charge of Sekbahn-baschi, that is, Overseer of those who kept the
Dogs for Hunting, or chief Hunts-man, as I may call him, was also a Sen-kene,
and the son of a Shepherd.

The Iesalkor has two functions, Jesaulkor.
to wit, that of Grand-Marshal of the Lodgings, and that of Judge of the king's
household. He marches before the king, as well in the City as in the Country,
with a staff in his hand, to make way. He has under him several other Iasauls,
who are as it were Harbingers, and sometimes is employed in the securing of
persons guilty of Treason, and such as are imprisoned by the king's express
order.

The other Officers belonging to the Court, are,

The Suffretzi, that is the Carver.

The Abdar, who serves the king with water to drink, and keeps it in a Jarr
sealed up, to prevent any body's putting of poison into it.

The Chazinedal, or Overseer of the king's Revenue.

The Ambadar, who has the oversight of the king's Granaries.

The Iesaul Neder, who keep the king's shoes, when he puts them off in the
antichamber.

The Mehem^ndar, who conducts Ambassadors from one Province to another, till
they come to Court, to their audience there, and so back to the Frontiers.

Besides these, there are yet several other Officers, not so considerable as
the precedent, as,

The Kischitzi-baschi, Captain of the Guard.

The Tzabedar, Controller of the Artillery.

The Tzartzi, who publishes the king's commands.

The Tzelaudar-baschi, who is as it were a Captain over the Grooms that conduct
such Horses as the king would have led.

The Kitaddar, Library Keeper.

The Meamar, Ingeneer and Architect.

The Mustofi, Purveyer for the House.

The Seraidar, Surveyer of the buildings.

The Klita, Captain of the Gate.

The Scherbedar, Overseer of the Conserves and Spices.

The Cannati, Confectioner.

The Omatzdar, Governor of the Pages.

The Schixtza, Cup Bearer.

The Eachtzi, who keeps the Gold-plate.

The Achtzi, Clark of the kitchen.

The Eemektzi, who bakes the bread which the king himself eats.

The Forrasch, who makes the fire.

The Sava, Water-bearer.

The Bildar, are such as serve for Pioneers, when the king goes any journey, to
make the ways even, and steps for the safer treading of the Camels. They help
also to pitch up Tents, and dig pits in the ground, whether to get water, or
serve for Privies.

The Schatir, Footmen.

The Rica, are men who carry Pole-Axes, and are always about the king's
person, as his Guards; but sometimes they also do the work of common
Executioners.

All these Officers have their Salaries and other Allowances, which are very
duly paid them, not out of the Treasury or Exchequer, but they are charged
upon the Demesne of certain Villages, whereof they themselves have the disposal,
or they are assigned them out of some part of the Taxes, or happily on the
Tribute paid by common Prostitutes.

The Persians seldom meet about affairs, but the Cloth is laid. At the two
Audiences the king gave us, as well at our coming thither, as our departure
thence, we Dined with him, and at all the conferences we had at the
Chancellor's, we always found a Collation of Preserves, and after that the
Cloth was laid, and the Meat served up.

When the King eats in public, The Hakim, Minarzim, and the Seder*
or comes into any assemblies, besides ten or twelve Lords of the Court, he is
ordinarily attended by the Hakim, or Physician, the Seder, and the Minatzim.
The Physician appoints what Mears he should eat of. The Minatzim, or
Astrologer, acquaints him with the fortunate and unfortunate hours, and
whatever he says is believed as Oraculous: and the Seder, who is the chief of
their Ecclesiastics, explicates to him those passages of the Alchoran, and
such points of their Divinity, where there seems to be any difficulty. The King
and the Kasi join together in the naming of the Seder, and they make choice of
him among those, whom they think best skilled in the explication of the
Alchoran, and the Laws which depend on it. They take his advice not only in
Ecclesiastical, but also in Civil affairs, but especially in Criminal. He is
showed the charge and proceedings against the Criminal, and he returns his
advice sealed with his Seal. The King for the most part follows it, adding
these words, This is the advice of the Seder, which we confirm; then he orders
his own Seal to be set thereto.

Civil causes are commonly tried before the Secular Judges whom they call Oef.
The administration of Justice.
They are a kind of Lawyers according to their way, and they have for their
chief the Diwan-beki, who ought to be well versed in the Law of Mahomet. Their
Pleading days are Monday and Thursday, and the place where they meet for the
administration of Justice, is a spacious Arched Hall under the Palace-Gate,
where they hear both sides, and if the Causes be of importance, they report the
same to the King, and acquaint him with the opinions of the Judges, whereupon
the King decides them.

It is forbidden by their Law to put out money to use. Usury forbidden.
Yet they stick not to do it; but if the Usurers be discovered, they are looked
on as infamous persons, and not admitted into the company of such as are of any
quality, nay, they are also very severely punished. Of this we saw an e^ample
as we passed through Ardebil, where they had an odd way to take out a Man's
Teeth* who, by way or interest, had taken one and a half in the hundred for a
month's time. They laid him all along on the ground, and knocked out his
Teeth one after another with a little Mallet. They call this kind of Usurers
Sudehur, that is, eaters of Interest of Usury, The Persians are permitted to
lay out money upon Lands, Gardens, and Houses, which they enjoy while they are
out of their money, and if they be not redeemed within the time agreed upon
between the parties, they are forfeited to the Mortgagee.

Their punishments are cruel, Their punishments.
and proportionable to the irreclaimable obstinacy of that people who are
violently bent to Vice, and laugh at gentle chastisements, and moderate pains.
The least Crimes are punished with mutilation of Members. They cut off the
Nose, Ears, and sometimes the Feet and Hands of Malefactors, nay, they are put
to death, by cutting off their Heads. That defiling, which the Latins call
Violatio, is not punished with death, but they think it enough to cut off the
part which has offended, to prove which, there needs only the Woman's Oath,
if she has the confidence to reiterate it thrice. The two last Kings, Schach
Abas and Schach-Sefi, have been rather cruel than severe in their punishments,
as may be inferred from the examples we have already produced thereof, nay,
they have been so far such toward some Criminals, that they have caused them
to be tied between two boards and sawen asunder. Schach-Abas had sent into
Spain one named Teinksbeg, who returning from his Embassy, and having not
brought home all his Retinue, and the King understanding by the Interpreter,
that his ill usage of them had caused many of his people to run away, he took
the pains himself to cut off his Nose, his Ears, and a good piece of flesh out
of his Arm, and forced him immediately to eat them, bloody and raw as they
were. Imanculi-Chan, who was sent Ambassador to the Duke of Holstein, our
Master, treated his Domestics no better. For a very trivial fault, he caused a
Spit red hot to be applied to the back of one of his Retinue; and he ordered
another's fingers to be knocked with the back of an Hatchet, till all the bones
were bruised: which obliged five or six of his Train to leave his service, and
return into Persia by the way of Italy: for which cruelties he had no doubt
been punished at his return, had not the Chancellor made his peace with the
King.

As to the Religion of these people, I could make a long digression, to give
some account of that of the ancient Persians, and show how they adored the Sun,
Moon, Venus, Fire, and other things, which they made Divinities; but it is
besides my design, and therefore I shall only say something of that of the
modern, and the difference there is, between the Religion of the Persians and
that of the Tu^ks.

Both these Nations follow the Doctrine of that grand Impostor Mahomet, The
Religion of the Persians.
and acknowledge the same Alcoran; yet does not that hinder, but they have a
mortal animosity one against the other. And whereas their enmity is chiefly
grounded on the difference of their Religions, we shall here briefly show
wherein it consists.

Monsieur Busbeque says in the third Letter of his Embassy to Turkey, that a
man may judge of the difference of these two Religions, from the conversation
he had with a Persian Visir, named Rustan, who told him, that the Persians had
a greater hatred for the Turks, and accounted them much more profane than the
Christians; but he gives no other particular thereof. Others, who have written
of the same subject, as Paulus Iovius, Bizarrus, Minadous, and a certain
English Gentleman, named Thomas Herbert, have given no better an account of it;
some, by reason of the little acquaintance they had therewith, and others out
of negligence, having not delivered what they might have learned during the
abode they made in Persia. I have had the curiosity to make a stricter enquiry
into it, and to inform my self as well from such as I became intimately
acquainted withal at Scamachie and Ispahan, by means of the Mathematics, as
by the reading of some Books, which I have compared with what I had learnt
thereof my self.

The Persians are as free to assume the quality of Mussulman's as the Turks.
The Etymology of the word Mussulman.
This word is derived from that of Salama, which comes from another Hebrew
word, which signifies, he has delivered, or saved. And the reason of it is,
that the Mahumetane Religion, being to propagate it self by Arms, and the
Alcoram ordering those to be presecuted and killed, who refused to pronounce
this confession, Ia illah illalahu, Mahumeda resul-alla, that is, There is no
other God but one, and Mahomet the Apostle of God, such as, by this profession,
saved themselves from, or avoided death, were called Mussulmans, that is to
say, the saved or delivered. But the present Turks explicate it otherwise, and
affirm, that they who make profession of their Religion, are Mussulmans, that
is, saved from eternal damnation. Whence it comes, that they do not call their
Sons Mussulmans, till they are Circumcised.

The Circumcision of the Persians is not celebrated, Circumcision.
till the Children are seven, eight, or nine years of age, and then they
intoxicate such as are to be Circumcised, with a certain drink, to make them
insensible of the pain they are to endure, in the cutting of the Prepuce; and
in this they agree with the Turks. But the difference between their Religion
and that of the Turks, consists.

1. In that they explicate not the Alcoran after the same manner. 2. That they
have not the same Saints. 3. That they have not the same Miracles. 4. That they
have not the same Mosqueyes, nor the same Ceremonies.
The very Principles of their Religions are contrary, The difference between
the Religion of the Persians and of the Turks.
in as much as Mahomet, having appointed by his last Will and Testament, that
Aly, his Nephew, and Son-in-law, (for he was the Brother's Son and had Married
his Daughter Fattima) should succeed him, as well in Temporals as Spirituals,
Ababeker, Omar, and Osman, all three Father-in-law's of Mahomet, who were more
considerable and powerful then Aly, and had contributed much to the
propagation and establishment of Mahumet's Religion, usurped, successively one
after another, the Califate, and Political Government of their Son-in-law,
notwithstanding the opposition, which Aly and his friends would have made
against it. 'Twas after their death, that Aly obtained the Califate, which yet
he was not so possessed of, but that it was pretended to, and, disputed against
him, by the relations of the three last Califs. Aly did not change any thing in
the Alcoran, and though he gave several Interpretations to the words of
Mahomet, and explicated the sense of his Law, yet did he submit to his
Authority, where it was clear, and where the Text admitted no explication, in
so much that this occasioned no change in the Religion.

But about the year 1363. The initials of the Religion of the Persians.
there happened to be at Ardebil, a very learned man, named Sofi, who pretended
himself derived from the Family of Aly, and gave out, that he was, in a right
line, descended from Musai Kasim, the Son of Hossein, who was the Son of Aly.
The austerity of his life, and the outward innocence of his demeanor, managed
by an understanding that had the knack of making the most advantageous
discoveries it could of it self, brought him into great reputation, and raised
him to the quality of Schich. He slighted, at least in appearance, all the
pleasures and enjoyments of this World, clad himself in a Sheep-skin, and would
not wear any thing about him but what was of Wool. Some affirm, that he had the
name Sofi given him, from the word Suff, which signifies Wool, though others
are of opinion, and that with greater probability, that the true Etymology of
his name is derived from the word Sefid, which signifies pale and white, in as
much as it is the custom of the Persians, many times, to give the surname from
the color of the face, as the Chancellor of Persia, who lived at the time of
our Embassy thither, was named Saru Tagge, from the yellowish color of his
countenance.

Sofi was the first who ventured publicly to teach and write, that the
succession of Mahomet, which belonged to Aly, his Nephew and Son-in-law, had
been illegally usurped from him and his Posterity, by Abubeker, Omar, and
Osman: That God, who had been very much offended at that procedure, had raised
him the said Sofi, and had endu'd him with all qualities necessary for the
restoration of the glory of Aly, which had been in a manner buried for many
ages. And to make it appear, that Aly was a man after God's heart, he revived a
great number of Miracles, which he said had been suppressed by the malice of
the Turks: That Aly had given a true explication of the Alcoran, which his
Successor, Tzafersaduck, had reduced into writing, and that in those
Commentaries there were many precepts contrary to the opinions of Hanife, whom
the Turks follow, but much more rational. There is not any Nation in the World
more inclined to change, and more addicted to Novelty, than the Persians.
Sofi's new Doctrine soon found credit among them, in so much that they forsook
that of the Turks, in whom this Schism heightened the animosity which
neighborhood and perpetual Wars about the Frontiers had already but too much
blown between those two Nations. However, the Persians made it their business
to confirm the reputation of their Aly, and added to their Creed, whereof we
spoke before, these words Aaly welli Alla, so that they said, There is but one
God, Mahumet the Apostle of God and Aly, Coadjutor or Lieutenant of God: Nay,
they presume to affirm, that though Aly be not really God, yet he comes very
near him. And to prefer him even before Mahomet himself, they add hereto, that
it was God's intention to bestow the Alcoran on Aly, and that it was by mistake
it fell into the hands of Mahomet. But as to Abubeker, Omar, and Osman, they
who at Prayer time call the people together (for the Persians, as well as the
Turks, use no Bells) will be sure to Curse these three pretended Prophets, and
to execrate them to the pit of Hell. They have commonly these words in their
mouth, Kiri Sekder deheni Abubeker, Omar, Osman, Hanifebad, that is, many Dogs
stones stop the mouths of these Prophets, which is an abomination to the ears
of the Turks, who, upon this account are become irreconcilable Enemies to the
Persians, especially since Sedredin and Tzinid, (whom some name Gutnet)
expressed so great a zeal for the establishment and advancement of their Sect,
which is, in process of time, grown so strong, that their Schichs are become
Schachs, that is their Prophets have changed their quality into that of Kings.

The Persians not thinking it enough to have established the Sanctity, The
Saints of the Persians.
nay, in some measure the Divinity, of Aly, were of opinion that he had
communicated some part of that quality to those of his Family, and that they
might bestow the denomination of Saints upon his first Successors, of whom
there were related many Miracles, whereby their memories have been celebrated,
and their Sepulchers enriched by the Presents sent into them. He had l^ft two
Sons, Hassan, and Hossein, who left Seinel, Abedin, Mahumed-Bagur,
Tzafer-Saduk, Musai-Casum, Risa, Mahumed-Taggi, Alli Naggi, Hossein Alkeri, and
Mehedi, whereof some, to wit, Hassan, Scinel, Abedin, Mahumed^Bagur,
Mahumed^Taggi, and Alli Naggi, are interred at Medina; Tzafer Saduk, at Bagdat,
and Hossein, Musai-Kasum, and Hossein Alkeri, at Kelbula or Kufa. They affirm
that Mehedi is not dead, but lies hid in a Cave near Kufa, where he is to
remain till the day of Judgment, which is to be, when his shoes, which he
left at the entrance of it, and which are already turned half way, shall be
quite turned toward the Cave, so as that at his coming out he may put his feet
into them, to go and convert all the World to the Faith of the Alcoran.

On these twelve Saints they bestow the quality of Imam, or Prelate. To these,
as also to the Institutor of their Sect Schich-Sosi, they address their Prayers
and Devotions, and it is to the four Sepulchers of them, that they go on
Pilgrimages, especially when their affairs permit them not to go to Meca, or
Medina. They give the Pilgrims a Certificate or Testimonial, called
Sijaretname, whereby they are not only known to be true Mussulmans, professing
the true Persian Religion; but there is also a further particular advantage of
these Testimonials, in that they save their lives, who are in disgrace with the
Kings or Governors of the Provinces where they live. We have seen instances
hereof in our Interpreter, whose name was Rustam, who took one of them, to
avoid the punishment which he migh have suffered for embracing the Christian
Religion in England, and another in Tzirrachan, who took this course to save
himself, as we have related elsewhere.

The Persians Celebrate every year, Their Festivals.
with great Ceremonies, the memory and death of Hassan and Hossein. The Turks
deride them for it, and on the contrary, have a great Veneration for Abubeker,
Omar, and Osman, and highly esteem Hanife, their chief Commentator and
Paraphrast of the Alcoran. The Persians execrate the memory of the three
former, and speak of the last as an Impostor, who has made false explications
of the Alcoran. They affirm, that Hanife, being a servant to Tzafur Saduk, was
very careful to preserve the water, wherein that Saint had washed his hands,
which he carried into Turkey, rubbed therewith the eyes of several blind
people, who by that means recovered their sight, and wrought diverse other
Miracles, the honor whereof belongs only to the Saints of Persia. They add to
this, that Schach Tamas, after the taking of Bagdat, caused the body of Hanife,
who had a very sumptuous Tomb there, to be taken up; and that he converted the
Masur, or place of his Sepulture, into a Stable, and the Sepulcher into a Sink
or common House of ease.

There are many Authors have Commented on the Alcoran; Commentators upon the
Alcoran.
but they who have had a particular illumination for that work, and have, in
their opinion, best understood the Sentiments of Mahomet, are Aly and
Tzafur-Saduk, whom the Persians prefer before all the rest. The Turks most
esteem Hanife; and the Vsbeques Tartars, as also the Indians follow the
explication of Hembili, and Maleki. The Alcoran, in many places, is not to be
understood; not only in that Mahomet himself seems to have affected obscurity,
as not knowing himself what he would say; but also in this regard, that, many
times, he alludes to stories which peradventure never happened, and whereof the
Commentators certainly having no knowledge, have supplied the defect with their
own fictions, fables, and impostures, which have no likelihood of truth in
them. But not to digress from the Persians, whom it is our particular design
here to give an account of, it is a thing much to be admired, that these
people, who are so ingenious, and so wise in their Generation, and so
excellently well versed in the affairs of the World, could be brought to
believe things so ridiculous, and the many fables, their Books of Devotion are
filled with. As for instance, among others, that Duldul, (so they call Aly's
Horse) was got of a Rock. That it was the Angel Gabriel who brought him the
Sword, called Dzulfakar, wherewith he did so many great exploits: That with the
said Sword, he killed a Dragon that had seven heads; and cut a Devil to pieces.
And that Sulthan Mahomet Chodabende, being one day a-hunting near Kufa,
discovered thereabouts a Sepulcher with this Inscription, Under this place ly
Adam, Noe, and Aly, and that thereupon the Sulthan had ordered the building of
the City of Netzef, where he had erected a Tomb in memory of Aly. But there is
not any thing so ridiculously flat as the story they relate of Aly's drinking
with the Angels in Paradise.

And that there may be no scruple made of the supernatural, Miracles.
and as it were Divine power, attributed by them to the Author of their Sect,
they relate a great number of Miracles wrought by him, which Miracles indeed
are chargeable with some imposture among those of other persuasions, but in the
Religion of the Persians, they are the more impertinent, in that they make
their Saints do them, without any necessity. As for instance, when they affirm,
that Schich Sofi, being yet very young, and going to see Schich Sahadi, who was
a great Saint, and a very wise man, and lived in the Village of Sahedan, in the
Province of Kilan, he there took particular notice of the pains the Inhabitants
were at in weeding their Grounds, and moved to compassion thereat, he commanded
the Weeds not to pester the Earth any longer. He was immediately obeyed. But
Schich Sahadi observing it, said to him; I see, Son, what thou art able to do;
but thou art to consider, that if thou ease these Pesants of the employment
wherein they spend their time, they will be lost through idleness. Schich-Sofi
thought this so excellent a consideration, that he presently resolved to serve
that holy man, with whom he continued seven years, and learnt of Sahadi many
noble things. It is upon this account, as they affirm, that the said Village,
to this day enjoyes an absolute and perpetual privilege and exemption.

They relate also that Tamberlane, whom they call Temurleng, desirous to see
Schich-Sofi, and to be assured whether his Sanctity was answerable to the great
reputation he had acquired all over the East, resolved to give him a Visit, and
to have an evident Demonstration of the truth of his Doctrine, he bethought
himself to make a trial of it, with a resolution to rest satisfied as to his
Sanctity, if he behaved himself in three things as he expected he should; to
wit, 1. if he came not out to meet him: 2. If he entertained him with Rice,
boiled, not in Sheep's Milk, but that of wild Goats: and 3. If the poison he
would order to be given him, should not kill him. Hereupon Tamberlane being
come to Schamasbu, where Sofi then lived, went straight to his Chamber, Sofi
saw him well enough coming, but would not go to meet him, till Tamberlane had
set foot within his Chamber: then Sofi rose up, and said to him, I know well
enough what respect is due to the King, but it was your pleasure I should not
meet you. I humbly crave your pardon. It Is a trial you were pleased to make of
me. This Complement passed, he made Tamberlane sit down, opposite to the Door,
and caused to come of the neighboring Forest a great many wild Goats, which
were milked in Tamberlane's presence. At last Sofi perceiving they were going
to give him poison; called for a clean shirt, which he put on, and having drunk
the poison, he fell a dancing round the Room, according to the manner of the
Schichs, and continued that exercise so long, till such time as having put
himself into a sweat all over the body, he took off the shirt, out of which he
wrung the sweat, which the poison had made of a Green color, and having put it
into a Glass, presented it to Tamberlane, to satisfy him that it had done him
no harm. That thereupon Tamberlane made no further doubt of the truth of Sofi's
Doctrine; that he bestowed on him several Villages near Ard^bil, and made him a
Present of a great number of Turks, whom he was to instruct in his Religion.

The Turks believe not a word of all these Miracles; but however, they have a
great Veneration for the memory of Aly. They acknowledge he was a near Kinsman
of Mohomet's, that he is truly an Iman, or Saint, and that he led a very
exemplary life; and particularly that he was valiant, and a very good Horsman;
and thence it comes, that, when they get on Hors-back, they say Isa Aly, in the
name of Aly.

As the Persians will not admit of any of the Laws and Ordinances which
Abubekar, Their purifi^^tions.
Omar, Osman, and Hanife, affirm to be grounded on the Alcoran, so they also
contemn all the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies of the Turks, and have particular
ones of their own, which they believe to be as necessary, as any thing that is
most essential in the business of Religion. For instance, when the Persians
intend to do their Devotions, especially their Prayers, they prepare themselves
by external ablution as the Turks do, but after an absolutely different manner.
They turn up their sleeves above the Elbow, wash their hands, which they
afterward put, two several times upon the Arms, stroaking them from the Elbow
down to the Wrist. Then they stroke their faces only with the right hand. The
Turks, on the contrary, take up so much water as they can hold between their
hands, and therewith rub their faces, stroaking them three several times, from
the Forehead down to the Chin, and afterward from the Chin up to the Forehead.
They wash also their Noses and Mouths, by drawing in with their breath the
water, which, to that end, they take up between their hands. The Persians
stroke their Heads with a moist hand, from the Nape of the Neck to the
Forehead, and afterward the Feet up to the Ancles. But the Turks pour water on
their Heads, and so apply their moist Hand to the Feet, which they are obliged
to wash, before they begin these Ceremonies: but this the Persians do not. The
Turks put the forefinger into the Ear, which they afterward rub all about
with the Thumb, and then with the same forefinger stroke their Heads from the
Nape of the Neck, to the Throat. These Ceremonies are performed in their
Houses, before they go out in order to the doing of their Devotions, in the
Mosquey; whither the Women come not at all, out of a fear they might distract
the Devotions of the men. The Persians have a stone, wherewith they often touch
their forehead, while they are at their Prayers; or happily they lay the stone
upon the ground, and touch it with their foreheads. It is made of a greyish
Earth, which is to be had about Metzef and Kufa, where Hossein was killed, and
interred, near Aly, and thence it is that the said stone derives all its
virtue. The Figure of it is Octogonal, and it is somewhat above three inches
Diameter, and contains, with the names of their twelve Saints, that of Fattima,
their common Mother. They are made by the Arabians, who bring them into Persia
to be sold.

The Persians being come to the Mosquey begin their Prayers with Alla Ekber.
Their Prayers.
When they Pray, their Arms hang down negligently, and they have their eyes
fastened on the ground. On the contrary, the Turks have both their hands upon
their Breasts. The Persians, afterward, put their hands upon their Ears, and
turn their faces to the South, out of this regard, that Meca and Medina are
toward that Quarter, in respect of the City of Ardebil, where their Sect had
its first Institution and Original. There is some probability, that, in this
particular, they would imitate the primitive Christians, who, in their Prayers,
turned their faces toward the East, to express, that Christ, their Sun of
Righteousness, was risen. Whence it came that the Christians being charged in
the time of Severus the Emperor, as if they adored the Sun, Tertullian
vindicates them in his Apology, and gives an account of the true cause of that
Ceremony.

The Persians having thus turned their faces toward the South, begin their
Prayers with that of Allhemdo lilla. Having said that, they set their Hands on
their Knees, and in that stooping posture they say the Prayer Subhanna Rebbi,
and repeat the Alla Ekber. Then they kneel down, touch their foreheads with the
gray stone, and repeat the foresaid Prayer of Subhanna Rebbi, stretching out
their Arms. After all this, they make the last Prayer upon their Knees, then
rise up, and turning to the left and right hand, they pronounce with a low
voice, Salom alekom, Salom alekom, saluting the Angels who have assisted them,
and kept the Devil from disturbing them in their Devotions, The Turks salute
the Angels before they have quite made an end of their Prayers. The Religion of
the Persians obliges them to say their Prayers five times a day, to wit, in the
morning at Sunrising, at noon, in the afternoon, in the evening, and as they
go to bed. Their chief Prayer is the Fatah, and next to that, the Allhemdo
lilla, which Translated is to this effect. Glory be to the Lord of all
Creatures, to the King of the last judgment. We honor thee; we invoke thee;
assist us in our necessities; Lead us in thy ways; bring us into the path of
those to whom thou have done good, and not into the way of those, upon whom
thou have poured out thy wrath, nor into that of such as thou suffrest to go
astray. Amen.

And whereas all the Chapters of the Alcoran begin with these words, They are
very devou^.
bismilla rahman rahim, in the name of God, etc. the Persians accordingly never
undertake any thing, but they pronounce the bismilla, and sometimes say, benahm
ohnki namesch here is tzanehaft, that is, in his name, who is the refuge and
protection of Souls, they express a great attention and devotion in their
Prayers; insomuch that going sometimes into the great Metschid Mehedi, at
Ispahan, at the time when they were at Prayers, I could never observe, that
they so much as took notice of me; but they had their eyes either fastened on
the ground, or lifted them up to Heaven, according to the subject of their
Prayers. There are some among them, who pray with such violence at their own
houses, that they put themselves out of breath, and many times fall down in a
swound. I remember to this effect a story of one of my Neighbors at Scamachie,
who was so earnest in his Devotion, that having said his Prayer very loud, and
pronounced with all his might, above fifty times the word Hakka, which
signifies, God, he at length could not pronounce it without a great deal of
difficulty, and at last his voice quite failed him. There are some, who, at
their Prayers use a certain kind of Beads, which they call Moher Thebish,
consisting of three dozen, distinguished by so many great Beads.

Upon Friday, which is their ordinary Festival, their Chaltib, or Preacher,
gets up into the Pulpit, and reads certain Chapters of the Alcoran, with the
explication thereof. They make no account at all of our Bible, and say it has
been falsify'd by the Jews and Greeks, and that for that reason God sent the
Alcoran, as a Corrected Bible, or the true word of God. While I was at
Scamachie, I showed the Minatzim Chalil, the Pentateuck in Arabic. He knew the
book well enough, but said of it, Chrabdur, that is, it is a book that is
corrupt and abolished; the Alcoran is much the better.

They have very strange and extravagant opinions concerning the Creation of the
World, Their opinion concerning Heaven and Hell.
the first man, the stories of the Bible, the last judgment and eternal life.
They affirm, among other things, that, at the beginning, God made seven Hells,
and as many Paradises, but that to the foresaid number there was an eighth
Paradise added, upon the following occasion. Ath, King of Persia, and
Grandfather of Nimroth, one of the most powerful Princes of his time, grew so
vainglorious and proud, that he would be respected as a God: and to the end
there should not any thing of Magnificence be wanting, he laid out several
Millions of Gold, in building the noblest and most Sumptuous Palace, that the
Wit and Art of man could imagine, which was to serve him for a Paradise. But
the King being upon his way to go and see it, and take possession thereof,
there rose up such a thick Mist, which so covered the House and Gardens that
were about it, that it seemed to have quite vanished, so that it could never
yet be found: and that this is the eighth Paradise, which God has joined to
the other seven.

The Persians have also the custom of dedicating or devoting their Children to
some Saint, They dedicate their Children to Saints.
as soon as they come out of the Mother's Womb, to which Saint they are to be
as it were Slaves as long as they live. As a badge of this slavery, they make a
hole in their Ears, as soon as they are born, and thence it is they have the
name of Mahumedculi, Imanculi, Aaliculi, that is, the Slaves of Mahomet, Iman,
and Aaly. This they ordinarily do, when they are some years married before they
have Children, or when the Children thrive not well. There are also some who
devote them to a Monastical life, and promise to make them Abdallas. And yet if
the Children that have been so designed express no inclination to a Monastical
life, they may go to some holy place, and for a sum of money be dispensed of
their Father's vow.

They have also a Lent or Fast, Their Lent.
which lasts a month every year. They call it Rusch, or, with the Turks Orutz,
and they begin and end it, according to the prescription of the Alcoran, with
the Moon* of the month Ramesan. They observe it with somewhat more austerity
than the ordinary Fasts, in as much as they neither eat nor drink between
Sunrising and Sunset: but they have all the night to do what they please in,
and they commonly spend it so well, that they never fast less than they do at
that time. For having sufficiently furnished themselves with Meat and Wine in
the night, they ly down in the morning, and sleep away part of the day. Such as
are unwilling to fast, may, for money, get a dispensation.

There is in Persia a sort of people whom they call Seid, The Kindred of Mahomet.
and they are of the Posterity of Mahomet and Aly, and enjoy several particular
Privileges and Exemptions. They do not shave their heads as the other Persians
do, but only cut their hair about the breadth of two fingers, and let the rest
grow, which they tie up together in a tress. They are not permitted to marry
out of their own Family, in regard the Alliances they might make elsewhere
would much diminish the King's Revenue. They are clad in white, and their
shoes are low and flat-soal'd. They are forbidden not only the drinking of
Wine, but also being in the place where any is Drunk; so that if they are
invited to any entertainment, the other Guests must be content with Duschab, or
only water. The touching of a Dog renders them unclean. One untruth would
forfeit all their Privileges; and whereas all the other Persians swear by the
name of God, Aly, Schich-Sofi, and by the Beyamber ba embia, that is, by the
Posterity of Aaly, these Seid have no other Oath than that of Eulademen, that
is, by my birth. Those of them who live in Cities are commonly rich, in regard
they are possessed of Lands and Villages, for which they pay not the King any
thing, whence it comes they are sufficiently proud and insupportable. There are
some who assume the quality of Seid, though they go from City to City, and
live by Alms. They show their Testimonials where they come, but they are for
the most part Counterfeit, and such as make use of them are accounted
Impostors; and thence it is they call them Cher-Seid, that is, Saints-Asses.
Some of these last mentioned carry, about them, some hair, in round boxes of
silver, which they say was taken off Mahomet's head, and have the slight to
make the several hairs come straight out at a little hole, persuading the
simple, that that is done by some supernatural and miraculous virtue. This hair
they fell at a very dear rate, and the Persians make use of it in their
Devotions, putting it upon their books, when they say their Prayers.

At Kimas, in the Province of Kilan, there was one of these Mountebanks, who
having found out the trick of setting Cotton on fire by means of a Crystal cut
half round, and held in the Sun like a burning-glass, would have people
persuaded by that Operation, which he affirmed to be Supernatural, that he was
of the Kindred of Mahomet. After our return to Holstein, I showed the Persians,
whom Schach-Sefi sent thither, that it was the easiest thing in the World to
get fire from the Sun, and I lighted paper in the very depth of Winter, by
means of a Crystal full of cold Water, or a piece of Ice, which I had made
half round in a Pewter Dish. They were astonished at it, and said, that if I
had done as much in Persia, I should have passed there for either a great
Saint, or a Sorcerer.

There is yet another sort of Ecclesiastics in Persia, Another sort of
Religious men.
who are thought to be descended from Aly, instead whereof the Turks have the
Dervis, of whom the Kulesthan makes many pleasant stories. These are called
Abdalla's, and are a kind of Monks or Friars. They are very meanly clad, with a
kind of sleeve-less Coat, of several pieces, quilted like Mattresses. Some of
them wear only a hairy skin, having at the waste, instead of a Girdle, a
Serpent of brass, given them by their Doctors, when they make their profession,
as a mark of their Learning. It is the Suffibaschi, or chief of the Suffi who
Consecrates them in the Sufficane, at Ardebil, Ispahan, and Meschet. These
Abdallas trudge up and down the Markets and other public places, to assemble
the people, and Preach to them the Miracles of their Saints, and to curse
Abubeker, Omar, Osman, and Hanife, as also the Saints of the Vsbeques Tartars,
of whom they relate ridiculous and obscene stories, to make them abominable and
despicable. This Contributes somewhat to the establishment of their Religion,
and heightens in the Children the hatred they have against the Turks, for those
are the chief Auditors of these Market-Lectures; and thence it comes, that
these Abdallas are never seen near the Frontiers of Turkey. There are some of
them, who take whatever their Auditors give them, and thence it comes they are
also termed Kalanderan; for after they have spent about half an hour in talking
and telling of stories, much after the manner of our Mountebanks, they have
some small money given them, whereupon they dismiss the assembly, to go and
Preach in some other place. They have in their hand a Hatchet or Scepter of
wood, wherewith they make their Gestures, and handle them, as those in our
parts, who show tricks of Legerdemain, do their sticks. They set out their
Discourse with all sorts of Fables, and sometimes bring in such palpable lies,
that some make no difficulty to interrupt them, and reproach them with their
impudence. They are a lewd sort of people, addicted to all manner of vices.
Tipling-houses and places of public prostitution are their ordinary retreats,
and they are for the most part Buggerers and High-way-men. That they may commit
their Robberies with greater safety, they go in the night time into Caves, and,
Counterfeiting the neighing of Horses, they make a discovery of what number
passes by. Hence it comes, that there are few that will give them so much as
Lodging, in so much that they are forced to take up their quarters in Chapels,
built for that purpose near the Mosqueyes.

I shall here relate, to this purpose, what happened, at the time of our
Embassy, in the Village of Lekere, within three leagues of Ardebil, to one of
these Abdallas, who addressed himself to a young Woman, desiring her to give
him a night's Lodging. The Woman excused her self upon the absence of her
Husband, and told him, that, another time when her Husband were at home, he
should not be denied. The Abdalla finding the young Woman to his mind, and
seeing her go out to milk the Kine, made his advantage of the opportunity,
crept into the house, and hid himself under a bed, which the Persians, in the
Summer time, put on high Tressels, as well to prevent the inconvenience they
receive from insects, as that they may make use of the floor to put their Corn
upon. The Woman being returned from milking, desired a young Maid of the
neighborhood to keep her company that night, and while they were at Supper,
she entreated the Maid, to reach some Cakes she had laid upon the bed; which
she did, but finding the Abdalla lying under it, and imagining it was with the
VVomans consent and privity that he was come thither, she would stay no longer
with her. The Abdalla perceiving the Maid was gone, comes out, salutes the
young Woman, and desires her to Lodge him, and having obtained that, made it
his further entreaty, that she would afford him part of her own bed. The poor
Woman finding her self alone, made as if she consented, and told him, she would
only go into the next Room to get somewhat for his Supper: but as soon as she
was got in, she locked the Door, and barricado'd her self in with certain Bags
of Rice. The Abdalla finding himself chows'd, laid hold of a little Child, and
threatened the Woman to kill it, if she would not open the Door. The Woman
made answer, that her honor was dearer to her than her Child, and that her
Husband, who would be the most injured in its miscarriage, would get more of
them. Upon that the Abdalla killed the Child with a broad Knife, which these
Villains are wont to carry at their Girdles, and call Bukdan, cut him into four
quarters, and beset himself to force open the Door. To get into the Room, he
made a hole under the Threshold of the Door, and thrust himself into it to get
through; but ere he had quite passed his head and shoulders, the Woman cries
out; and finding a Plough-share in the Room, gave him so many strokes over the
head and neck therewith, that he died of it. The Neighbors, coming in at the
noise, and, immediately after the Husband, found this sad Spectacle of the
Abdalla, and, having got open the Door, the Woman swounded in the Room. Being
come to her self, she called to mind, that the Rogue, finding himself hurt by
the first blow she had given him, had begged his life, and told her that he had
wherewithal to purchase it: whereupon the Husband took the pains to search
him, and to examine his ragged Coat, which had so many pieces about it, as made
a shift to Lodge eight hundred Chequines, whereof the Peasant made his
advantage. The Abdalla's body was burnt.

The Persians interr their Dead, Their Interrments.
within three hours after the Soul is gone out of the body, unless it be in the
night time. They wash the bodies before they are interred, and this Ceremony is
performed, in the house, to persons of quality, or in a place built in the
Churchyard for that purpose, which they call Mordeschar Cane, for the common
people. I had the opportunity to see these Ceremonies at Caswin, in our return
from Ispahan. 'Twas the body of a young man of about twenty years of age, whom
they carried in his Clothes, and before he was quite cold, singing all along,
to the Churchyard, where they stripped him, and cast him into a Cestern built
about with Freestone, about sixteen foot square. The Grave-maker having washed
the body all over, they put a clean shirt about him, wrapped him in a shroud of
Cotton Cloth, and laid him on a B^er, to be carried to the Grave, which was
not far thence. Persons of quality have this further Ceremony done them, that
at their coming out of the Bath, the body is set upright, and they pour Camphir
water, which they call Kafur, upon the head, whence it runs down all over the
body, all the Overtures whereof are stopped with Cotton. Then they lay it near
the Grave, and the Priest having read some passages of the Alcoran, raises up
his head a little, which he presently lets down again, and then he is put into
the Grave without any Coffin. The Graves are made very hollow, and some are
vaulted, and others covered with boards* the body is laid down on the
right-side, with the face toward the West, upon this account, that the
Persians, among other things, are of a persuasion, that at the last Judgment,
the Sun and Moon shall be very sad, and that the Sun coming to the West shall
stand still, and that both those Planets shall become as black as Coal. That
then the Angel Gabriel shall come and beat the Sun and Moon, and force them to
return from the West to the East, and that the last judgment shall begin at
the West. Then the Priest, having taken up a little earth in his hand, read
another passage of the Alcoran, went seven paces from the Grave, then returned
to it again, and having read another passage, retired with all the company.
After these Ceremonies, persons of quality are wont to make a Feast, the third
day after the interrment, but without any Wine, and if the deceased has left
much Wealth behind him, they make another Feast on the seventh, and another on
the fortieth day, as also at the Naurus, at the Kurban, and at the Ramesan,
being sure to distribute some Alms among the Poor.

The reason why they make the Graves so hollow, and stop up all the Overtures
of the body, is, the belief they are of, that when the Priest goes seven paces
from the Grave, two Angels, named Nekir and Munkir, come into it, and, if the
Overtures were not stopped, might be incommodated by some uncleanness. They
believe, that, during that time, the Soul returns into the body, that she
raises it into a sitting posture, that it may give the Angels an account of all
its Members had done in this World. Then he makes these questions to the
deceased; In whom have thou believed? whereto it answers, In one only God, my
Heavenly Father. Who is thy Prophet? Mahomet. Who is thy Iman? Aaly. If he
answers pertinently to the questions, and can give any account of the use of
his Members, there is no doubt made but he is saved, and that the Angels
thereupon seize the soul, and absolutely separate it from the body. There are
only persons of age who are subject to this examination; Children being not
obliged to give any account of their Faith.

The Persians, to show that Abathalib, Aly's Father, is infallibly saved,
affirm that he was, before, named Emiram, and that he died before Mahomet.
Being buried, and the Angels having asked him who was his Prophet, he made
answer, it was Mahomet; but when they asked him who was his Saint, he was at a
loss, and knew not what to say, for he knew not then that his Son Aly should
become so great an Imam. Whereupon the Angel Gabriel going to Mahomet, bid him
send Aly to Abalhalib's Sepulcher, and to say to him, Father I am thy Imam, and
shall draw thee to me at the day of Judgment: and that thence it comes, they
gave Emiram the name of Abathalib, that is, the seeking Father, in as much as
the Father had sought, and found his Imam.

The interrments of great Lords and persons of quality are performed with great
Pomp, and the body is accompanied by a great procession. We made mention, in
the fifth book of this Relation, of a Gentleman of Scamachie who had drunk so
much Aquavitae, that he died of it the next day. The Ceremonies of his
interrment were as follows.

In the first place, in the head of the Procession, there marched six men
carrying Banners, and great and long Poles, much like those we had seen at our
entrance into that place, with this difference only, that those at this Funeral
were wreathed. Next marched four Horses, the first whereof carried the Bow and
Arrows of the deceased, and the other three some part of his Clothes. After
these, one of his Menial servants, mounted on an excellent Mule, carried his
Mendil, or Turbant. This man was followed by two men, carrying on their heads,
certain Towers, which they call Nachal, adorned with great Plumes of Feathers,
who danced and leaped to the sound of the Music, which came after them, and
consisted of Tabours, and Copper basins, which they struck one against another.
Between this Music and the Dancers, there were carried eight Dishes of
Preserves, having each of them a Sugar-Cake in the midst, covered with blue
paper, which is the color of their Mourning, and about every Cake three
Wax-Candles lighted. Next marched diverse of the Suffi, who were distinguished
from others by their white Turbants. Then followed two bands of Musicians, who
with all their might sung the la illa illaha, and the Alla Ekber, accompanying
their cries with such distorted Countenances and Postures, as Scaramuzza
himself would be much troubled to imitate. Then followed three young Boys,
having their right shoulder and arm naked, and their foreheads and arms so
scratched, that the blood trickled down to the ground. Lastly, there followed
three men, carrying each of them a Tree, whereto they had fastened certain red
Apples, and the Tresses of hair, which the said Gentleman's three Wives had
either plucked or cut off their heads, as also certain pieces of red and green
paper. These went immediately before the body, which was carried by eight men
upon their shoulders; and upon the Bier there was a very fair Garment, lined
with the precious skins of the Buchar-sheep. Behind the Corpse there followed
four men, carrying, in a very high Chair, a young Lad, who read certain
passages of the Alcoran, and the Procession was closed with the Relations and
Friends of the deceased, who went along with the body to a certain place of the
City, where it was to remain, till such time as it should be transferred to
Bagdat, to be disposed near their Imams.

THE TRAVELS OF THE AMBASSADORS FROM THE DUKE of HOLSTEIN INTO MUSCOVY,
TARTARY, and PERSIA.
The Seventh Book.
HAving given an account, in the precedent Book, of all we thought worthy our
observation in the City of Ispahan, during the abode we made there, as also of
all we could learn of the State of the Kingdom of Persia, and the Inhabitants
thereof, and their manner of life, at least as far as was consistent with the
relation of our Travells; it shall be our business in the subsequent to set
down the particulars of our return, and to reconduct the Ambassadors into their
Country.

All things being set in order for our departure, Some of the Retinue take
Sanctuary.
there happened a difficulty which occasioned no small distraction. The King of
Persia had commanded Abasculi^Chan, our Mehemander, to conduct us, in our
return, through the Province of KILAN, out of this consideration, that the said
Province being one of the best and most fertile of all the Kingdom, it was his
pleasure we should pass through it; as well that we might be eyewitnesses of
the riches of it, and give an account thereof in Germany, as that we might find
there those conveniences, which we had not met withal in our coming thither,
and which we should hardly light upon elsewhere. But in regard the Inhabitants
of Kilan are cruel and barbarous, whereas all the other Persians are civil and
obliging, it raised an apprehension in some, that the King had given those
orders purposely to ruin us, and it was reported, that his Majesty, being
incensed against the Ambassador Brugman, who in several Occurrences had
demeaned himself insolently and imprudently, intended to make those people the
instruments of his revenge upon him, and all of us. And this it had been the
more easy for him to do, in that he needed only to awaken the resentments of
the Governors of Derbent and Scamachie, whom the Ambassador Brugman had
indiscreetly affronted at our first passage that way. Most of our people were
so prepossessed with this apprehension, and had given so much credit to the
report, which was spread up and down the City, to that effect, that five of
our Retinue went and took up their Quarters with Lion Bernoldi, in the
Alla-Capi, or Sanctuary, to wit, the Captain of our ship, Michel Cords, his
Mate, one of the Pages, the Surgeon, who afterward went along with
Mandel^lo into the Indies, and one of the Guard.

We left Ispahan, on the 21. of December, toward the evening. Most of the
English Merchants accompanied us above a League out of the City, to a certain
place, where they gave us a Collation, DECEMBER.
at the foot of a pleasant green Hill; which done, they took leave of us, and
returned to the City. The Ambassadors leave Ispahan.
The same night, we traveled three Leagues, to a Village named Reschman, where
we continn'd all the next day, as well for some reasons, not fit to be
discovered as in expectation of the Poslanick, or Muscovian Envoy, who was to
take the same way, and accompany us. The Augustine Fathers of Ispahan and F.
Ambrose, Prior of Tistis, came thither also, to take their leave of us, and
afterward, Monsieur Malon, the most considerable person among the French
Merchants, came also to make us his Complements. Monsieur Mandelflo came also
to the said place, as well to take his final leave of us, as to acquaint us,
that the King of Persia had appointed Imanculi Sulthan, Eischickagasi, or one
of his Stewards, for the Embassy he intended to send to his Highness the Duke
of Holstein, our Master; that he carried along with him a Present amounting to
five and twenty thousand Crowns, and that he was taking his leave, in order to
his departure from the Court, within a few days after.

The 23. after we had taken leave of our friends, not without the shedding of
some tears, we got on hori-back, and reached that day to the Caravansera of
Dombi, five leagues from our former lodging.

The next day, we got five leagues further, and took up our lodging at night in
a Caravansera, called Serdehe.

The 25. being Christmas Day, we saw, near the Village of Kaskabath, within two
leagues of Serdehe, how the King was encamped there under several Tents, which
being of diverse colors, made a very delightful show. The Ambassadors sent
thither the Sieur Francis Murrher, who understood the Turkish language. He made
the King so handsome and respectfull a Complement, Come to Natens.
that his Majesty openly expressed how much he was satisfied therewith. In the
mean time we passed on, and went and lodg' in the little City of Natens.

The 26. we traveled on, and took up our Quarters at night in a Caravansera,
named Chotzakassim.

The 27. we came to the City of Kaschan, Kaschan*
where the difference which happened between the Ambassador Brugman and our
Mehemander, put us to much trouble. For the Mehemander, thinking it a
disparagement to him to be domineered over by the Ambassador, would have
returned to the Court, to make his complaints of the ill treatment he received
from us; and had done it, had it not been for the Ambassador Crusius, who
reconciled them, but it was his business for four days, which we spent to no
other purpose at Kaschan. We found the weather there very fair, and hot enough,
though it were in the very depth of Winter.

M.DC.XXXVIII.
IANVARY the first, JANUA.
we Celebrated the beginning of our New year by the firing of our great Guns,
which were discharged three times, and afterward by a Sermon and the ordinary
Prayers. In the afternoon, we got on hors-back, and reached that day five
leagues, to the Village of Sensen.

The 2. we got five leagues further, and took up our Quarters at night, at
Kasmabath.

The third, we came to the City of Kom, Kom*
where we were assigned lodgings, in very fair houses near the Basar, upon the
complaints we made of the losses we had received in our former passage that
way, when we were quartered in certain old ruined houses, where we had many
things stolen from us.

We continued there all the 4th. and the Mehemander, to show he had forgotten
all former differences, treated us so well that day, that we had all the reason
in the World to be assured thereof. The Muscovian Ambassador, who seemed
willing to have a little debauche, obliged us to pass away the night with him.

Ian. 5. we traveled five leagues, to a Caravansera, named Schaferabath. But
ere we were all got out of the City of Kom, we found the Sun eclipsed soon
after his rising. It was not quite three degrees above the Horizon, when the
Moon deprived us almost of all sight of it, and so overshadow'd it, that, to my
judgment, in the greatest obscurity, the eclipse was three parts of four.

Near this Caravansera, The Mountain of Kilissim.
and on our right hand, we discovered the Mountain of Kilissim, which is not
very high, but encompassed of all sides with several barren and stony Hills,
which produce nothing but Salt, as does also all the neighboring Champaign,
which is all white, by reason of the Salt and Saltpeter. This Mountain, as
also, those of Nachtzuan, Kulb, Vrumi, Kemre, Hemedan, Bis^tan, and Suldus,
supply all Persia with Salt, which is dug out of them as out of a Quarry.
The Persians speaking of the Mountain of Kilissim, have this expression, Kim
keder kelmes, that is, those who go it up come not down; an equivocation
wherein many of our people have been mistaken, in so much that they have set
down in their Journals, 1638.
that the said Mountain is so dangerous, that such as go up it, never come down
again. Whereas the true meaning of those words is only this, that they who go
up that Mountain, come not down, that is, that as long as they are getting up
they do not come down, in as much as both cannot be done at the same time. The
Persians affirm indeed, that Schach-Abas one day commanded one of his Hunts-men
to go up to the top of it, and that he did so, and made it appear by the fire
he made there, and that he never returned thence, and that it could never be
known what became of him: but this is only a made story.

The sixth, Brugman hurt.
we continued our journey, but ere we were well got out of our Quarters, the
Ambassador Brugman's horse fell down under him, in a very plain way. He had not
only the right Arm put out of joint by the fall, but his brains were also so
disordered, that we thought he would hardly ever be his own man again. But
indeed we had all a sad day's journey of it, in regard most of our horses
tired, nay, mine falling down dead under me, I was forced to make use of my
man's, who went afoot, and carried the Portmantle upon his head. We lodged that
night, Come to Saba.
at Saba, where we stayed all the next day, to give the Ambassador Brugman some
rest, to recover his senses.

The 8. we left Saba betimes in the morning, and traveled that day nine
leagues, to a Caravansera named Choskera. In our way, we lost one of the Mules,
which being strayed some distance from the rest, had been driven out of the way
by some Peasants. They were pursued to the next Village, where the Mule was
found, with some part of its burden, in a house, among a great many Women, who
had made a shift to unload the beast, but finding themselves surpised, and
fallen into the hands of strangers, they cried out as if they had been undone.
The Thieves were got away, so that all could be done, was to bring away the
Mule with what was left.

As soon as we were lodged in this Caravansera, the Ambassador Crusius gave
order for the seizing of certain Seamen who had committed several insolences
at Saba; but they put themselves in a posture of defense, and endeavored to
make an insurrection in the Retinue, in so much that we were obliged to disarm
them by force, and to put them into Irons, wherein they continued till our
coming to Scamachie. In all this quarter, and till we came to the Mountain of
Kilan, the weather was cold enough, and the Snow upon the ground was above half
a foot deep.

Ian. 9. Meet with an Ambassador from the King of Poland.
having traveled about three leagues, near an old uncovered Caravansera, named
Hetzib, we met with a Lord whom the King of Poland sent Ambassador to the King
of Persia. His name was Theophilus de Schonberg, a person, though well advanced
in years, of a very good countenance. He was a German by extraction, and yet in
the discourse that passed between him and the Ambassadors, which lasted above
an hour, he spoke altogether in Latin: but taking leave of us, he discovered
himself to be a German. He told us, among other things, that the King his
Master had given him a Retinue of 200. persons, but that the great Duke of
Muscovy would not permit him to pass with so many: which had occasioned him to
stay six months at Smolensko, whence he had been forced to send back most of
his people, and reduce them to the number he then had about him, which was, 25.
persons.

He also delivered us some Letters from the Armenian Archbishop, whom we had
met at Astrachan, and told us, there were arrived in that City some Provisions
which had been sent us from Nis^novogorod.

We saw that day, on our right hand, a very fair Countrey-house, which the King
had built upon the Hill called Kultcbe, for the convenience of hunting. We
intended to lodge the next night at the Village of Araseng, and to travel that
day but six leagues, but the Inhabitants told the Harbinger whom the Mehemandar
had sent thither, to take up Quarters, that they would not receive us, and that
if we attempted to lodge there by force, they were able to prevent it, and make
us repent our rashness, not dissembling the design they had, to cut all our
Throats, if we came within the Village, They had not forgotten the affront
which the Kaucha, or Judge of the Village, had received, at our first passage
that way, from the Ambassador Brugman, who having desired water to wash his
hands, and the poor man having brought him troubled water such as the Brook did
afford, cast it in his face, and the pot at his head; so that we were forced to
travel on. The Villages of Dowlet, Abath, and Ketzisan, taking example by that
of Araseng, in like manner denied us entertainment, and forced us to travel on
three leagues further, to the Village of Kulluskur, through such a bad and
slippery way, that most of our Horses were several times on their Noses, nay,
it was day ere some got to the Quarters.

I was lodged at the Parson's of the Parish, and sent several times to desire
him to come in and Sup with me. But he would by no means come, and walked all
night without Doors, grumbling that his house was profaned, by drinking Wine in
it, and eating such Meats as are forbidden by the Law of Mahomet.

Ian. 10. we had another ill day's journey, in regard the ground being frozen,
the beasts we rode on were so tired, that most of our people were forced to
march afoot. Nay some were not able to perform the journey, whom we were
afterward obliged to send for. We lodged that night at the Village of Membre.

The 11. we came to the City of Caswin, Come to Calwin.
where we were forced to continue nine days, till fresh Horses and Mules could
be got for the prosecution of our journey. Near the Ambassadors lodging there
was a great Tree, full of Nails and Pebble-stones, The superstition of the
Persians.
which are so many marks of the Miracles, that one of their Pyrs or Beats, who
lies interred under that Tree^; is wont to do at that place, in healing the
Toothache, Agues, and several other Diseases. Such as are troubled with the
Toothache touch the aching Tooth with a Nail or Pebble, which they fasten to the
Tree as high as they can reach with their mouths, and hope by that means to get
ease. They, whose imagination is so strong as to be ever the better by this
kind of Cure, express their acknowledgement thereof by tying certain Ribbands
to the boughs of the Tree; though in other respects these Miracles are not done
gratis, but are very beneficial to a certain Religious man, who has the
keeping of the Tree, and makes his advantage of the Offerings and Alms made
there. This profit, which is enough to maintain one man, has encouraged
several Mountebanks and Impostors, to expose their Cheats, in dressing up Trees
with these trifles, and finding Sepulchers of Pyrs where there never were any.

The 15. The Pos^anick, or Muscovian Ambassador, made a great entertainment for
our Ambassadors, and the chiefest of their Retinue, and treated us very
Magnificently. It was in Commemoration of the birthday of Knez Iuan
Basilouits, one of the chief Ministers of Muscovy, whose favor he courted.

Ian. 20. we left Caswin, Leave Caswin.
and leaving on our left hand, toward the Northwest, the way of Solthania and
Ardebil, which we had taken at our coming into Persia we took that of Kilan
directing our course Northward. We traveled that day four leagues, for the
most part over Hills, manured and sown, and lodged, at night, in the Village
of Achibaba, at the foot of a Mountain, on our right hand.

We were told, that Village was so called from an ancient man of that name, who
lived in the time of Schich-Sefi, and obtained it of him, in memory of a
Miracle which God had done in his person, in reviving in him and his Wife, who
were each of them near a hundred years of age, the heat of younger years, in so
much that they had a Son, who had bestowed on them the Tomb, which they showed
us, under a great Vault.

The 21. we passed through a fruitful Country but somewhat uneven, to the
Village of Tzitelly, by some called Kellabath, that is, a place fit for the
breeding of Cattle; so far as that the Grass, which there is excellent good,
and grows very plentifully, invites the Inhabitants of Caswin to drive their
Herds into those parts. The Vice-Daruga of Caswin, who accompanied the
Ambassadors to this place, and Supped with them, entertained them a long time,
and much to their Diversion, with the relation of his life, and told them, he
had been carried away in his Infancy out of Georgia, which was his Country, in
the time of Schach-Abas, during the War he made in those parts, and that he had
been transferred to Caswin with his Father and Mother, who were then alive, and
still Christians, though, in appearance, forced to embrace the Religion of the
Persians.

He told us also, that Abasculi made his advantage of our journey, as well as
other Mehemandars, to exact Provisions and other conveniences from the places
which lay in their way; but that there was not one half employed for the
service of the Ambassadors. They made him a Present of certain Else of Cloth
and Satin.

The 22. we traveled seven leagues, all over Mountains and Rocks, interwoven
with a Brook, which thereabouts ran winding up and down, so as that we were
forced to cross it above thirty times, ere we got to the Village of
Kurtzibaschi, where we lodged that night. The next morning, we traveled all
along Mountains, which were not very high, but delighted the eye by a diversity
of colors, Red, Yellow, Green, and Blue, which afforded a very pleasant
prospect. But about noon, we could see nothing but Rocks, dreadful for their
height and steepiness, and, in the evening, we came to the River Senderuth,
which we crossed by a Bridge, that joins the two Mountains through which it
runs. We discovered from the top of the Mountain, some pleasant and fruitful
Valleys, at least if I may so call the other lower Mountains, which are tilled
and cultivated, and appeared to us from the top of the Mountain as little
Hillocks. This Village belonged heretofore to a Kurtzibaschi, or Colonel of a
thousand Horse, who gave it his own name, and was seated in a very pleasant
place: but the houses were built only of Earth and Canes, whereto there
adjoined certain shepherds Huts, where with we made the best shift we could.

The 23. we traveled two leagues, very good way, along a Forest of
Olive Trees, at the end whereof, we came to a place, anciently called Fauces
Hyrcaniae, Fauces Hyrcaniae.
but by the Persians, in the time of Alexander the Great, as it is indeed to
this day, Pylas. The passage is very narrow, and serves for a Gate to the
Province of Kilan. At the entrance of it, join two swift Rivers, which fall
down with a dreadful noise through the Rocks, under the name of the River
Isperuth, though before their joining together, the greater of the two had the
name Kisilosein, and passing under a stone bridge, in order to its falling into
the Province of Kilan, it there again divides it self, and by two several
Channels, falls into the Caspian Sea.

This is a very fair Bridge, A Caravansera upon a Bridge.
built on six Arches, each whereof has a spacious Room, a Kitchen, and several
other conveniences, lying even with the water. The going down into it is by a
stone pair of stairs; so that this Bridge is able to find entertainment for a
whole Caravanne.

At the end of the Bridge, A Dreadful Road.
the road divides it self. One way leads through a delightful and even
Country, into the Province of Chalcal, and so to Ardebil, the other goes
straight into the Province of Kilan, and this last is the most dangerous and
most dreadful way of any, I think, in the World. It is cut out of a Mountain
which is pure Rock, and so steepy, that they found it a hard matter to make way
enough for the passage of one Horse or Camel laden, nay, in some places they
have been forced to supply it with Mason's work, where the Rock fell short.

On the left hand, the Rock reached up into the Clouds, so as that the top of
it could not be seen; and on the right, there was a dreadful Abyss, wherein
the River made its passage, with a noise, which no less stunned the ear, than
the Precipices dazzled the eye, and made the head turn. Not one among us, nor
indeed of the Persians themselves, durst ride it up, but were forced to lead
their Horses by the Bridle, and that at a distance loosely, lest the beast,
falling, might drag his Master after him. The Horses came very gingerly, but
the Camels stumbled not at all, and were sure to set their feet in the steps,
which had been purposely cut for them in the Rock. At the top of the Mountain,
we came to a house, where certain duties are paid. The Receiver thereof made us
a Present of several fruits, and we wondered much, considering the time of the
year, to see the Hedges all over the Valleys, flourishing, and full of blossoms.

But this very Mountain, Summer and Winter the same day.
which was so steepy, teadious, and dreadful on the one side, had so pleasant
and delightful a descent on the other, that it was no hard matter for us to
forget the fright and trouble we had been in, in coming it up. It was all over
clad with a resplendent vendure, and so planted with Citron-Trees,
Orenge-Trees, Olive Trees, nay, Cypress-Trees, and Box, that there is not any
Garden in Europe could more delight the eye, nor more surprise and divert the
smell. The ground was in a manner covered with Citrons and Orenges, insomuch
that some of our people, who had never seen such abundance of them, made it
their sport to fling them at one another's heads. But what we were most
astonished at, was, in one and the same day, to see Winter changed to Summer,
and the cold, which we had been sufficiently sensible of in the morning, turned
to a heat, which in a manner accompanied us into Europe.

We lodged that night, at the foot of a Mountain, upon the River Isperuth, at
the Village of Pyle-rubar. It Is true the houses were little and incommodious,
and scattered up and down without any order; but there was not any but had its
Garden, and Vineyard, its Citron-trees, Orenge-trees, and Pomegranate-trees,
and that in such abundance, that the Village being covered therewith, we could
hardly see any of the houses. It was encompassed of all sides with a very high
Mountain, save only, that on the South-west side of the Valley, there was a
little Plain.

It may be said of this part, as indeed of all the Province of Kilan, The
Provence of Kilan described.
that it is a kind of terrestrial Paradise. In the fifth Book of these Travels,
we gave an account of its extent, of the other Provinces whereof it consisted,
and of its principal Cities; whereto we think fit to add in this place, that
the Province of Kilan extends it self like a Crescent, all along the Caspian
Sea, and that it is encompassed like a Theater, with a high Mountain, out of
which arise several Rivers, which refresh the plain Country, and make it very
fruitful, but in some places, especially toward the Sea, so fenny, that the
whole Province becomes by that means inaccessible. But Schach-Abas has
remedied that inconvenience, by a bank or causey, which runs quite through the
Country, from Astarabath to Aastra; so that now people may travel without any
inconvenience, and that with any kind of Carriage, Horse, Camels, Wagons, etc.

There is no Province of all Persia so fertile and so abundant with Silk, Oil,
Wine, Rice, Tobacco, Lemons, Orenges, Pomegranates, and other Fruits. Its
Fruits.
The Vines there are excellent, and as big as a man at the Waste: but in regard
they are commonly planted at the foot of some tree, the branches spread
themselves up the tree, even to the extremities of the boughs, so that the
Vintage becomes so much the more difficult. For he who is to gather the Grapes,
is obliged to fasten to the top of the tree a rope, having at the other end a
stick as if it were to swing withal, upon which he having seated himself, is
drawn and swings as it were from one tree to another, and from one bough to
another, to gather the bunches.

The Mountain which encompasses it and spreads its extremities to the Caspian
Seaside, is so covered with trees, that the whole Province seems to be
enclosed by a continued Forest.

The neighboring Sea, and all the Rivers of this Province are so well stored
with Fish, the grounds with Cattle, and the forests with all sorts of Venison
and wild Fowl, that the Inhabitants have not only wherewithal to live
deliciously themselves, but may communicate of their abundance to their
Neighbors. Which is contrary to what John de Laet, writes, after Johannes de
Persia, to wit, that Mesanderan, which is part of the Province of Kilan, is so
cold a Country, that the fruits thereof hardly come to their full maturity. We
know by experience, that there is no Province in all Persia, where the air is
better and more temperate than in Mesanderan, and that it produces the best and
fairest Fruits of any place in the Kingdom. Whence it came, that Schach Abas,
who knew it very well, preferred this Province before all the rest of the
Kingdom, and had such a kindness for it, that, willing to make it his ordinary
residence, he there built the City of Terabath, where he died.

The Inhabitants of this Province, The Kilek.
especially the Kilek who live between Kesker and Mesanderan, are
self-conceited, hardy and apt to attempt any thing. They had heretofore their
particular King, nay even to this day, the King of Persia is not so absolute
there, as in the other Provinces of his Kingdom; as well in regard they need
not much care for any Trading with their Neighbors, since they have at home
whatever is necessary, as that the Country being in a manner inaccessible,
they may easily avoid entertaining the Forces which might be quartered upon
them. There are but four ways to come into the Province, and all very narrow:
the first comes from Chorasan-side, by the way of Astarabath; the second, from
Mesandaran, by the way of Ferabath; the third, by Pyle-rubar, and the fourth,
by Longer Kunan.

All these ways are so narrow, that they hardly afford passage for a Camel.
Such as are afoot, as also horsemen, sometimes venture to get into it by the
way of the Mountain; but the way there also is so intricate, that the passages
being maintainable by a few people, and the Caspian Sea not being able to bear
great ships, the Inhabitants have no enemies to fear but the Cosaques, who
sometimes fall into the Country in the night, to surprise and rifle certain
Villages upon the Seaside.

We were then told, Revolt.
that it was not above eight and thirty years, since Schach-Abas had reunited
that Province to his Crown; but that as soon as his Sovereignty was acknowledged
there, the Kilek, finding that Schach-Sefi, his Successor, signalized the
initials of his Reign by the executions of the chiefest persons about the
Court, revolted, took up arms, and chose a King, whom the Persians call
Karib-Schach.

This Karib was born in the Village hf Lechtenscha, The history of Karib-Shach.
but descended from the ancient Kings of Lahetzan, in the Province of Kilan,
and found credit enough in the Country to raise an Army of 14000. men. His
first action was the taking of the City of Res^ht, where he seized on the
King's money, as he also did in all the other Cities of the Province, whereof
he had possessed himself of all the avenues. The King of Persia, who was then
at Caswin, coming to hear of this revolt by the other Governors of the
Country, Commanded Saru, Chan of Astara, Mahoned, Chan of Kochtum and
Seberabath, Heider, Sulthan of Keinluhesar and Tanchabun, and Adam, Sultan of
Mesanderan, to set upon Karib-Schach of all sides. To that end they divided
their forces into three Bodies, and went with two of them straight toward him,
intending to make use of the third, in case of necessity, as a reserve; but
they found him so well posted, that they were forced to retreat with loss.

Karib-Schach, instead of improving this first advantage, which might have
given reputation to his Arms, grew so insolent thereupon, and withal so
negligent, that he permitted his people to enlarge their quarters to the
adjacent Villages, where they fell to merriment and making good cheer, while he
continued with some few about him at Kisma and Fumen. The Chans who observed
all his actions, had no sooner notice of it, but they got together again their
three Bodies, which made an Army of above 40000. men, with which they set upon
the forces of Karib-Schach in their quarters, and gave them an absolute defeat.

As to Karib himself, he had the time to get into a Garden, where he hid
himself, behind one of those trees which produce silk, and which those of the
Country call Tut; but he was there discovered by one of the Domestics of
Emir-Chan, who knew him by his Clothes. He entreated that Thebni, or Servant,
to save his life, by furnishing him with his Clothes, and promised him, in
requital, a good sum of money, besides the Present he made him in hand of a
great many Jewels. The Servant made as if he consented, but as soon as he got on
Karib's Garment and Sword, he said to him, It is I who am now King, and thou
art but a Traitor, and thereupon calling to some of his Camerades, he seized
upon him, and put him into the Palenk. Schach-Sefi would needs see him, and had
him brought to Caswin, where he then was, making his entrance into it,
accompanied by five or six hundred Curtezans, who incessantly jeered him in his
Royalty, and did him a thousand indignities and affronts.

They began his execution by a very extraordinary punishment. A strange
punishment.
For Schach-Sefi caused him to be shod, hands and feet, like a Horse, and told
him he did it for his ease, in regard that being accustomed to go upon the fat
and soft ground of Kilan, he would otherwise hardly endure the stony and rugged
ways of Persia. Having suffered him to languish in that condition three days*
they brought him to the Maidan, where they set him on the top of a Pole, and
killed him with Arrows. The King having shot the first, obliged all the Lords
of the Court to follow his example, bidding those that loved him do as he had
done. Upon that word, he was immediately so covered with Arrows, that there was
no shape of a man to be seen. The body was left in that posture three days,
exposed to the sight of all, and then it was taken thence and interred.

Saru Chan, Governor of Astara, had expressed most zeal, courage, and conduct
in that War, whereby he got so much into favor with Schach-Sesi, that the
saved the estate and life of a rich Merchant, who was unfortunately engaged in
Karib's revolt. He lived at the Village of Leschtensa, and if he did not openly
declare for Karib, certain it is, he knew of his design, and neglected to give
norice of it to the Court: so that they were going to extirpate him and his
family, and to confiscate his Estate, which amounted to above a hundred
thousand pounds sterling, to the King's use, had not Saru-Chan's intercession
procured his pardon.

As Soon as this revolt was appeased, The Kilek disarmed.
the Kilek were dis-arm'd, and they were forbidden to buy Arms, upon so great
penalties, that ever since that time they have not dared to have any, not so
much as a Sefir, or Ring, wherewith the Persians bend their Bows, so far were
they from being allowed Firearms, Swords, Bows or Arrows. They are only
permitted the use of a certain Instrument like a Hedg-bill, which they call
Das, having a handle of wood four foot long, wherewith they cut wood, dress
their Vi^es, and do several other things. The people called Talisch, who live
between Kesker and Mesanderan, who expressed their fidelity, and affection to
the King's service, in the War against Karib, have, on the contrary, the
privilege of using all sorts of Arms.

The Kilek wear a shorter Garment than the other Persians, Their^dbit.
by reason of the moisture and moorishness of the Country. They are not of so
yellowish a complexion as the rest of the Persians, but of a much clearer, in
regard the air there is much more temperate, than in other parts of the
Kingdom. The Talisch
The Women of the Talisch's are the handsomest of any in Persia, and cover not
their faces as much as the others do. Maids have their hair tied up in 24. or
25. tresses, which hang down over their backs and shoulders, but married Women
have but ten or twelve. Their Garments are so short before, that they hide not
their Smocks, and instead of shoes, they were Sandals of wood, which they
fasten with a string to the heel, and, with a button or latchet of wood,
between the great toe and the next to it: but in regard the ground is very fat
there upon any rain, they commonly go barefoot as well as the men. The Caps
worn by the Kileck are of a coarse Cloth, but those of the Talisch are of
black Lambskin. These two people have each of them their particular Language,
which differs from the Persian, only as to Dialect; though there be so little
rapport between that of Kilan and that of the Talisch, that they have much ado
to understand one the other. For example, to signify a Dog, a Persian will say
Sek, a Kilek Seggi, and a Talisch Spech. There is no Province in all Persia,
where the Women take more pains than they do in that of Kilan* They are
commonly employed in spinning, and making Stuffs of Cotton, Flax, and Silk, as
also in making Duschab, and Syrrop of Wine, which they sell by jarrs, and
tilling the ground for the sowing of Rice, about which the men and women have
their several employments. For the men hold the Plow, and make the trenches to
keep in the water, for the watering of the ground: The women carry the Corn to
field. The men sow the ground, going backwards as they cast the seed into it:
The women weed it. The men cut it, and the women bind it. The men bring it into
the barn, but the women thrash and sell it. They all profess the Turkish
Religion, and are of the Sect of Hanife.

They received us so kindly, that it was generally wished by us we might have
made some stay there: but we were forced to depart thence the 24. of January.
We went, at first, along the River side, having on our left hand a forest of
Olive Trees, which gave us a pleasant shade, against the heat of the Sun, which
proved very great that day. Within a league of Pyle-rubar, we saw, in the midst
of the River, upon a great Rock, the ruins of a Castle, and the remainders of a
Bridge, both which they said had been pulled down by Alexander the Great. We
afterward passed over another Mountain, or rather a very high and craggy Rock,
at the foot whereof we came into a very smooth way, enameled with green, and
spread over with new springing grass, checkered with Violets, which extremely
delighted not only the smell but also the eye. We came at night to a Village,
where we saw the Sepulcher of Iman Sade, in a little Chapel built at the foot
of a hill, which lay on our right hand. All the houses of the Village were
covered with ^lats and tiles, as they are in Europe, by reason of the rains,
which, it seems, are more frequent in those parts than any where else.

The 25. we got five leagues, Come to Rescht.
and came at night to Rescht. The way at first, was somewhat uneven and woody:
but after a while, we found it planted with those trees which bear silk, and at
last we came to a plain and smooth way, having on both sides Corn-grounds,
interwoven with several deep trenches, such as those which in Flanders they
call Water-gangs, into which they let in the water by Sluices, and there keep
it, for the watering of their grounds, when the heat has dried up the sources
of the Rivers, nay indeed for the overflowing of them, when need requires. They
had indeed been at the pains to make Bridges over those moats or trenches, but
they were so ill kept in repair, that many of our people fell into the water.
The Inhabitants of the Country mind only the husbandry of Rice, and they have
each of them his house at the end of his piece of ground, about two or three
hundred paces distant one from the other.

The City of Rescht is the Metropolis of all Kilan, Metropolis of the Province
of Kilan.
and of a considerable bigness, but open of all sides like a Village, and the
houses of it are so hid within the trees, that a man at his entrance into it
may think, he is rather going into a Forest than a City, since there is no
seeing of it, till a man be within it. It lies two leagues distant from the
Caspain Sea, and the Arabians, in the Catalogue of their Cities, name it,
Husum, and place it at 85. degrees, 10. minutes latitude. The houses of it are
not so well built, nor so fair, as those of the other Cities of Persia, but
they were all covered with tiles as ours, and not any but had adjoining thereto
a great number of Citron-trees and Orenge-trees, which had then on them their
second fruit, ripe, of that years growth.

The Maidan, or Marketplace, is very spacious, and full of shops, where are
sold all sorts of Commodities, especially Provisions, which are very cheap
there, upon which account it was, that our Mehemander treated us very
magnificently during the abode we made there, which was five days: The City of
Rescht, though the greatest af all the Province, has no Chan, or chief
Governor, but only a Daruga, whose name, at that time, was Alyculi-Beg.

Ian. 26. the Inhabitants of Rescht celebrated a Festival, A feast in honor of
Aly.
in Honor of Aly, with the same Ceremonies in a manner, as we had seen at
Scamachie, on the 7. of February, the year before: and this Feast happened then
in January, in regard the Persians regulate their Feasts according to the Moon.
They borrowed of us a Drum, wherewith they made a mad kind of noise in their
Procession. The Preacher, who made a long relation of the Miracles of Aly,
concluded his Sermon with these blasphemous words, That, if Aly were not really
God, he at least came very near the Divinity: Aly Chodda nist, amma ne dures
Choddai.

We were here shown the Sanctuary, Sefi Myrzas' Sanctuary.
which Schach-Abas had ordered to be built, at the place, where Sefi Myrza, his
Son, had, by his command, been killed by Bebut-beg, as we have related in the
precedent Book of these Travels.

Ian. 30. we left Rescht, Leave Rescht.
the weather rainy. We saw nothing at all that day but a Plain, which brought
us not only to our lodging that night, but also to the Frontiers of the
Province of Kilan, which is very even on that side. All the way was planted on
both sides with Box, and those trees which bear silk, and crossed by many small
Rivers, whereof such as were considerable enough to have a name, are, the
Pesi-chan, half a league from the City of Rescht, then that of Chettiban, and
somewhat less than a league thence, those of Pischeru and Lissar, all which
have Bridges, raised very high, by reason of the frequent inundations of the
Rivers, and so untoward to pass over, that they put a man into a fright: and
notwithstanding all our care, yet could we not prevent the Horse, which carried
the Physicians baggage, from falling into the River, whence we had much ado to
get him out, by reason of the Fens on both sides it. The last River we crossed
that day is called Tzomus; and they are all well stored with fish, in so much
that the King farms out the fishing of them, which brings him in yearly very
considerable sums. Having traveled four leagues that day, we came at night to
Kisma, neet the Town of Fumen, or Pumen, where Karib-schach was defeated, and
taken, as we related before.

January the last, we got four leagues further, our way being planted all along
with those Trees which bear silk, and whereof there was so great a number, that
they made a Forest. We saw also that day great Vineyards, according to the
Persian way.

Having traveled about four leagues, we met with the Calenter, or King's
Lieutenant in the Government of Kesker, who came to meet us, accompanied by
thirty Horse. He had led after him a Mule, laden with Wine, Conserves, and
other refreshments, wherewith he treated the Ambassadors, and obliged them to
make a Collation in the field.

The Chan, who was coming after him, Come to Kurab.
accompanied by a hundred persons of quality on Hors-back, received the
Ambassadors with great civility, and conducted us to the little City of Kurab,
where he invited us to his own house, and treated us with Fruit and Conserves,
making it his excuse, that their Fast permitted him not to keep us company, and
entertain us with flesh. The Collation ended, he had us all conducted to the
Lodgings he had taken up for us, ordered certain Gentlemen to wait on the
Ambassadors, and sent them a Present of four wild Boars.

The Chan's name was Emir, and he was son to a Georgian Christian, born at a
Village near Eruan. He had been Circumcised in his youth, and had some time
been Cup Bearer to Schach-Abas, who had bestowed that Government on him, in
recompense of the service he had done him at the siege of Eruan, and had given
the reversion of his place of Cup Bearer to his Son. He was an eloquent person,
and obliging, and took much delight in talking of the Affairs and Wars of
Germany, and our manner of life. He told us he could not forbear loving the
Christians: but we were told one very extraordinary thing of him, and horrid to
relate, to wit, that having some time been in a teadious Disease, which having
caused an universal contraction in all his Members, the Physicians had ordered
him one of the most extravagant remedies that ever were heard of, which was, ut
rem haberet cum cane foemina.

This little City of Kurab lies within two leagues of the Caspian Sea, Kurab
Metropolis of the Province of Kelker.
as that of Rescht does, and is hid within its Trees. They who call it Kesker,
give it the name of the Province, wherein it lies. In this place was born
Schach-Sefi, who reigned at the time of our Embassy. For his Mother was brought
to bed in this City, upon occasion of a journey which Schach-Abas took into
Kilan, wherein she followed him, along with Sesi Mersa her Husband. The house,
wherein he was born, belonged to a rich Merchant, named Chotza Mahmud; but in
regard a Prince, Heir to the Crown, had his birth there, it was converted into
a Sanctuary.

February the first, FEBRUA
we left Kurab, The Ambassadors leave Kurab.
about ten in the morning, having very fair weather, save that the heat was
greater than we could have wished. Emir-Chan conducted us a league or better
out of the City, where he took leave, entreating us to be careful of his
Calenter, who had order to accompany us through his Government. This Calenter
was a young man, of an excellent good nature, and diverted us in our way, by
shooting with the Bow, and showing tricks with a half-pike, at which exercise
he had an admirable slight.

Having traveled two leagues, we were got to the Caspian Seaside, whence we
saw the Country, which is all covered with Trees and Forests toward the North
and South, spreading it self like a Crescent a great way into the Sea, on the
right hand, from about Mesanderan, and Ferahath, and on the left, from about
Ast^ra. We traveled about a league along the the Caspian Seaside, and lodged
at night, upon the Torrent Nasseru, in a house called Ruasseru-kura, which had
but two Chambers in all, so that being straightened for room, most of our people
were forced to ly abroad, at the sign of the Seven-Stars.

The 2. we traveled six leagues or better, along the Sea coast, going
North-westward. We crossed over that day fourteen little Rivers, or rather so
many great brooks, and among others, those of Sehibern, Dinatsar, Chalessera,
Alarus; and Nabarrus. The River of Dinatsar, which is about the midway, serves
for a common Frontier to the Goverments of Kesker and Astara, which obliged the
Calenter of Kesker, who had accompanied us so far, to take leave, and recommend
us to the conduct of the Calenter of Astara, who waited for us on the River
side. The Canton is called Kargaru. The Calenter carried us out of the highway,
and conducted us through Corn-ground to a Village named Sengar-hasara, where we
lodged that night, and found, brought thither, before us, five wild boars which
they had hunted, purely upon our account, and for our entertainment. All the
Forests of those parts are well stored with them, in regard the Persians, not
daring to eat them, are not much inclined to the hunting of them.

The 3. we departed betimes in the morning, in snowy and rainy weather, and
continued our way along the Caspian Sea, drawing toward East-north-east. Our
way lay so near the Sea, that the Horses many times went into the water up to
the Girts, nay some of our people fell, horse and man, into the water: so that
this proved one of the worst days journey we had, especially for this, that,
after we had traveled seven large leagues, we were forced to lodge that night
in a wretched Village, named Hove-lemur, where all we could get was only a
house over our heads.

The 4. we were upon our way again very betimes in the morning, having received
fresh horses. We traveled four leagues along the Seacoast, going toward the
North. Then we passed through a Forest^ of two leagues, and, in that space of
ground, met with two and twenty Rivers; whereof the chiefest are called Lome,
Konab, and Beskeschan. The Bridges we were to pass over, were so bad, that many
of our company fell into the water, nay there were three Peasants and four
horses drowned, and six more died by the way.

The Chan of Astara, with a troop of 200. horse, met us within half a league of
the Village, where we were to take up our quarters, and accompanied the
Ambassadors to their lodgings, which he had taken up for them in houses
scattered up and down among the trees. The name of the Village, as also of the
River, which runs through it, is Choskedehene. The word Choskedehene signifies,
dry-mouth, and they have given it that name, for this reason, that, the Sea is
so shallow there, that the Fish cannot get into the River. The Chan lives at
Astara, which place has its name from the Province, and is an open place
without any walls, as Rescht is, within a quarter of a league of the Caspian
Sea. His name was Saru-Chan, a person furnished with all the qualities
requisite in a Governor of a Province.

Feb. 6. which was the last day of their Lent, he made a great entertainment
for the Ambassadors, whereat he discovered not only the magnificence of his
disposition, but also the excellency of his wit, by the noble discourses that
passed between him and the Ambassadors. Among other things, he gave them all
the particulars of the War, occasioned by Karib-Sehach's revolt, wherein he had
been in person, and had brought away his table-cloath, which, being of green
Satin with Gold-flowers, was laid at this entertainment. That service, with
other he had done upon several other occasions, had raised him so much into the
King's favor, that he had appointed him for the Embassy into the Indies,
whither he was to go the following Spring, to which end he had already received
his dispatches. He confirmed to us what we had been told before, of the danger
we might fear from the Cosaques, adding thereto, that it was not two years
since they had plundered the City of Rescht, and that it were not amiss we
stood on our guard, and had our Arms fixed.

The Vines in these parts are so big, that they exceed a man's bulk. I have
said as much before, though I believe some will hardly believe it: but besides
that all who traveled with us, are eyewitnesses of this truth, I may allege,
to make good what I affirm, the Authority of Strabo, who says the same thing
of the Vines of Margiana, which is part of the Province of Chorasan, and adds
thereto, that no stock almost but yields an ordinary pail-full of Wine; which
is very certain, and yet I have some reason to doubt of what he further
affirms, that the bunches there are above four foot long.

We saw near Astara at the foot of the mountain of Schindan, the Village of
Schich-Sahadan, which enjoyes an absolute exemption, granted it, upon the
account of the Sepulcher of Schich-Sahadan, Aly's Master,

Febr. 7. we got seven leagues further, Come to the Province of Lengerkunan.
along the Seaside, and came, by a very steight passage, into the Province of
Lengerkunan. The only way to come into it is by a Bank, raised between the
mountains and the fenns, besides which there is no other passage. At the end of
the said bank, we came to the River Serdane, and afterward to the Town of
Lenkeran; upon the River Warsasaruth. This Town, as also all the adjacent
Country, derives its name from the easy anchorage of shipping thereabouts,
though, to speak rigorously, there is no haven in those parts, but only a kind
of Bay, between two Capes, or Promontories, which reach a great way into the
Sea, one on Lenkeran-side, which is covered with trees, on the other on
Kisilagats-side, on which there is nothing but canes. But the Sea thereabout is
so shallow, that little Vessels can hardly get in there; and when they are in,
they ly exposs'd to the violence of the East Wind.

Geor^e Dictander says, in the Relation of his Travels, that, in the year
1603. there came to that place by Sea an Ambassador from Rudolph II. Emperor
of Germany, and that he died there with most of his retinue: but the
Inhabitants thereabouts, from whom I would have informed my self of that
particular, knew nothing of it. The Kurtzibaschi has the revenue of the
Country allowed him as part of his pay; though our Mehemandar and the
Persians, for what reasons I know not, would have persuaded us, that it
belonged to the Chan of Ardebil, and depended on his Government. We were
received there by a Visir, or Secretary, who had the oversight of the Demesne
in those parts.

We continued there the 8. 9. and 10. as well to refresh the Camels, which the
ill and slippery ways had almost wearied off their legs, as in expectation of
the rest of our retinue, who were not yet come up with the baggage, and with
them fresh horses, for the better prosecution of our Journey.

The 11. we left Lenkeran, Leave Lenkeran.
and traveled five leagues on to Kisilagats, crossing that day four great
Rivers, to wit, those of Kasiende, Noabine, Tzili, and Buladi, the three former
over Bridges, and the last, which was very broad, in little Boats, swimming
over the horses. At our coming out of the River, we were forced to travel with
much inconvenience, for half a league or better, through the water, which the
adjacent Sea had forced up there, and to send the Baggage by Sea, in six great
Fisher-boats. The Seaside, in those parts, is covered all over with Canes, as
are also the Islands along the Coast, where the Cosaques some times lie in
ambush, to surprise and set upon the ships which pass that way, as also in
expectation of an opportunity to cross over to the Continent.

At our coming out of the said water, we found the Lord of that place, who was
come to meet us, accompanied by a hundred persons on hors-back.

The little City of Kisilagats, The City of Kisilagats.
that is, red, or gilt wood, has no walls, no more than any of the other
Cities of those parts, and lies in a plain, half a league, or better, from the
Sea, toward the North-west, upon a little River, called Willeschi.
Sulfahar-Chan sold it heretofore to the Chan of Ardebil, by whom it was left to
his Son, Hossein Sultan, who still enjoyes it. The mountain of Kilan presented
it self to our sight, toward the West-north-west, sinking by degrees into
little hills, toward the Country of Mokan. At the foot of the mountain, there
were ^eral Villages, among others, those of Buladi, Matzula, Buster, and
Thaliskeran, and abundance of trees, planted in a straight line, along a vast
piece of Meadow-ground, where there was excellent Pasture for Cattle. I
conceive this to be the place which Strabo speaks of, when he says, that,
toward the Portae Caspiae, there is a fertile plain, very fit for the breeding
of Horses. He adds, that it is able to keep fifty thousand breeding Mares,
which number the Kings of Persia were wont to have kept there. But this is not
true, at least there is no such thing now: though a Military Officer of the
Duke of Holstein's, who made it his bragg, that he had traveled into Tartary,
though he had not been beyond Astrachan, being questioned concerning the truth
of this breeding-place, had the confidence to affirm, that what Strabo had said
of it, was very certain.

About these parts, and in the neighboring Mountains, are the Countries of
Kuawer, Maranku, and Deschiewend, and the Village of Dubil, otherwise called
Chatifekeka, the Inhabitants whereof were extirpated, The Inhabitants of a
Village extirpated.
by the express command of Schach Abas, for the abominable lives they led. They
had their meeting in the night time at some private houses, where, after they
had made good cheer, they blew out the Candles, put off their Clothes, and went
promiscuously to the work of Generation, without any respect of age or kindred,
the Father many time having to do with his own Daughter, the Son, with the
Mother, and the Brother, with the Sister. Schach Abas coming to hear of it,
ordered all the Inhabitants of the Village, to be cut to pieces, without any
regard or distinction of age or sex, and peopled it with others. I conceive, it
is of the Inhabitants of these parts, that we are to understand what Herodotus
affirms, of their going together, without any shame, and publicly, after the
manner of Beasts. Over against Kisilagats, and about three leagues from the
Continent, there are two Islands named Kelechol and Aalybaluck. A false Miracle
of Aly.
The latter, which is three leagues, or Farsangs in length, has its name upon
this account, that Aly being there one day, extremely put to it for fresh water
to quench his thirst, God immediately caused to break forth out of the ground a
Spring of fresh water, which is to be seen there to this day.

Febr. 12. we traveled on, through a plain Country, but crossed by several
small Rivers, the chiefest whereof were the Vskeru, and the Butaru, and we
lodged at night, at Elliesdu, a Village seated at the entrance of the Heath of
Mokan, at the foot of a hill, which is very fruitful, as is also the rest of
the Country, on the mountain-side. It belonged to a Military Officer, named
Beter Sulthan, who had his ordinary residence at a place six leagues thence.
The houses of this Village were very wretched ones, as being built only with
laths nailed across, and plastered over with clay. They were inhabited by
Soldiers, on whom the King bestows the revenue of his Demesin in these parts,
with certain Lands which they are obliged to cultivate.

In this Village, A harbarous action of the Ambassador Brugman.
the Ambassador Brugman caused a Persian to be killed with cudgelling. His
Groom would have gone into the first house he came to, with one of the
led-horses: the Kisilbach, or soldier, who was the Master of it, told him, that
his house was free from quartering, and that besides, he had no convenience for
the entertainment of horses, whereupon, having a stick in his hand, he
therewith struck the horse over the head, but very slightly. The Ambassador
Brugman, who saw this contestation, was so enraged at the resistance of the
Kisilbach, that he immediately alighted, and ran in to him.

The Kisilbach, who said afterward that he knew him not, and was far from
imagining, that an Ambassador would engage himself in such a business, and, as
a Soldier could not brook an affront in his own house, stood upon the
defensive, and gave the Ambassador such a blow over the arm with his stick,
that he was forced to cry out for help.

His Domestics came in upon the noise, and gave the Kisilbach such a beating,
that he was mortally wounded, and had much ado to crawl into the next house, to
avoid their further fury. The Ambassador, notwithstanding all this, would needs
make his complaint to the Mehemandar, of the insolence of the Kisilbach;
whereto the other replied, that he knew not what to do in the business; that he
had no power over the Kisilbachs; that the Superior Officer was not there, to
give him satisfaction, and, withal this, that he who had injured him, had
received such a chastisement, as he thought he could hardly ever recover, and
that if he were not satisfied, he might do himself what further satisfaction he
thought fit. Brugman, presuming upon this permission, immediately sent to
plunder the Kisilbach's house, and ordered his horse and arms to be brought
away. The next day, he got together all the retinue, and caused it to be
published by sound of Drum, that all should get on horseback, in order to
their departure out of the Village, and that all who should stay there, after
the Ambassadors were gone, might do it at their own peril.

Not one of the Company knew his design, no, not his Colleague; but it was soon
discovered, when he himself, being got on horseback, and making a halt before
the Ambassador's Lodging, told the Mehemandar, that he should bring forth the
man, who had struck him the day before. The Mehemandar told him, he was so
dangerously wounded, that he was not able to rise; but the Ambassador not
satisfied with that answer, ordered him to be brought thither in a Coverlet,
and, notwithstanding the mediation of the other Persians, who with great
submissions begged the Kisilbach's pardon, he commanded an Armenian, who was an
Interpreter for the Turkish Language, named Mark-Filerossein, to beat him with
a great Cudgel, after the same manner as he had been beaten the day before.

This merciless Rogue gave him one blow over the arm, Causes a Kisilbach to be
killed in cold blood.
and another upon the side, wherewith he dispatched the poor Kisilbach, who
stirred a little afterward; but when the Armenian would, by order from
Brugman, have prosecuted the execution, he found the man quite dead. The
Ambassador seeing him in that posture, said, it is very well, he has what he
deserved; and thereupon turning to the Mehemandar, and the other Persians, he
told them, that if Schach-Sefi did not revenge him for the affront be had
received, he would return again in a short time, so well attended, that he
should do himself satisfaction. The other Soldiers made it appear by their
demeanor, that they wanted neither will nor courage to express their
resentment of the injury done them, and cut all our throats, and I know not
whether it were the presence of the Mehemandar, that prevented them from doing
it; but certain it is, that it would have been no hard matter for them to do
it, and that it was the effect of a miraculous providence, that we escaped that
misfortune.

We traveled that day, which was the 13. of February, two leagues over the
Heath of Mokan, and lodged, that night, at Oba, in Shepherds hurts. The
Mehemandar, who had staid behind in the Village, overtook us at night, and
brought us word that the Kisilbach was dead, and demanded of the Ambassador
Brugman, the Horse, Arms, and other things, which he had from the deceased
person, to be sent to his Widow and Children, whom he had left in a very sad
condition.

I observed that morning, that the Sun rose toward East-south-east, and
consequently, that the Lodestone declined 24. degrees from the North toward
the West, and at Oba, I found the Sun, at noon, at the height of forty degrees,
forty eight minutes, and consequently, that the elevation of the Pole, under
that Meridian, was thirty nine degrees, twenty eight minutes.

The Seacoast lay from South-west to North-east, and we had a sight of the
mountain of Scamachie, toward the North.

As concerning the Heath of Mokan, it is held to be sixty Farsangs in length,
and twenty in breadth. The Turks call it Mindunluck, that is, a thousand ways,
or thousand holes, at which the smoke comes out, and the Persians, Mogan, or
Mokan. It is inhabited by several peoples and families, whose Predecessors,
having born Arms under the command of Iesid against Hossein, were banished into
this Desert, and they are not permitted to live either in Cities or Villages.
In Summer, they encamp at the foot of the Mountain; and in Winter, they lodge
in Tents upon the Heath.

They subsist by their Cattle, but so poorly, that it is as much as they can
do. Whence it comes, that they are called Sumek Rajeti, either for that, from
bone to bone, that is, from Father to Son, they are subject to the King no
otherwise than as the most miserable Slaves are, or that they have hardly left
them wherewith to cover their bones. They are a kind of Savages, and their
chief families are called Chotze Tschaubani, Tekle, Elmenku, Hatzikasilu,
Sulthan baschelu, Carai, Ardenduschenlu, Chaletz, etc. I speak in another
particular Treatise of the origin of these families, and the manner of life of
these people.

The 14. we traveled three leagues, A Robber General of an Army.
drawing toward the North, and lodged at night among the Hatzicasilu. We saw,
in a Chapel by the way, the Sepulcher of Bairam Tekle Obasi. He was the famous
Robber, who lived in the time of Schach Abas, who coming to be head of a strong
party of Toryes, did abundance of mischief to the Bassa Tzakal Ogli, who was
entered Persia with a Turkish Army, insomuch that there hardly passed a day, but
he sent some Turks heads to the King.

These little advantages, and the booty he got, improved his retinue to the
number of twelve thousand men, who did the Turks more mischief than the Royal
Army could. Schach-Abas requited his services, by honoring him with the
quality of Chan, and bestowing on him the revenue of certain Villages, and some
Lands, to maintain the new Dignity.

We lodged that night in Hurts, and were hardly laid down, ere we heard the
noise of a great volley of small shot; which gave us a hot alarm, and obliged
us to put our selves into a posture of defense, in expectation of some
engagement. We thought at first, that the Kisilbachs had a design to revenge
the cruelty, which the Ambassador Brugman had exercised the day before on one
of their Camerades; but we understood soon after, that what had been done, was
by order from the Muscovian Poslanick, purposely to frighten the Ambassador
Brugman, though he would make us believe, it was to honor him, out of an
imagination he seemed to have, that it was the said Ambassador's birthday.

The 15. we traveled eight leagues along the Heath, and lodged within a
quarter of a league of the River Aras.

We intended to take up our quarters that night at Tzauat; but understanding
that Areb, Chan of Scamachie, was lodged there with his whole Court, and that
he would stay there all the next day, we also resolved to continue the 16. at
the place where we were.

We had some reason to be distrustful of Areb-Chan, by reason of what had
happened between us at our first passage: but he made it appear that the
Persians have this also common with all Generous minds, that they can forget
injuries. For he did us no unkindness; nay, on the contrary, as long as we were
in his Government, he let slip no occasion of obliging us, laying the cause of
our misunderstanding one the other, on the Interpreter Rustan, who had forsaken
us, and, as he said, had made him several bad reports of us, not doubting but
he had said as much to us of him, and protesting that if he had him, his head
should go off for it. He ordered us to be received by a Person of Quality of
his retinue, upon the first news were brought him of our being come to the
River Aras, and made us a Present of three baggs of Wine, which came to us very
seasonably, in as much as that day, and the day before, we had been but poorly
treated. Aetzebeg, who had been our Mehemandar at our former passage, came also
to visit the Ambassadors, and presented them with an excellent Greyhound-bitch.

The 17. we crossed over the famous River Araxes, near Tzauat, where they had
made a Bridge of Boats, which they call Tzissi. The ancient Historians and
Geographers speak so differently of this River, that I conceive it will not be
amiss I said somewhat here of it by the way.

True it is, The River Aras.
most of them put it in the Province, wherein it really lies, but they are
mistaken in the description of its Course, in as much as they do not well
understand Q. Curtius, who speaks of it in two several passages, but in a
different sense. For in the 5. Book he puts it in Persida, and says its course
is Southward; and in the 7. Book, he makes it pass through Media, and to fall
into the Caspian Sea. Nor does Strabo express himself more clearly. Raderus, in
his Commentaries upon Q. Curtius, thinks to make these passages very clear, by
saying, that the River Medus, into which the Araxes fall, has its course, at
first, from North to South, and that it falls into the Caspian Sea. But he is
mistaken; for it is impossible, that River should make its way through the
dreadful mountain Taurus, which is many leagues in breadth, and which runs
through all Persia, nay indeed all Asia, and pass from Persepolis toward the
Caspian Sea. But the truth is, there are two Rivers of the same name of Araxes
in Persia; one, in Media, the other in Persida. As to that which passes by the
walls of Persepolis, now known by the name of Schiras, Q. Curtius calls it
Araxes, as he gives to the Iaxartes, which passes to the Frontiers of the
Scythians, the name of Tanais, and that of Cancasus to the Eastern part of the
mountain Taurus, for which it would much gravel him to show any reason.

The Persians call that which is in Persida, Bend-Emir, by reason of a great
Miracle, which they believe Aly did there, and it falls into the Ocean near the
Persian Gulf. That which we crossed over in the Heaths of Mokan, still keeps
its name, which is derived, if we may credit Eustathius, from the Greek word
(...), which signifies to pluck, in as much as, when it overflows, it plucks
up, and carries along with it whatever lies in its way. It rises out of the
mountains of Armenia, behind the great Ararat, and receiving into its Chanel,
the waters of many other Rivers, the chiefest whereof are Karasu, Senki, Kerni,
and Arpa, it goes near Karasu, a great way into the Land, and falls soon after
near Ordabath, with such a noise, as is heard above two leagues thence, in the
Plain of Mokan, which lies very low, in comparison of Armenia and Schiruan.

Its course there is very slow, and after it is joined, viz. 12. leagues above
Tazuat, with the River Cur or Cyrus, (which is as big as it self, and comes
Northwar'd out of Georgia or Gurtzistan) it falls into the Caspian Sea. Whence
it appears, that Ptolomy, and those who follow him, are mistaken, when they
affirm, that the Araxes and the Cyrus fall into the Caspain Sea by two
different channels; as also when they say, that the City of Cyropolis was that
which is now called Scamachie. This is inferred by Maginus, from the degrees of
Latitude which Ptolomy gives him. But if it were so, we must put these two
Rivers, not above, but below the City, toward the South, in as much as we
found their Conflux or meeting together, which the Persians call Kanschan, at
thirty nine degrees, fifty four minutes, and Scamachie, at forty degrees, fifly
minutes, that is, thirteen leagues thence, and under another Meridian. And
indeed we found such a distance between them, when we traveled those parts.
Nor is there any other River, eminent enough or big enough, within nineteen
days journey of Scamachie, on either side of it, to deserve that name.

The 17. we took up our Quarters at Tzauat, where we were received, and
magnificently treated by the Mehemandar, whom the Chan had sent to us. This
Vill^ge derives its name from the Arabiau word Tzauat, which signifies a
passage, in regard that, at the crossing of this River, people are obliged to
show their passport, which is done, to prevent the entrance of the Turks into
the Kingdom.

The 19. we traveled eight leagues, for the most part, over barren Lands, and
a desert Country, covered with Reeds, and lodged, that night, at the foot of
the mountain of Scamachie, in three Matzuchs, or round Hutts, which had been
purposely set up there for us. That day died our Painter, whose name was
T^ierry Nieman, after he had been shaken several months together by a quartane
ague, whereto a flux joining carried him away in four days. He died by the way
in a Wagon, and in ill weather. We had him buried the 22. before the City of
Scamachie, in the Churchyard belonging to the Armenians, with the ordinary
Ceremonies of our own Country.

The 20. we were upon our way betimes in the morning, The mountain of Scamachie
that we might, in good time, pass over the mountain of Scamachie, which
extends it self in those parts like a Crescent, toward the East, from the Sea,
along the River Cyr, and it is called there, Lengebus tachi, by reason of a
Village, named Lengebus, which is upon the op of the mountain.

The rain, which was then so cold, that we thought Winter coming on again, had
so broken the highways, that this was one of the saddest days journey we had
ever since our first setting forth.

The Ambassadors, and such others as were well mounted, got to the City ere
daylight was shut in, but it was very late ere the rest reached it; nay some
got not thither till after midnight, some, not till the next morning.

The Camels, which being so heavily laden, where not able to get up so narrow
and slippery a way as is that of the Mountain, came not till eight days after.
The Chan had assigned us the same Quarters we had had, at our former passage
that way; so that we were all lodged at the houses of the same Armeniaus, our
ancient Landlords. They received us very kindly, and as to the Ambassadors, the
Chan sent them a Supper from his own Kitchen.

For my own particular, I had several Presents sent me from my friends, and
Tutors, as Maheb Aly, the Molla, Imanculi, and Chalil, who sent me several
dishes of Apples, and Grapes, and came to see me the next day, to examine how I
had improved my self in their Language.

Feb. 22. The Chan and Calenter came in person to see the Ambassadors, The Chan
treats the Ambassadors.
and invited them and their retinue to a Supper. In the evening, the Chan sent
horses, to bring them to the Palace. He treated us magnificently; and
entertained us with very civil discourses, and such as were the more obliging,
in that we afterward found the effects of them, during our abode at Scamachie,
where we continued five weeks; during which, we had the divertisement of
several hunting matches, and were treated a great Feasts, which the Chan made
from time to time purposely for us.

Alexi Savinowits, MARC.
Ambassador of Muscovy, made a great and sumptuous entertainment on the first
of March in commemoration of the birth of the Great Duke, his Master.

The 3. 6. and 10. the Chan treated us at his own Palace, to celebrate their
Naurus, or Newyear. Chalip, the Minatzim, or Astrologer, belonging to the Chan,
sent me, for my new-years-gift, a fat Lamb.

March 14. Areb-Chan received an assurance of the continuance of the King's
favor toward him, How the K of Persia assures the Chans of his favor.
according to the custom, by the Present of a new Garment: in as much as when
the Chans and Governors have made their ordinary Presents, the King sends an
express to them, to assure them, either of his favor or displeasure; whereof
the Ceremony is this. The King's Envoy or Express, being come within three or
four leagues of the City, sends a Messenger, to give the Governor notice of
it, and to let him know he brings him good news. The Governor, who many times
is not sure to return again, takes his leave of the City, as if he were not to
come thither any more, and goes a league out of the City, to meet the Envoy,
accompanied by all his friends.

As soon as the Envoy sees the Governor coming, he makes a halt, and the
Governor alights, and puts off his Sword, Garment, and Turbant, and in that
posture approches the Envoy, who has in a Box covered with some rich Tapistry,
a Letter of grace, with a new Garment, or else an order to bring the
Governor's head. If the Kings favor be confirmed to him, he receives from the
Envoy, the new Garment, which he kisses at the collar, touches with his fore
head, and then puts it on.

If the Envoy has an order to bring away the Governor's head, he presently
has it cut off, puts it into the Box, and immediately returns. There are
diverse examples of these executions in the time of Schach-Abas, as also in
that of Schach-Sefi, The former caused to be executed after this manner, Ahmad,
Chan of Hemedan, Kaban, Chan of Orumi, and Baisunkur Sulthan, Governor of
Magasburt; and the later put to death, by an Envoy, Iarali, Sulthan of Maku,
and Moral, Sulthan of Bajesid. But this last caused them to be strangled, and
afterward to be flead, and ordered their skins, filled with Hay, to be set in
the highway, because they had over-easily delivered up those places wherewith
he had entrusted them.

Areb-Chan entreated the Ambassadors to be present at an action, which he knew
could not be otherwise than advantageous to him, in so much that he had got a
large dose of drink, ere he went out of the City. He was mounted on an
excellent Roan horse, without any Arms, causing to be led before him several
other gallant horses with rich trappings, and having about his person fifteen
of his Guard, with their Carabins, and a retinue of about four hundred men
besides the Ambassadors, and the Calenter, who accompanied him with their
Domestics. He marched in this order, as far as the King's Garden, without the
City, halting several times, to make the Company drink, and causing several
young Lads to dance in the mean time. His two Sons, whereof the elder was but
20. years of age, and the younger 18. both very handsome well shaped persons,
followed him with most of the Inhabitants of the City, and certain men on
horseback, who were covered with Lynxes-skins, and the furs of Buchar-Sheep,
and carried on the tops of long Poles, certain Turks Heads filled with Hay, and
the Colors, which Areb had taken from them.

He alighted before the Garden, and found the King's Envoy at the entrance of
it, attended by three Servants, and holding the Box in his hand. The Chan being
come within ten or twelve paces of the Envoy, he very cheerfully put off his
Garment and Turbant, but perceiving the Envoy stood a while, without saying
ought to him, he began to be a little startled and out of countenance, till the
Envoy said to him, Ai, Areb-Chan, whereto Areb answered, Nediersen, what say
thou? The Envoy continued, Schach Sefi ne chales kunderdiwe rakem, Schach Sefi
dnsti sen, that is, Schach Sefi sends thee a Garment, and a Letter of Favor;
thou art certainly beloved of the King. Whereto the Chan replied very
courageously, Scahung dowletti berkarar, olsumwe birkuni minkun olsun men
seahung birkari kulim: that is, May the King's Wealth continue for ever, and
may every day of his be as a thousand; I am one of the King's old Servants.

He thereupon took the Garment, with very great submission. It was of Seagreen
Satin. The Envoy helped him to put it on, with a Rochet of cloth of Gold, a
Girdle, and Turbant.

The Envoy had, for his pains, a Present of certain Tumains. Then the Casi, or
Judge, made a Prayer for the King's health, which ended, the Chan's Steward,
cried out, Schach dowetine, Kasiler kuweline, Chan saglukine, alla dielim; that
is, We pray for the prosperity of the King, the success of his Soldiers, and
the health of the Chan, whereto all the people answered, Alla, Alla, Alla.

These Ceremonies ended, the Trumpets sounded, and the Tymbrels were played on,
and and the Chan returned to the City, causing to be carried, before him, the
Turks heads and Colors, which, at his coming thence, had marched after him.
The Chan invited the Ambassadors to Dinner; but he himself had drunk so
liberally, that he was forced to rise from Table, and the Company soon after
withdrew.

The 22. being Maundy Thursday, Armenian Ceremonies.
the Armenians performed the Ceremony of the washing of Feet, in memory of the
beginning of our Savior's Passion: They all came to Church, where the Priest
washed the right foot of the Men, and the left foot of the Women, and made
thereon the sign of the Cross, with Butter, which had been consecrated to that
purpose: And that done, he was cast into a Chair by twelve men, who raised him
up into the air, with exclamations of joy, and kept him there, till he had
promised to treat them with a Dinner.

The 25. the Armenians began their year, The Armenians begin the year at Easter.
and in regard that day fell on their Easter, they made a great Procession out
of the City. The Chan would needs see it, and made a great extertainment for
us, during which, the Armenians stood with their Banners, Crosses and Images
before his Tent. Which they did only to please the Persians, in as much as,
when the Muscovian Ambassador, who was troubled to see those poor people stand
there so long in that posture, sent them word, that they might be gone with
their Images, they made answer, that they ought not to stir thence, without
express order from the Chan. The Armenian Women gave us the divertisement of
their dancing, in three Companies, which successively relieved one another. The
Chan gave us another kind of sport, by letting loose among the People, two
Wolves, tied to long Ropes, to be drawn back when they pleased. He caused also
the head of one of those wild Beasts which they call Ahu's to be cut off at one
blow with a Cymitar. That was done by this slight, first they gave the Beast a
blow over the back, which made it lift up the head, so that they could hardly
miss it. That night I was stung by a Seorpion.

The 26. came to Scamachie, The Ambass. intended for Holstein comes to
Scamachie.
Imanculi, whom the King of Persia sent Ambassador to the Duke of Holstein, our
Master. The Chan invited him to Dinner with our Ambassadors. The next day, they
had a long conference together, for the regulation of our journey, for which we
set all things in order.

The 29. Imanculi Sulthan came to visit the Ambassadors, to take leave of them,
and to assure them, he would follow within eight days. Abasculi-Beg, our
Mehemandar, took also his leave of us, and returned toward the Court, and we
had another appointed us, named Hosseinculi-Beg, who was ordered to conduct us
to the Frontiers of Persia.

The 30. we left Scamachie, The Ambassadors leave Scamachie.
accompanied by the Chan and Calenter, who, with a great body of horse, brought
us half a league out of the City, where he treated us magnificently. Having
mutually taken leave with the greatest expressions of civility, the Chan
returned, with his Company, to Seamachie, and we took our way toward Pyrmaras,
whither we came in the evening, after we had traveled, that afternoon, three
leagues.

March the last, we were on our way by eight in the morning, and we got that
day six leagues, all over mountains, whence we had not the sight of so much as
one Village. At night we came into a Valley, to the Village of Cochani, where
we lodged.

April 1. we traveled seven leagues, APRIL.
over hills and dales, till we came to the Village of Bahel, otherwise called
Surrat, from the fruitfulness of the Country, especially by reason of the
abundance of Millet growing there, beyond what any other part of Persia affords.

The 2. we got out of the mountain into the plain Country, leaving the Rock of
Barmuch on the right hand, and coming within a quarter of a league of the Sea.
We saw, as we passed by, within the space of five hundred paces, Sources of
Nefte.
above thirty sources of Nefte, which is a kind of Medicinal Oil. There are,
among the rest, three great ones, into which they go down by sticks, placed
there to serve instead of a Ladder, fifteen or sixteen foot into the ground. A
man, standing above at the pits mouth, might hear the Oil coming out in great
bubbles, sending up a strong smell, though that of the white Nefte be
incomparably more pleasant than that of the black: for there are two sorts of
it, but much more of the black, than of the white. We traveled that day six
leagues, and lodged at night, at the Village of Kisicht, not far from the Sea.

The third, we got two leagues, and lodged at night, at Schabran, having passed
over three little Rivers.

There lives in the mountains of these parts a certain people, Padars a sort of
people.
called Padar. They live only by rapine, and course up and down the highways
for twenty leagues about, to rob Travelers. We were told, that, the day
before, they came to the Village, to inquite how strong we were, how we
marched, and what Guard we kept in our quarters.

The Mehemandar and the Inhabitants advised us to keep a strong Guard, and to
keep close together, as well in our march, as at our quarters. Whence it came,
that ever after, we kept still in sight of the Baggage. The Inhabitants of
Schabran are, in their Language, called Kur^, which occasioned the mistake of
diverse of our people in their Journals, who thought they were the people
called Kurdes. But it was a great oversight, in as much as the Kurdes live in
Kurdesthan, which is the ancient Chaldaea, a Province far distant from that we
now speak of.

Apr. 4. we traveled four leagues through a hilly, yet very delightful,
Country. We overtook by the way a Caravanne of Muscovian and Circassian
Merchants, who were very glad of our Company, to secure them against the
incursions of those Robbers.

There appeared one of them, who would have taken notice of our march, and
strength; but the Mehemandar immediately commanded out ten or twelve Persians,
who pursued him into the Wood, where they lost him. He had stolen an Ox, and
being forced to leave him behind, the Mehemandar made a Present of him to the
Ambassadors.

In the afternoon, we came to Mischkar, a Village lying in a fenny place,
within two leagues of Niasabath, where our ship was wracked. The Inhabitants of
the Village, who took us for enemies, had left all, and were got into the
Woods: but understanding afterward upon what account we came, they had the
confidence to return to their houses. We found in the house of one of their
Priests, many fair Manuscripts.

The fifth we traveled eight leagues, through woody roads. and deserts, to the
Village of Koptepe. We saw by the way the Sepulcher of one of their Saints,
named Pyr Schich Molla Iusuf, and met with a party of five and twenty Horsemen,
well mounted and well armed. They said they were Country people of the adjacent
Villages, and that they were forced to go in strong parties, and to travel so
armed, to secure themselves against the Robbers thereabouts: but they looked
more like such themselves. For we understood afterward, that the inhabitants
of the Village, where we lodged that day, were Padars. Their houses were built
upon the ascent of certain little hills, half within the Earth, being
encompassed about with a knot of trees, which made a delightful prospect from
one house to another.

The 6. we traveled three leagues, all through a continued Forest, and we
crossed the three Rivers of Kossar, Sambur, and Kurgane. That of Sambur is the
most considerable, and rises out of the mountain of Elbours, dividing it self
at this place into five branches, the channels whereof were so broad, that our
horses, as we passed through, had not water up to half the legs.

The 7. having gone three leagues, Come to Derbent.
we came to the most ancient City of Derbent. There came to meet us only a
certain number of Kisilbachs, in regard the Governor, Scahewerdi Sulthan,
between whom and his horsemen there was some difference, durst not come out of
the Castle, lest the Kisilbachs should possess themselves of it.

The Persians put this City at 85. degrees longitude, Derbent described.
and I found it at forty one degrees, fifty minutes, latitude. It is in length,
reaching from East to West, about a league; and in breadth, four hundred and
fifty ordinary paces.

It serves for a Gate to the Kingdom of Persia on that side, for, on one side
it reaches to the foot of the mountain, and on the other, to the Sea, which is
so near, that sometimes the waves beat over the walls.

The Persian Authors, as also the Inhabitants of the City, affirm, that it was
built by Iscander, that is, Alexander the Great; not such as it is now (for
that honor is due to their King Nauschiruan) but only the Castle, and the
Wall, which encompasses the City on the South Side. These walls are very high,
and at least five or six foot thick, and viewing them at a distance, a man
would think them built of the best and fairest kind of freestone; but coming
near them, he finds that the Stones are made of Muscle-shels, and pieces of
freestone beaten and molded like Brick, which time has reduced to a hardness
beyond that of Marble.

I found upon one of the Gates which are remaining of the building of Alexander
the Great, a Syriack Inscription, of three lines, and in another place certain
Arabic words, and strange Characters, but so eaten out by time, that they were
not legible. The Castle, where the Chan lives, is upon the top of the mountain,
and kept by a Garrison of five hundred men, who are of two several Nations,
Asumrumlu, and Koidurscha. The second quarter of the City is at the foot of the
mountain, and the most populous; but the lower part of it is very much ruined,
since Emir Hamse, the Son of Chadabende, recovered the City, out of the hands
of Mustapha, the Turkish Emperor, to whom the Inhabitants had voluntarily
submitted themselves.

The lower part, and that which reaches to the Sea, is about two thousand
ordinary paces in compass; but it lies desert, having no houses, but converted
into Gardens and Cornfieldsd. It was heretofore inhabited by Greeks, whence the
Persians call it, to this day, Scaher Iunan, that is, the Greek City.

All this coast is pure Rock* upon which score it is very dangerous for
Vessels. It serves for a foundation to the walls of the whole City, which are
so broad, that a Wagon may easily be driven on them. The mountain above the
City, is covered with wood, where there may be yet seen the ruins of a wall,
above fifty leagues in length, which, as we were told, had sometime served for
a communication between the Caspian and Euxine Seas. In some places it was some
five or six foot high, in other, but two, in others, there was no track of any.
There might be seen also on other hills, the ruins of several old Castles,
whereby it might be judged, that they were built four square. There were two
undemolish'd, and had garrisons in them. There are also several redoubts of
wood, upon all the avenues.

The most remarkable thing about this City is the Sepulcher of Tzumtzume, of
whom the Persians relate this story, after their Poet Fiesuli, who has left in
writing.

They affirm, The Fable of Tzumtzume.
that Eissi (so they call our Savior Jesus Christ) coming one day into those
parts, found in his way a dead man's skull, and desirous to know whose it had
been, prayed to God, with whom he was in great favor, to raise that deceased
person to life again, which God accordingly did, and then Eissi asked him, who
he was. He made answer, his name was Tzumtzume, that he had been King of all
that Country, and so powerful, that he consumed every day in his Court as much
salt as forty Camels were able to carry. That he had forty thousand Cooks, as
many Musicians, as ^any Pages with Pearls in their ears, and as many Sersants.
But says Tzumtzume to Eissi, Who art thou? And what Religion do thou profess?
Whereto Christ made answer, I am Eissi, and my Religion is that which saves all
the World. If it be so, replied Tzumtzume, I am of thy Religion; but I pray
thee let me die as soon as may be, for, having been heretofore so pow^rful, it
would extremely trouble me to be here now without a Kingdom and Subjects. Eissi
granted his request, and immediately permitted him to die; and at this place is
his Sepulcher, over which there is a great tree, and, adjoining to that, there
is a Scaffold erected, ten foot high, and sixteen, square.

We took notice, on this side of the City, of about five or six thousand Tombs,
covered with stones, much larger than the ordinary stature of men, all half
round, Cylinder-wise, and hollow within. They had all of them Arabic
Inscriptions, and it is reported, that anciently, yet since the time of
Mahomet, there had been, in Media, a King named Kassan, by birth, an Okus, (a
people living in Thabesseran, behind the mountain of Ebbours) who being engaged
in a war against the Tartars of Dagesthan, whom they call Lesgi, was desirous
to give them battle in that place; but that he was there defeated, and that he
caused the Officers then killed to be buried in the Tombs which are yet to be
seen there. Toward the Seaside, there were forty others compassed by a wall,
but much bigger than any of the forementioned. These, as the Inhabitants
affirmed, were the Sepulchers of so many great Lords, and holy Persons, who had
been killed in the same battle. Every Sepulcher had its Banner.

The Persians name these Sepulchers Tziltenan, and the Turks and Tartars,
Kerchler. The Persians and Tartars do their devotions at them, in so much that
this place was heretofore very famous, both for the many foundations, and
charities given thereto: but now it is kept by an ancient man, who makes a poor
shift to live upon the Alms that are given him.

King Kassan, who lived many years after this Battle, is interred near Tabris,
near a River, named Atzi, that is, bitter waters. The Tomb of Queen Burla, his
wife, is to be seen near the Fortress of Vrumi, and they say it is forty foot
long.

Apr. 13. we saw several Tartars, as well men as women, coming to do their
devotions there, which consisted in going, one after another, to kiss the
Sepulchers of these forty Saints, upon which they set their hands while they
prayed. It was the tenth day of their Silhatza, on which they make a
commemoration of the sacrifice of Abraham.

There are not any Christians at Derbent, but the Inhabitants are all
Mussulmans, unless it be some few Jews, who pretend to be of the Tribe of
Benjamin. It is accordingly a place of no Commerce, save only that the Tartars
bring thither a great many stolen Children, or happily such Turks and Muscovites,
as they have taken upon some occasion or other, and there sell them, to be
carried further into the Kingdom.

The Soldiers who kept the Garrison there, as also the Citizens, were a proud,
daring, and insolent sort of people, so far from treating us with any civility,
that, on the contrary, they did what they could to pick a quarrel with us.

The Mehemandar himself gave us notice beforehand, to stand upon our guard:
whence it came, that, on the 8. after Sermon, the Ambassadors ordered, upon
several penalties, that none of their retinue, should, either in word or deed,
give occasion of offense to any Soldier, or Inhabitant, nor relieve any person
whom they should find engaged in any quarrel with them, lest they should take
occasion, from a particular difference, to fall upon the whole Company.

The 9. the Chan of Tarku, The Chan Tarku proffers to convoy the Ambassadors.
who had given the Ambassadors a visit, at their former passage that way, sent
us word, that the way we were to travel through the Country of the Tartars of
Dagesthan, was very dangerous, desiring us to make use of the Convoy he
proffered us. The Ambassadors, considering that those proffers were made by a
Tartar of Dagesthan, and that there were no more safety in his Company, than
among the Robbers themselves, returned him their thanks, and sent him word,
that they would not put him to that trouble. However we thought it prudence, to
make our advantage of the notice given us of the danger we might fall into
among those Barbarians, and we ordered a view to be made of our Arms, and
found, there were among us, two and fifty Muskets and Firelocks, ninteen cases
of Pistols, two brass Guns, and four murthering-pieces, all well fixed, and fit
for service.

Having staid some time for Imanculi, They take order for their departure.
who had promised to follow us within a few days, and finding our selves in a
place, where the Governor, instead of supplying us with provisions, forced us
to buy all at a dear rate, the Ambassadors resolved the 12. to give order for
their departure, commanded the Baggage to be made ready, and delivered every
man his allowance of bread for four days, in as much as there was no great
likelihood we should find much at the places we were to travel through.

The 13. we were got on horseback, The Governor hinders it.
and ready to march, when word was brought, that the Governor had shut the
City-gate. This news somewhat startled us, and obliged the Ambassadors to send
the Mchemandar to him, to know the reason of his so doing. His answer was,
that, having received intelligence, that Osmin, a Tartar-Prince, not far from
Derbent, intended to set upon us by the way, and put us to an excessive
ransom, or take away all we had, and that being responsable to the King for
what might happen to us, he thought it not fit we should go thence without a
Convoy, which being not to be had that day, he desired us to stay till the next.

We knew the Convoy he intended us, would serve us in no stead, and that the
care he took proceeded not from any kindness he had for us; but it was fit, we
put on the best face we could upon it. and acknowledged our selves obliged to
him. Only we sent to desire him, in regard we were all mounted, to permit' us
to encamp without the City, and there expect the Convoy. He was content we
should do so; whereupon we went and encamped a quarter of a league without the
City, near a Vineyard, upon the side of a small River, which serves for a
common Frontier, between the Tartars of Dagesthan and the Persians.

We found near that place the Sepulchers of two other Mahumetan Saints, Other
Saints Sepulchers,
one, that of Pyr Muchar, in the plain, at the foot of the mountain; the other,
that of Imam Kurchud, within the mountain. They say the later was of kin to
Mahomet, and that he always sat at his feet, to be instructed by him. They
add, that he lived three hundred years after Mahomet's death, and that he
retired to King Kassan, whom he diverted by his playing on the Lute, and
incessantly animated to make a war against the Lesgi, by the songs he sung to
that instrument; but that at last, presuming to preach to those Barbarians, who
were Pagans, in hopes to convert them to the Mahumetan Religion, they killed
him.

His Sepulcher is in a Cave cut within the Rock. There is also another hollow
place in the same Rock, where there is a Coffin, made of four boards nailed
together, and raised about four foot from the ground. I saw it overnight, and
found at it, an old woman, who had the keeping of the Sepulcher,; but the next
day, I found it set forth with a Carpet of Brocado, and the floor covered with
Mat, for their convenience who came thither to do their Devotions.

There resorted thither many Women and Maids from the City, and other places,
who went all barefoot into the Cave, kissed the Coffin, and, having said their
prayers, made their offerings to the old Woman, to whom they gave some Butter,
Cheese, Milk, others, Bread, Money, Wax, and the like The night following we
heard here a confused and dreadful noise, much like that of persons singing,
dancing, and weeping, all at the same time. I never heard any thing so
barbarous.

Apr. 14. we expected our Convoy till three hours after Sunrising; Leave
Derbent,
but seeing none came, we set forward, observing the following order.

The three Lieutenants, with their Soldiers, having their matches lighted made
the Vanguard.

Next them, followed a Field-piece, of two pound and a half Bullet, upon a
carriage with four wheels, and then the four Murthering-pieces, with all things
belonging to them, in a Wagon.

Then marched the Camels, laden with the baggage, having on both sides some of
our retinue, commanded by the Ambassador Crusius, and in the head of them a
Trumpetter.

Next the Baggage, came the other Field-piece, and after that, the Ambassador
Brugman, who brought up the Rear, consisting of all the rest of the Company.

In this order we left the Frontiers of Persia, to go into those of the Tartars
of Dagesthan.

Ptolomy, The Tartars of Dagesthan
and his followers, affirm, that this Country is part of that Albania, out of
which Q. Curtius would have to come Thalestiis, Queen of the Amazones, who came
to Alexander the Great in Hyrcania, to get of him that kindness, which Women
will not often beg, though they ever so much desire it. The Persians call these
people Lesgi, and they name themselves Dagesthan Tartar, that is Mountain
Tartars, from the word Tag, or Dag, which in their Language, signifies a
Mountain: because they live between the mountains, and in the plain, at the
foot of the mountains, which are twenty or thirty leagues distant from the
Caspian Sea, toward the West.

They inhabit all along the Seacoast, Northward, as far as Terki, about forty
leagues, taking the way we came. The mountain it self, in some places, comes
within half a league of the Sea, and in some it is two or three leagues from
it, there being in the plains very fruitful and pleasant fields, unless it be
toward the Seaside, where it is all heathy and barren.

The Inhabitants are of a yellowish and dark complexion, inclining to black;
they are well set and have strong limbs, dreadfully ugly in their faces, and
wear their hair, which is black and greasy, falling down over their shoulders.
They are all barbarous and savages.

Their clothing is a long close Coat, Their habit.
of a gray or black color, of a wretched coarse cloth, over which they wear a
Cloak as coarse, or happily of Sheep-skin. On their head they wear a square Cap,
made of several pieces of cloth, and their shoes are of Sheep-skin, or
Horse-hide, all of one piece, and sowed to their feet over the instep, and at
the sides.

They are circumcised, and have all the other Ceremonies of the Turks,
professing the Mahumetan Religion; but are so slenderly instructed therein,
that it is not to be wondered, they have so little devotion. They live by the
Cattle they breed, whereof the Women take care, while the men go up and down
a-robbing, making no conscience to steal away the children of their nearest
relations, to sell them to the Persians and others. Whence it comes, that, even
among themselves, they live in perpetual distrust one of another.

Their defensive Arms, Their Arms.
which they put on and off, with their Clothes, are, a Coat of Mail, a
Headpiece, and a Buckler; and the offensive are the Cymitar, Bows and Arrows,
and the Javelin, there being not any so poor among them but is furnished with
these Arms. They put all Merchants to a ransom, and sometimes rob them of all;
so that the Caravannes which pass that way, are either so strong as to make
their party good against these Tories, or go by Sea to avoid them.

They fear neither Persians nor Muscovites, in regard no Army is able to follow
them into the mountains, into which they retreat when they are pursued.

All this Country is not subject to one Prince; The Prince of the Tartars.
on the contrary, every City, almost has its particular Lord. They call him
who is the chiefest among them the Schemkal. He succeeds his Predecessor by an
odd way of election. For, upon the death of the Schemkal, the other Lords or
Myrsas meet, How chosen
and sit down in a ring, into which the Priest of the place casts a golden
Apple, and the person who is first touched thereby is made Schemkal Yet is not
his power so absolute, but that the other Lords participate thereof, they
having only for him a certain respect and compliance, and that not very great.

We came into this Country, The Country of Osnun.
as we said before on the 14. of April. We traveled that day five leagues,
passing through several Villages, and pleasant fields, and lodged at night in
the Country of Osnun, whom some call Ismin, at a Village named Rustain, which
was also the name of the Lord of it. He sent to meet us his son, attended by
fifteen persons on hors-back, well armed, who after the first Complement, fell
off on the left hand, and went into a Wood, and we took the right. We quartered
in the fields near a Village, fortifying our selves with the Baggage, and
securing our selves against the surprises of those Robbers, by a good number of
Sentinels, placed at all the avenues.

The young Prince returned to our Quarters in the evening, but visited only the
Muscovian Ambassador, only to learn of him who we were, and what there was to
be gotten of us. We intended him a Present of 12. Ducats, and three pieces of
Persia-Satin, had he honored the Ambassadors with a visit; but he thought it
enough to do it by two of his Officers, whereupon we only saluted him with the
firing of two great Guns, charged with bullets, just at his departure from the
Muscovian Ambassador's to take horse.

The 15. we prosecuted our journey, through a hilly Country, and had in our way
good Hunting. There started so many Hares, that, in a short time, we took nine.

Having traveled six leagues that day, The Lordship of Boinack.
we came, at night, into the Seigneury of Boinack, and lodged near a Village of
the same name, upon the ascent of a hill, which was so steepy toward the Sea,
that we were secure as to that side, and we fortified our Camp with the
Baggage, which we drew up like a half moon well flanked. The Lord of Boinack
has not many Subjects, but in recompense, abundance of Cattle, wherein all his
Wealth consists.

The Ambassador Brugman was incensed at the people's looking on us, as a thing
they had never seen before, and would have had some Muskets discharged among
them, but without bullets, only to frighten them, Brugman 's impertinence.
and was enraged that those he spoke to would not execute so impertinent a
command, which no doubt had cost us all our lives. For those Barbarians, who
were wicked and daring, and discovered that they wanted only a pretense to set
upon us, grumbled that any should think it much they stood there, and were
confident enough to tell us, that the ground, they were then upon, was rather
theirs, than ours, and that they had as much right to be there as we had: That
we might have forborne threatening them; that they acknowledged we were too
strong for them; but that upon the least sign the Schemkal should give them,
they would come with such a force as were able to dispatch us all, though we
were twice as many. That they cared for neither the King of Persia nor Duke of
Muscovy, that they were Dagasthans, and acknowledged no Superior but God. They
would not, at first, suffer us to go for water, without paying for it; but
finding that the Well where it was to be had, was within the reach of our great
Guns, and that we set things in order to force our way to it, they retreated
and left us.

The Schemkal sent us word late overnight, that we should not offer to go away
the next morning, till he had searched our baggage, to see whether we carried
any Merchants goods. The Ambassadors returned him answer, that they were not
Merchants, but Ambassadors, and that consequently they might pass all places
without paying: That they would stand upon their privilege, and that if the
Schemkal offered them any violence, they should do what were consonant to the
law of Nature and Nations to prevent it. But we heard no more of him.

I heard since, A Polish Ambassador killed.
that the Polish Ambassador, whom we met in our journey out of Persia, and of
whom I gave some account before, coming to lodge, in his return, at the same
place, had quarreled with the Inhabitants of Boinak, and was killed with all
his retinue, only three Servants excepted, who got back to Derbent, whence the
Mehemandar, who had conducted him thither, carried them to the Court. During
their stay there, the King allowed each of them three Abas's a day, till he
found a convenience to send them home, which he did afterward, upon an Embassy
which the Great Duke of Muscovy had sent to him.

The 16. we departed betimes in the morning, The Author like to be taken by the
Tartars
and came, long before night, into the Territories of the Prince of Tarku,
where I narrowly escaped falling into the hands of those Barbarians. For,
hearing that we were not above a quarter of a league from the Seaside, I left
the Company, taking along with me the Master's Mate, Cornelius Nicholason, to
go and observe the situation thereof: but we were hardly got thither, ere we
discovered at a distance two Tartars, followed, within two or three hundred
paces, by eight more, who, as soon as they perceived us, made all the haste they
could toward us; but we soon recovered the Road. The two first seeing us
retreat, pursued us in full speed, with their Javelins in their hands; till the
other eight, doubting, it seems, that we might not be alone in those parts, got
up to a hill, to take a view of the Country, and seeing all our Company, from
which we could not be above a Musket Shot distant, they called to the other
two, to give them notice it was in vain to pursue us. Whereupon, they rode on
gently, and came all together to the Company, saluted it, admired our Clothes,
and would needs see our Pistols, but were not permitted to handle them.

We met that day with several parties of Tartars, some appearing before us,
some behind us. Some only passed by, others accompanied us a quarter of a
league or better. Some tried whether we would suffer them to cross us in our
march; but we would not permit it.

Having traveled seven leagues that day, Come to Tarku.
we came at night before the City of Tarku, and encamped without the City, near
a Fountain, within a quarter of a league of the Sea.

The next day, Apr. 17. the Lord of the place sent his Brother, accompanied by
three persons of quality, to complement us, and make proffers of his friendship
and services.

The Chan himself, being sick, could not come in person, which the Ambassadors
understanding, they sent their Physician to him, as well to return their thanks
for his civilities, as to offer his assistance, for the recovery of his health.
He made use of him, and found such ease, that some days after, he sent to
complement the Ambassadors, and thank them for the care they had had of him.

He was a Lord, of about 38. years of age, named Surchou Chan, and pretended
himself descended from the Kings of Persia, with whom he held so good
correspondence, that when the Dagesthans are engaged in a war amongst
themselves, he implores the assistance of the Schach, who fails not to back
him. His authority is very considerable among them, yet not so absolute, but
that several Myrsas, of his kindred, participate of the Government. Nay he had
a Nephew, a younger Brother's son, who was Lord of some part of the City.

The City of Tarku, Tarku the Metropolis of Dagesthan.
the Metropolis of all Dagesthan, lies within the mountain, between steepy
rocks, which are so full of shells, that they seem to consist of nothing else,
there being not the space of a hands breadth, but a man meets with five or six
of them, most, about the bigness of a Wall-nut-shell. The Rock is as hard as
flint, yet is there good pasture upon the top of the mountain.

Out of these Rocks there rise several pleasant springs, which fall into the
City several ways. The City is not walled. It may contain a thousand houses,
built according to the Persian way, but not so well. These Tartars, as also
those of Boinak, and the others who live more Northerly, are called Kaitack:
but those who live behind Tarku, in the mountain, toward the West, are named
Kamuk, or Kasukumus, who have, most of them, their particular Lords.

The Inhabitants of Tarku are as barbarous and mischievous as those of Boinak,
but the women and maids were more civil. They go with their faces uncovered,
and are not kept in such restraint, as those of the Persians. The maids have
their hair tied up in forty tresses, which hang down about their heads, and
they were not shy of being seen, nor of having their hair felt.

We met here with and old man, named Matthias Magmar, born at Ottingen in the
Duchy of Wittenberg, A German living among the Tartars.
who having left off his trade of weaving, to go into the wars of Hungary, fell
into the hands of the Turks, who had sold him to these Tarters. He was
circumcised, and had almost forgot the German tongue; yet he told us he was a
Christian, and believed one God and three persons. He also said the Lords
Prayer, but with much ado.

The proffers of friendship and service which Surchou Chan made us, had raised
us into some confidence, that we were safe under his protection: but we found
since, that we were in greater danger there, than we had been any where before.
For, during the five weeks we were among the Tartars, all their discourse was
of robbing, rifling, killing, and cutting of throats. We desired the Mehemandar
to go along with us to Terki, upon the frontiers of Moscovy, or, at least, to
leave us the Camels and other conveniences for carriage, considering the little
likelihood we had to get any of the Tartars, and we should requite his kindness
with a considerable sum of money. But he told us, that he had express order to
bring us only to Tarku, and that if he went any further, The Ambassadors in
great danger.
it might endanger his life: That we might treat with the Camel-drivers, and
that he would assist us what he could do in it: but instead of obliging us in
that, he took them all along with him that night, unknown to us. This sudden
departure of his startled us the more, in that, the next day, two women, who
sold us milk, and pretended to be Muscovites born, and Christians, and that
they had been stolen away in their yourh, and married in that Country, came to
tell us, that the Tartars intended to kill us all, out of an imagination, that
we carried along with us a vast treasure; That the Inhabitants of Osmin and
Boinak had sent word to Surkou Chan, that we had passed through their Country,
and that, instead of paying the duties for our Merchandises and Baggage, we had
been so insolent as to threaten them, and give them ill words: That they had
resolved to set upon us, to kill all the aged persons, and make the rest
Slaves, and, to that end, had sent Messengers to Surkou Chan, and that there
was one gone from him to the Schemkal.

We put the best face outward before those women, and made as if we were not
troubled at any thing the Tartars could do, in regard we knew not how far we
should credit their relation. However we thought good to make our advantage of
it, upon this reflection, that we found no order taken for our departure
thence, and that there came thither a party of forty Tartars of Boinak, and
that Messengers passed to and fro, as if it were in order to the execution of
some great design.

The Ambassadors having called together the chief of the retinue, and
represented the danger we were in, put it to the question what were best to be
done. It was urged, that it had been more prudence to treat those Barbarians
kindly, than to have exasperated them, as had been done, but since there was no
recalling of what was past, that the only way was to take courage, and ^ell our
lives at the dearest rate we could: That, having, on both sides of us,
inaccessible Rocks, the Sea behind, and the Tartars before us, it would be more
honorable for us to die nobly, than fall alive into the hands of the Tartars.

Our greatest misfortune was, that there were differences among our selves. The
Ambassador Brugman carried on his private designs, and found fault with
whatever others advised, especially those among us who any way pretended to
Learning. Certain it is, that, instead of contributing his endeavors to our
preservation, he would have contrived our ruin, could he have done it, without
danger to himself.

We understood since, that it was really the design of the Tartars, to set upon
us, and that they had done it, if the Schemkal, out of hopes to have the whole
booty himself, and trapann'd us an other way, had not prevented them. He sent
an Express to tell us, that we should take our way over the Bridge of Boats,
above the City of his ordinary residence, and that if we took any other, even
that of the Seaside, where we might have crossed the River by Boat, he should
treat us as Enemies.

The Messenger he sent us, having concluded his discourse, rose up, and would
have been gone; but the Muscovian Ambassador taking him by the arm, said to
him; Friend, go and tell thy Schemkal, that he is not to appoint us our way; we
shall take that we think fit: it is true, it well be no hard matter for him, to
cut off a handful of people; but let him know, that the Czaar, who is most
concerned in this Embassy, will resent it, and revenge our deaths, with the
greatest cruelty imaginable. This sharp and resolute answer made the Tartars
quit the design they had to set upon us, as they intended, and obliged them to
change their manner of proceeding: So that, Apr. 20. we were visited by four
Tartar-Princes, who dined with the Ambassadors in their Tent, and were not ill
treated, considering the place we were then at. All their discourse was only of
robbing and stealing, and selling men: nay one of them said that, all the week
before, he had stolen but one poor Girl. After they were gone, the Prince of
Osmin's Brother came to visit us. He expressed somewhat of civility, and made
us great proffers of his services. After him, came the Daruga of the City of
Tarku. We asked him, why we were not furnished with conveniences of carriadge
for our Baggage. He ingenuously told us, A Present sent to Surkou-Chan.
that we were not to expect any, till we had made a Present to Surkou Chan. The
next day, there was one sent him, to wit, a pair of gold Bracelers, a pound of
Tobacco, a Pistol, a Firelock, a barel of Powder, two pieces of Persia-Satin,
and several sorts of Spices, with this message withal, that a barel of
Aquavitae should be sent him, as soon as we came to Terki. This Present took
him so, as that he prefently promised we should have all conveniences, for
money, Who invites them to dinner.
and invited the Ambassadors to come and dine with him. It was taken into
consideration whether they should go, or not; but at last, it was resolved they
should, taking along with them four other persons.

The cloth was laid upon the ground, according to the Persian way, and the
whole entertainment consisted in four dishes, Particulars of the entertainment.
wherein there were little slices of Mutton, drawn upon sticks, some Whitings,
and Curds, and in four other lesser dishes, Rice, with pieces of Mutton in it,
and raisins of the Sun. The Carver sat in the middle of the dishes, and having
broke a long thin Cake, he cast a piece of it to every one of the Guests. He
also tore the pieces of Meat and the Fish, but all was done only by his hands,
which were as black as his face; so that the fat running between his fingers,
and mingling with the dirt from which it took another color, almost turned our
stomachs.

But there was a necessity we should comply. Our drink was only water, in great
glasses, and afterward Aquavitae, in silver Cups. After dinner, they would
needs hear our Music, which we sent for; and after a divertisement of three
hours, there was meat brought in again. I observed, among other things, the
Liver and Rump of a Sheep, which was all fat, and weighed at least five or six
pound.

One of the Carvers, (for at this second treatment there were three) minced the
meat very small, salted it well, and served every man by handfuls. The meat
looked as if it had been chewed before, yet was it not so bad, as against our
stomachs. After the treatment, we returned to our Quarters.

The next day, Another Tartaria^ Feast.
Apr. 21. one of the other Princes, named Iman Myrsa, invited the Ambassadors
to dinner. He was very young, as being not full eighteen years of age, and born
between a Brother of Surkou Chan's, and a woman, by birth a Kasamuka. His
Servant told us, that Surkou Chan usurped the Principality from him, and that
his life was in some danger, by reason of his Uncle.

The cloth was laid in a great Hall, where we sat down, with Imam Myrsa, and
some other Lords of the Country, in Chairs, at a low Table. We were better
treated, than we had been the day before, and the Meat was better dressed. Among
other dishes there was brought in a whole Lamb roasted, whereof every one
carved himself what he pleased. They used no knives but tore the Meat in
pieces, and I observed that when one had left any Meat about the bone, his next
neighbor took it up, and picked it, and many times it went to a third and
fourth hand, till at last, he who could find nothing about it would try what
there was within, and get out the marrow.

Their drinking Vessels are of Cows-horns, and their drink a sort of liquor
called Bragga, which they make of Millet, and, in color and consistence, looks
like the lees of beet. They think it very delicious, and drink freely of it, as
they do also of Aquavitae, and grow of a sudden so drunk, that notwithstanding
the presence of their Prince, they made such a noise, as would have drowned
Thunder it self.

The Tartars having thus treated us, we took leave of them, well satisfied with
the cheer they made us.

Some days after, the Ambassadors were treated by another Prince, named
Emir-Chan, who also gave them a visit. But all these Barbarians did in this
kind, was only to get Presents from us.

The 23. the Daruga got us some Wagons for the Baggage. We immediately loaded
them, intending to be gone the next day: but in the evening, Surchou-Chan sent
us word, that he had certain intelligence, that Sultan Mahmud (so was the
Schemkal called) had possessed himself of all the passages of the River Koisu,
with a design to stop us, and put us to a ransom, and that hindered him from
permitting us to depart.

Late in the evening, there came near Tarku twenty horsemen, well mounted and
armed, who encamped close by our Quarters. The Ambassadors, accompanied by some
Musketteers, went to them, to know whence they came, and what their design was.
They made answer, that the Prince of Osmin had sent them to the Schemkal, to
tell him that certain foreign Ambassadors, friends of the King of Persia, and
Czaar of Muscovy, being come into his Territories, he had suffered them to poss
without paying any toll or duties, and to entreat him, to do him the same
favor; which the Schemkal had promised to do, provided they carried no
Merchants goods. We gave not so much credit to this intelligence, as to neglect
keeping a strong Guard, and having our Arms in readiness.

The 24. these Tartars departed before day, and presently after, there came to
us, two Messengers from Sulthan Mahmud, who asked the Ambassadors why they did
not prosecute their journey, promising all the favor and assistance lay in his
power, for their passage, provided they took the way he appointed them. These
Messengers were hardly gone, ere Surkou-Chan came to visit us. The Ambassadors
asked him, why he hindered their departure, he told them, that the Horses and
Oxen, we had hired, were ready, and that we might be gone when we pleased,
giving it him under our hands, how that we would needs depart, notwithstanding
the notice he had given us of the designs of the Schemkal, in as much as
otherwise he should be responsible to the King of Persia, and Great Duke of
Muscovy, for the misfortunes might happen to us: That he knew the Schemkal
better than we did: That he cared for neither God, nor Devil, nor any foreign
Prince at all: That he never observed his word: That it was his only sport, to
rob, and shed blood, and that it were better stay eight days longer, within
which time he promised us a sufficient Convoy, without which we could not pass
through the Prince's Country, if we resolved not to hazard our lives, and lose
our Baggage: That ere that time were expired, the Persian Ambassador would come
thither, with Letters of Commendation from the King, without which he durst not
undertake to convoy us, left he should thereby disoblige all the other Tartars.

This discourse put us into a great perplexity, considering that the arrival of
the Persian Ambassador was uncertain, The Governor of Terki refuses a Convoy.
and that in the mean time, we might fear the same thing from Surchou-Chan,
which he would have us apprehend from the Schemkal. We sent an Express to the
Weywode of Terki, to desire him to send us a Convoy of Strelits, such as might
secure us against the attempts of the Tartars; but he would do nothing.
Surchou-Chan sent an Express to Derbent, to know of the Ambassador, how long it
would be ere he came to Tarku: but he sent us word, some days after, that the
man he had dispatched for Derbent was returned, but had been so indiscreet as
to put the Letter, delivered him by Imancnla Sulthan, into his Quiver, and
going to shoot at a beast by the way, had dropped it, so that he had been
forced to send him back again. All these proceedings added more and more to our
jealousy; but what most startled us, was, the sudden departure of certain
Armenian Merchants, who having joined with us, out of hopes of traveling with
greater safety in our Company, went into the City, upon notice given them, that
two hundred Tartars intended to set upon us. Besides, the inconveniences we
endured by reason of ill weather heightened our affliction: for the continual
rains had not only sunk through our Tents and Clothes, but also hindered us from
making any fire, to warm us, and dress our Meat. No condition, for misery,
could be compared to that we were then in, forsaken by all, destitute of all
things, even advice and resolution, insomuch that we durst not go into the
Tartars hutts, Surkou Chan himself having given us notice, that we might run
the hazard of being carried away and sold. Nay, Apr. 27. one of our Soldiers, a
Scotchman, named William Hoye, being got a little too far from the Quarters,
was carried away by the Tartars, so clearly, that we could never learn any news
of him, though we made great inquiry. We heard since, that he was carried to
the Fortress of Sachur, within five or six leagues of Turku.

The same day, there happened to us another misfortune, in that, some of our
people being shooting with Bows and Arrows, our Canonier, going somewhat near
the Mark, to take up an Arrow, was shot into the Belly, whereof he died the
next day.

The Muscovite, whose mishap it was to hurt him, had so sensible a remorse of
what had happened, that he desired to be put to death, but the business being
taken into consideration, it was found done by chance without any design;
whereupon he was set at liberty. We interred the deceased, by the advice of
certain Tartar-women who were Christians, in the place where our horses stood,
and made a Grave without the Quarters, into which was put an empty Coffin, it
being certain that the Tartars would, after our departure thence, dig up the
Carcass, to give in their Dogs. There died also a rich Muscovian Merchant. His
body was inbalm'd, and brought to Terki, where it was buried, in the
Churchyard, belonging to those of his Religion. Amidst all these afflictions
and misfortunes, the Tartars came every day to get our Music played upon; which
was somewhat like that of the Israelites, at the waters of Babylon.

May 1. we dispatched a man to Sulthan Mahmud, MAY.
to desire passage. Our Messenger returned the next day, The Schemkal grants
them passage.
accompanied by four Tartars, who told us from the Schemkal, that he wondered
much to hear, that Surchou-Chan would persuade them, he was a famous Robber and
faithless person: that he had given him no cause to dress him in such a
Character, and that he should take occasion to resent it. For us, he proffered
all his Credit, and his Subjects, for the advancement and safety of our
journey; and that if we durst not trust him, he was ready to send us three of
the principal Lords of the Country as hostages, whom we should either take
along with us, or leave with Surchou-Chan, till we were out of his Jurisdiction.

These unexpected proffers put us to some difficulty what we should do: but
hearing, that Sulthan Mahmud lived otherwise than his Father had done, who,
having dishonored his Country by continual robberies, had reformed his life,
and, to expiate his sins, went on pilgrimage to Meca, and to Mahomet's
Sepulcher, we accepted of his proffers; and that the more willingly, in that
the 6. following, we received Letters from Derbent, wherein the Persian
Ambassador sent us word, that being obliged to continue there till he had
received his dispatches and the Interpreter he expected from the Court, and
thinking it would be a month longer ere he came to Tarku, he left it to our
choice, whether we would expect him, or prosecute our journey. Upon this, we
pressed Surchou-Chan, to give order for our departure; which he did, after the
receipt of another Present, which he had the boldness to beg himself, and
security given, for the return of the Horses and Oxen, which carried our
Baggage, by two of the Schemkal's hostages, whom we left with him, taking the
third along with us.

May 12. we left Tarku, upon the dangerous word of Sulthan Mahmud. We had
agreed 15. days before with the Waggoners of Tarku: but when the Baggage came
to be laden, they fell from the former agreement, and made us pay much more
than we had promised them. They would have done the same for the Saddle-Naggs;
but the Ambassadors would not condescend: which occasioned some of our people,
nay of the chiefest, to foot it, the two first days, not without abuses and
jeers from their enemies.

We traveled that day two leagues, through a plain and even Country, but
desert, to a Rivulet which serves for a common Frontier, between Sulthan
Mahmud, and the Prince of Tarku, We met by the way certain Tartar Lords, who
entreated the Ambassadors to lend them our Physician, to visit one of their
friends, who was sick not far thence. The Physician seeming unwilling to go,
out of a fear he should never return, they left two of their Company, as
hostages, with us, and brought him back after midnight. All our Supper that
night was, only Bread and troubled Water.

May 13. being Whitsunday, we traveled four leagues, through a very woody
Country. We thought that day; we should have been left by the way; for the
Muscovian Ambassador having cudgelled one of the Waggoners, all the rest would
unteam, and return homewards: but with much entreaty and fair words we got them
to stay. We passed over the night in the Wood, and those who were desirous to
sleep, lay down supperless.

The 14. we got but one league, The River Albanus.
to the River Koisu, which, in my opinion must be that which Ptolomy calls
Albanus. It rises out of mount Caucasus. Its Water is thick and troubled, and
its course very swift. It is at least as broad as the Elbe, and in that place,
it was above twenty foot deep.

The Town or Village of Andre, where Sulthan Mahmud lived, stands upon a hill,
on this side of the River. Near the Village, there is a Spring of seething
Water, which falls into a Pool, and makes the water thereof very fit for
bathing. The Inhabitants of it are for the most part Fishermen, and we saw
them in great numbers upon the Riverside, about their employment.

They thrust a sharp hook baited, which is fastened to a long pole, to the
bottom of the River, and by that means take abundance of Sturgeons, and such
like fish.

I heard they had an odd custom at their Weddings, which is, that all the men
bidden thereto shoot each of them an Arrow into the floor, and leav^ them
there, till they either rot, or fall of themselves, whereof I could never learn
any reason.

As soon as they perceived us, they came to the Riverside; and proffered to
help us over, and to facilitate the getting over of the Baggage, they joined
two Boats together, over which they laid a hurdle, strong enough to bear a
Wagon. They demanded two Crowns for the passage of every Wagon, and we had
about seventy; and perceiving we made some difficulty to give it them, and that
we chose rather to make a bargain with them for all together, they passed over
to the other side, where they fell a jeering and laughing at us. We saw there
also the Schemkal, standing at the entrance of the Wood, accompanied by a great
number of persons on hors-back: so that we knew not what case we were in.

We made hurts of boughs of Trees, upon the River side, and had several private
Assemblies, in regard there was not any public, in relation to the holy time
of Whitsuntide. Such as professed Letters met at the Ambassador Crusius's,
where we dined, having no other drink than Oxicrat, that is, a beveridge of
Vinegar and Water, which was increased by the tears we shed, reflecting on the
difference there was, between our present condition, and that we should be in
at our return into our dear Country.

The 15. we entreated the Muscovian Ambassador to cross the River, which he
did, and spoke to the Schemkal, according to the instructions we had given him,
and prevailed so far, that the Tartars were content to take two Tumains, which
amount not to above forty Crowns, for the passage of all the Company and the
Baggage.

We crossed the River the same day, and the Ambassadors immediately caused
their Tents to be pitched, and fortified the Quarter with the Baggage, which
was defended by the Artillery.

Soon after the Schemkal, accompanied by two of his Brethren, and a retinue of
50. persons on horseback, gave them the first visit. He was about 36. years of
age, strong, bulky, and of a good countenance. He had on a Garment of green
Satin, over a Coat of mail, and over that a Cloak, of extreme coarse cloth.
His Arms, as also those of the rest of the Company, were the Cymitar, Bows, and
Arrows. Besides a Present of certain Sheep and Lambs, he caused some of his
people, to bring thither a great Chauldron, full of Sturgeon, cut into little
pieces, and boiled in water and Salt, whereto there was a sauce of fresh Butter
and Sorrel. I may truly say, I never made a better meal, and that all the
delicates of Persia were not comparable to that dish. The Ambassadors treated
him with Aquavitae and Music, during which our brass Guns were several times
discharged. He diverted himself in that manner for the space of two hours, till
that being got half drunk, he withdrew; but returned again within a white after.

We presented him with a pair of gold Bracelets, a silver Goblet, a Scarlet
Cloak, lined with Furr, a case of Pistols, a Sword, a barrel of Powder, certain
Persia silk stuffs, and some Goats-skins dressed into leather. He immediately
put on the Cloak, and gave his own to the Ambassador Brugman, who had the
prudence to humor him, and assure himself of his kindness and friendship, by
putting him in hopes of extraordinary advantages, likely to accrue to him by
settlement of the Commerce, for which he had traveled so far. He told him,
that the Persian Ambassador was to follow them, to conclude with the Duke of
Holstein, what they had but begun in Persia; that the said Ambassador would
give him further satisfaction as to that particular, and that they should be
obliged to pass through his Country once a year, with Commodities of great
value: That that Country was not known at all in Germany, and that their Prince
knew not they were, in those parts, to meet with so great a Lord, otherwise, he
had sent him very considerable Presents; but that it should not be omitted
hereafter, and that it was their intention to make a perpetual friendship with
him. This discourse so pleased the Schemkal, that he would have hastened our
departure thence, that we might the sooner return that way. So that we had
horses for the sadle and for carriage at a very easy rate, to carry us as far
as Terki.

May 16. Leave
we departed. He himself, accompanied by fifty horse, convoyed us through a
thick Wood, half a league from Andre, Andre.
where he took leave of us, with much civility. We traveled that day two
leagues, over a great Plain, to the River Aksai. It runs very slowly in those
parts, and is not above fifty paces broad. The Tartars told us, that it is an
arm of the River Koisu, into which it falls, near the Sea. There we were forced
to stay for the Boats, and the Hurdles, which the Inhabitants of Andre brought
in Wagons, and in the mean time, we cut Reeds and Canes, to lay over the mudd
which hindered our coming dry to the River side. We crossed it by Moonlight,
and paid there also two Tumains for our passage.

Such as were not in favor with the Ambassador Brugman, were forced to lie
down supperless.

The 17. we traveled seven leagues, over a great Heath, where we began to be
out of sight of mount Caucasus.

We came at night to the River Bustro, and pitched our Tents in the adjoining
Forest. This River is very muddy, and near as big, but not so swift as that of
Koisu. Running Northward, about five leagues from the Caspian Sea, it is
divided into two branches, whereof one, heretofore named Terk, and now Timenki,
has ^erived its name to the City of Terki, by which it passes, and is about
fifty foot broad.

The other branch of the said River is called Kisilar, by reason of certain
Grains, like Gold, which come down with its gravel, and the Chanel of it is as
broad as that of the other, but has so little water, that many times, in the
Summer, a man may cross it dry-foot. The mouth of this arm is eight leagues
above the City of Terki.

It is to be observed here, that all these Rivers come from the
West-north-west, and that between Kisilar and the River Wolga, which are sixty
five leagues distant one from the other, there is no other River. So that we
are to conclude, that the Aksai, is the Coesius of Ptolomy; that Bustro, is the
Gerrus; that Timenki, or Terk, is the Alonta, and that Kisilar is the Adonta,
in as much as there are only these Rivers between the Albanus or Koisu, and the
Rha, or Wolga.

The River Bustro is a common Frontier between the Tartars of Dagesthan, and
those of Circassia; upon which account it was, that the Waggoners of Tarku,
would not go beyond it.

May 18. Enter Circassia.
we crossed the River, and got over the Baggage, to our greater satisfaction in
this particular, that we left, on the other side of the River, the Mahumetans
and Pagans, and were entered into Christendom. For though the Tartars of these
parts are also Pagans or Ma^umetans, as well as those of Dagesthan, and the
rest, yet are they under the Jurisdiction of a Christian Prince, who is the
Great Duke of Muscovy, and has, at all places, his Governors, Magistrates and
Priests, for the exercise of Christian Religion.

Provisions were so dear in these parts, that we were forced to pay above
thirty shillings for a Sheep. Nay they would not spare us many; so that to get
flesh, we went into the Woods and shot at Crows, whereof there were abundance
thereabouts.

The 19. we traveled five leagues, through a plain Country, full of Reeds,
having also some few trees, which were, for the most part, planted round about
a great Plain.

At night we encamped upon the Heath, near a Well, or rather a Sink, in regard
the water of it was so corrupt, that the very Beasts would not drink of it. The
ground thereabouts was all full of holes, which the Serpents and Snakes had
made there; and yet, though we were forced to lodge on the ground, not one of
us received any harm.

The 20. we got four leagues further, over heathy and barren Lands, to the City
of Terki. We saw that day a great many Serpents, many whereof where as big as a
man's arm, and above six foot in length. They lay round, and sported themselves
in the heat of the Sun, which gave a delightful luster to the liveliness of the
colors, wherewith their skins were spotted all over. We saw also, near Terki,
a kind of Field-mice, Abundance of Serpent. Jerbuah, a kind of Field-Mouse*
which, in the Arabian Language, are called Ierbuah. They are about the bigness
of a Squirrel, and somewhat like the Creature of that kind which is so common
in Europe, save that their hair is blacker, their heads like those of Rats,
they have long ears, the fore-feet short, and the hinder feet long; whence it
comes, that they cannot run, but when they get up some place, and, in the
plain, they only creep, unless it be, when thy leap, for then they spring five
or six foot high from the ground, having their tails laid over their backs. And
whereas their tails are long, and without any hair, like those of ordinary
Mice, but not so big, they are somewhat like the Lions Rampant, in Coats of
Arms: and they made a pretty kind of sport, especially when many of them leaped
at the same time, as we said before. They say, there are abundance of them
about Babylon, and in Arabia, where the Inhabitants eat them. Some will leave
the field, and go into peoples houses; which if they do, the master of the
house had need have a care of his money, left they light upon it.

The Persian, whom I brought out of the Country, and who still waits on me,
named Achwordi, told me a story, how that his Father having observed that his
money was, from time time, taken out of his Chamber, at first suspected his Wife
and Children, till, one day finding there one of these Ierbuah, he presently
imagined who played the Thief: but to be assured of it, he set an Abas upon the
Table, and, going out of the room, locked the door, so that no other could get
in, and coming thither a while after, the Abas was gone, whereupon searching
the nest of that Creature, he found in it more money than he had lost.

Within a quarter of a league of the City of Terki, came up to us a Brother of
Prince Mussal's, of whom we have spoken heretofore, accompanied by a Colonel,
whom the Weywode sent to meet and complement us. He received us in Tents,
pitched without the City, where we had a Collation of Ginger-bread, Beer,
Hydromel, and Aquavitae. During our stay there, there were Lodgings taken up
for us in the City.

The next day, the Weywode sent the Ambassadors four dishes of Meat, for their
wellcom thither. The Ambassadors sent to visit the Princess Bika, Mussal's
Mother, and, some days after, went to her in person. They dined with her. Now
was our joy complete, to find our selves out of the power of the Tartars of
Dagesthan, and among the Moscovites, who were our friends and acquaintance,
which made us send for our Music to divert our selves at Prince Mussal's.

We promised, in the precedent part of this Relation, to give a further account
of the Circassian Tartars, in our return, in as much as, traveling by Sea, as
we went, we could not learn much of them* There is no Historian, either ancient
or modern, that I know of, who speaks of them. Scaliger makes mention of them,
in his Exercitations, against Cardan, Exerc. 33. 167. and 303. sect. 3. but in
very few words, and, with Strabo, calls them Zigi, placing them beyond the
Caucasus, upon the Euxine Sea, and toward the Palus Meotides, upon the
Frontiers of Asia and Europe: whereas they, whom we saw, are Scythians, or
Caspian Sarmatians, and possessed of part of the ancient Albania, which has
for his Frontiers, on the East and West side, the Caspian Sea, and mount
Caucasus; and on the South and North, the River Bustro, and the dreadful
Deserts of Tartary and Astrachan.

Their Metropolis is Terki; Terki the Metropolis of Circassia.
but ever since the reduction of those parts by the Great Duke, he has put
Garrisons into all the Cities, leaving the Circassian Tartars, for their
habitations, but only open Towns and Villages, though under the Government of
the Lords of the Country, The Government of the Country.
who are all subject to the Czaar, and obliged to take an Oath of Allegiance to
him. The administration of Justice, whereof those of their Nation have the
management, passes under the Czaar's name, and in the presence of the Weywode,
especially if the affairs be of importance. Their houses are but poor ones,
built, for the most part, of earth and boughs of trees, and within, plastered
over with Clay.

The men, for the most part, are strong, and of yellowish complexion, but not
so broad-fac'd as those of Nagaia. Their hair is black and long, save that they
shave the midst of their heads, from there forehead to the neck, about the
breadth of an inch, leaving at the crown a little lock, which falls down behind.

Scaliger says, that the Circassian Tartars are the most perfidious, and most
barbarous of any Nation. It might be more truly said of those of Dagestan. For
the Circassians are somewhat less barbarous, and more compliant. It Is likely,
that since their coming under the Jurisdiction of the Muscovites, and their
conversing with Christians. they, by degrees, quit their former barbarism.

They have their Language common with all the other Tartars, Their language
Habit.
and besides that, most of them speak also the Muscovian. The men are clothed
as the other Tartars, save that their Caps are a little larger, and much like
those of our Priests. Their Cloaks are of a very coarse cloth, or Sheep-skin,
fastened at the neck with a point or string; but both sides do not come
together, so that, it being able to cover only some part of the body, they turn
it, before or behind, according to the Wind and Rain.

Their Women are well shaped, and have good faces, a clear and smooth
complexion, and their cheeks well colored. Their hair, which is black, hangs
down in two tresses, o^ both sides of their faces, which are never covered.
They wear about their heads a black Coif, covered with a piece of very fine
Cotton, or some other wrought linen cloth, which they ty under they chin.

The Widows have hanging behind in their necks an Ox bladder, Women
fully blown, covered with a piece of Cotton, Lawn, or some other stuff of
several colors, so that at a distance, they seem to have two heads. The Women,
in Summer wear only a smock, which is red, green, yellow, or blew, cut so deep
before, that a man may see all down to their Navels.

They were very familiar, and of a very good humor. The first day after ou^
arrival, four of them came to us, in a stately gate, and with such a
confidence, as the Poets attribnte to the Amazons, whom they place in or near
these parts. They stayed us, and would not let us go, till they had taken
particular notice of all things about us. Nor were they on the other side so
shy, as to take it ill, that some of ours, who pretended to handle the beads of
amber and shells, or necklaces of Tinn or Copper, which they wear about their
necks, slipped their hands down into their bosoms. Some invited us to their
houses, and we were told, it was the custom of the Country, that the husband,
seeing any one going to his house, to speak with his wife, should, to avoid
being troublesome, go out of doors, and leave them together. Though the men are
seldom at home, as being all day busied in the fields, about their Cattle, yet
do they relate miracles of the chastity of these women.

One I have to this purpose from a Military Officer of ours, Are Chaste.
who being got into one of their houses; and finding the woman handsome, grew
familiar with her, and found her very willing to do him any little kindness
that lay in her power, even to make him Handkerchers, and wash his head: so
that, thinking the fort as good as taken, he would try how much longer she
could stand out. But she told him there was no such thing done among them; that
the confidence their husbands had of their honesty, required they should be as
faithful on their parts; nay that though their husbands might connive at such a
miscarriadge, yet would not the rest of the people pass by an inconstancy of
that nature. They made no difficulty to endure any thing else, and would be
paid for it, taking and begging Presents, nay under pretense of visiting our
clothes all about, they sometimes put their hands into our pockets, and took
out what they could light on.

Though it be lawful among them, for men to marry several wives, yet most
content themselves with one. When a man dies without issue, his Brother is
obliged to marry the widow, to raise up seed to him; and according to this
custom, the Mussal had married his Brothers widow.

Their Religion is in a manner Pagan; Their Religion.
for though they are circumcised, yet have they neither Bible, nor Alchoran,
nor Priests, nor Churches. They are themselves the Priests, and offer the
Sacrifices, especially on the day of St. Elias.

When a person of quality dies the relations and friends meet in the fields,
Their Sacrifices.
both men and women, to sacrifize a he-Goat; and to find whether it be fit to
sacrifize, they cut off the privy members, which they cast against the wall: if
they do not stick thereto, they are obliged to kill another, but if they do,
they proceed with the Ceremonies, fleaing it, and stretching the skin upon the
top of a long pole, before which they offer their sacrifice, and boil, and
roast the Flesh, which they afterward eat. The Feast ended, the men rise, and
go and adore the skin, and the prayers concluded, the women withdraw. The men
stay, and grow so bestially drunk, with their Bragga, or Aquavitae, that they
seldom part without fighting. This skin is left upon the pole, till another
person of quality dies, and then the former is taken away, and another set up
instead of it.

We saw near Terki, both going and coming, not far from the Princess Bika's
house, one of these stretched skins, with the head and the horns on, upon the
black cross. The pole was planted in a quick-set hedge, only to keep the Dogs
from coming near it, and, by their pissing against it, profaning the Mystery.

They interr their dead very honorably; Their enterments.
adorn their Sepulchers with pillars, and build houses over those of persons of
quality. We saw one over the Sepulcher of Mussal's Brother, the boards whereof
were of diverse colors, placed checquerwise, having, upon the roof, several
wooden Statues, poorly done, which represented the hunting of some wild Beast.

To express their sorrow for the departure of their friends, they tear their
forehead, arms, and breasts, with their nails, after a barbarous manner, so
that the blood comes out in abundance. Their mourning continues till the wounds
are healed, and if they would have it last longer, they renew, them, by opening
the scratches in the same manner.

May. 21. we began to set things in order, for the prosecution of our journey.
We had a Desert of seventy leagues to travel over, and, to find horses for all
the Company to ride, would have been too great an expense. Wherefore we agreed
with the Waggoners of Terki, at nine Crowns a Wagon, drawn by two horses, which
might carry each of them three or four persons, to Astrachan.

There joined with us a Caravan of Merchants, of several Nations, as Persians,
Turks, Greeks, Armenians, and Muscovites; so that then we had above two hundred
Wagons, in our Company. But the Provisions allowed us were but small for so
great a journey: to wit, to every man, with the Suchari, and a loaf of moldy
brown bread, half a dried Salmon that stunk, without any drink. For the
Tartars, pretending they had bargained only for the cariadge of men, would not
receive any barrels or other vessels into the Wagons, and the Ambassador
Brugman would not be at the charge of a Wagon, purposely to carry beer or water
for us, though he made good provision of all for himself and his Favorites.
And indeed we stood not much upon it, out of an imagination, it was impossible,
we should want water: but we had time enough to repent us of that presumption.

We left Terki, the fourth of June, JUNE*
in the afternoon, and soon entered into that dreadful Heath, The Ambass. leave
Terki.
taking our way on the left hand, and turning from the Caspian Sea. It Is a
thing strange, yet very certain, that, in eleven days journey, we saw neither
City, nor Village, nor tree, nor hill, nor any River but that of Kisilar,
contrary to what all Maps represent thereof. The Deserts of Astrachan.
Nay, during all that time, we saw not so much as one Bird, but only a vast
Plain, desert, sandy, and covered in some places with a little grass, and pits,
or standing pooles, of salt, or corrupt and stinking water. We got the first
day but two leagues, and lodged at night, near one of those standing pools.

The 5. we encamped near the River Kisilar.

The 6. we traveled six leagues, and lodged near one of those pools. These
three first days, we took our way toward the West-north-west, and
East-north-east, to the River Wolga.

The 7. we got six leagues further, through a great Fenn, which we had much ado
to pass. Heat and thirst troubled us extremely, but not so much as the Flies,
Wasps, Gnats, and other infects, which both men and horses found it no small
difficulty to keep off. The Camels, which have no tails, to keep away those
infects, as the horses have, were all bloody, and full of swellings.

The 8. we were going before day; and having traveled 4. leagues, we gave our
horses a little rest and provender, at the entrance of a very sandy road. In
the afternoon, we got four leagues further, and lodged at night, near a
standing pool. The Tartars perceiving that one of their horses was like to
miscarry by the way, prevented him, cut his throat, and shared him among
themselves. At night they roasted him, making a fire of little bushes of thorns
and reeds, and were very merry.

The 9. we traveled seven leagues, and lodged, near a pool which the
overflowing of the Sea made thereabouts. The water was so bad, as was also that
of all the rest, that we were forced to stop our noses while we drunk it.

The 10. we got seven leagues further, to a place covered with Reeds, where we
found a little fresh water, derived thither from the Wolga.

The 11. we got seven leagues further, to a standing pool, made there by the
inundation of the Wolga. The water is not salt, but so dead and stinking, that
there was no drinking of it. That day, twelve great wild Boars crossed out way.
Some Tartars on horseback came riding after them, and as ill fortune would
have it, there came two of them close by our Wagon. The horses were frightened,
and fell a-running, so that the Physician and Steward fell out of the Wagon,
with the Baggage. The Si^ur Vchterits and my self, who sat in the forepart of
the Wagon, considering there was no getting out without danger, kept our
places, till the horses, being not able to go any further, stopped at the
entrance of a Fenn.

The 12. we traveled eight leagues, and found, in our way, upon the ground, a
Neast, wherein there were two Birds not quite fledged Some were of opinion they
were young Eagles. We passed by two salt marshes, the scent whereof was
somewhat like that of a Violet, and very delightful.

The 13. we traveled eight leagues further, lodged at night in a place, whence
we could discover the City of Astrachan.

The 14. we got three leagues, and lodged on the side of the Wolga, over
against Astrachan. All our people who had not drunk any fresh water, since
their coming from Terki, ran up to their knees in the River, to drink with
greater ease. As Soon as they had notice at Astrachan of our arrival, they
presently came to visit us, and he who had the keeping of the Provisions sent
thither for us, brought us a sack full of bread, Neats-tongues, hung-Beef, a
tun of Beer, and a barrel of Aquavitae. We continued that day on the
Riverside, to give the Weywode time to assign us Lodgings.

The next day, Come to Astrachan.
June 14. we crossed the River Wolga, and were lodged in a great Ambara, or
Storehouse, built there not long before, upon the River side, without the
City, where we were much troubled with Flies. We found there also another
Storehouse, full of Provisions, which David Ruts, his Highness's Factor at
Moscou, had sent thither six months before.

The Ambassador Brugman would have had all the Baggage disposed into an
appartment by it self, intending to have it searched, and to that purpose, had
opened some Chests: but those of the retinue who had not put off either clothes
or linen, since their departure from Terki, were so incensed at this
procedure, that they broke into the Room, and carried away their Chests,
notwithstanding the order he had given the Sentinel, placed at the door, to
keep any from getting in.

June the last, the Ambassadors sent their Presents to the Weywode, who
returned them another Present, of four Sheep, an Ox, ten wild Ducks, ten
Pullets, six Geese, a runn of Beer, and another of Hydromel.

It Is true, JULY.
the Ambassadors dined and supped together, during our abode at Astrachan; but
there was not a word spoken at Table, unless it were when the Ambassador
Brugman was pleased to fall on any with his ordinary Language which was
picquant and satirical enough. One day he gave such bitter expressions, to the
Secretary of the Embassy, that he could not forbear making him some answer,
whereat the other was so enraged, that he drew his knife at him, and made him
rise from the Table, with such injurious words, that the Secretary, at his
return into Holstein, was obliged to make his complaints thereof, to the
Magistrate, who condemned Brugman to make public satisfaction. This ill
correspondence, and al^enation of minds, proceeded chiefly from Brugman's being
conscious to himself, of the many imprudent actions he had done in our Travels,
and the fear he was in to be punished, for those disorders, at his return into
Holstein, upon the prosecution of those, who had taken particular notice, and
the freedom many times, to mind him thereof.

This aversion of his reached even to the Minister, who being obliged, by the
duty of his Profession, severely to reprove the sins committed in the Company,
had incurred Brugman's displeasure in so high a manner, that he could not get
of him to buy a suit of clothes, in so much, that, being, on some great
Festival, to preach and administer the Sacrament at Scamachie, it was found he
had only a pair of Drawers under his Cassock, to the great scandal of all, but
particularly the Muscovian Ambassador, who liked our Liturgy, and would have
given the Minister a suit of clothes, had he not stood in fear of the
indignation and violence of the Ambassador Brugman.

We understood also, A pernicious design of one of the Ambassadors.
that he had a design to leave Astrachan, and to go by land, accompanied by
some of his own Creatures, and to forsake the rest of the Company. The
Muscovian Ambassador, to whom he had communicated it, discovered it to us, and
gave us notice, that we should observe his actions, in as much as his intention
was no better than that of Roussel, who had betrayed the Marquess of Exidueil,
and caused him to be sent prisoner into Siberia.

Soon after he had given us this notice, the Muscovian Ambassador took leave of
us, to go for Muscovy by land: but we have heard since, that, at his coming to
Nise, finding Letters from some friends, giving him to understand that he would
not be well received by the Great Duke, he went no further, but there took a
dose of poison, whereof he died.

July 25. came to Astrachan, a Muscovian Caravan, and, with it, a German, named
Andrew Reusner, who had Letters of recommendation from his Highness of Holstein
to the King of Persia. The Ambassador Brugman had a great deal of private
discourse with him, which begat such an intimacy between them, that instead of
prosecuting his journey into Persia, he obliged him to return back thence, and
to undertake the solicitation of his affairs at the Duke of Holstein's Court.

August 1. the Muscovites celebrated, with great solemnities, the reduction of
the City of Astrachan, taken from the Tartars, on the same day, in the year
1554.

The same day came to see us two Cosaques, AUGUS.
with Letters for the Ambassadors, from Alexei Savinouits, whom they had met
upon the River Wolga.

These Rogues freely told us, that they had successfully set upon and robbed so
many people, that they were desirous to try how they should be able to deal
with the Germans: That they cared not much for our Artillery, in regard that
was only for the unfortunate: That they heard, we had an invention to toss all
that came near us into the air: That they could not imagine how it should be
done; but that the worst they could fear was death, which they were forced to
suffer at a Gibbet, or upon a wheel, and that the hope of booty would make them
attempt any thing.

Aug. 6. came to Astrachan, The Persian Ambassador comes to Astracha*
Imanculi Sulthan, the Persian Ambassador; whom we had expected so long, and
the next day he made his entrance into the City.

August. 11. died one of our Interpreters, named Kenry Krebs, and was buried
the thirteenth, in the Churchyard of the Armenians, with the ordinary
Ceremonies.

September the 5. there went away a Staniza, SEPTEM.
or Caravan, of about 200. persons, to go from Astrachan to Moscou, by land.
Andrew Resner, made his advantage of that opportunity, and departed, taking
some of our people with him.

The Ambassadors also took that convenience to send away some of their retinue
with their horses. The Ambassadors divide their Baggage.
We began to set things in order to follow them by water, and to that purpose,
bought two great Boats, sixty foot in length, and fifteen in breadth, which
cost us 600. Crowns, and to every Seaman, whereof there were thirty, we gave
12. Crowns, to bring us to Casan.

Not long before our departure, some Muscovian Musketteers brought, to be sold,
to the Ambassadors, a young Girl of ten years of age, whom they had taken from
a Schoolmaster, who was a Tartar of Precop, at the taking of the City of
Assou, which lies upon the Palus Meotides, at the mouth of the River Don, and
was taken by the Cosaques from the Turk, on the firh of August.

They brought us also another Girl about seven years of age, whom they had
stolen not far from Astrachan, as she lay a-bed with her Mother. They had put
her into a bagg, out of which they cast her at the Ambassadors feet, as if it
had been a sucking-Pigg, stark-naked. Her Parents had made in her cheeks two
blew marks, of the bigness of a Lentil, that she might be known again, in case
she were stolen.

The Ambassador Brugman, Brugman's charity.
considering, that, in purchasing them, he should bring two lost Sheep to the
Fold of Jesus Christ, bought them both, one at 25. the other at 16. Crowns. At
his return he presented them to the Duchess of Holstein, who had them so well
instructed, that in the year 1642. they were both baptized, having before given
a public account of their Faith.

Our Interpreter for the Turkish Language was also a Tartar-born, and had been
stolen in his Infancy and carried to Moscou, where he had been baptized. His
relations knew him again, and would have redeemed him; but he would not consent
thereto, protesting he would die in the profession of the Christian Religion,
since it was Gods pleasure to bring him to the knowledge thereof. But ever
after, he went not far from the Ambassadors Quarters, le^t he might have fallen
into the hands of his relations, who would have disposed otherwise of him.

At this place, The Persian Ambassador buys him a Wife.
the Persian Ambassador bought him a Wife. She was a Tartar, and Sister to a
Myrsa, who was a prisoner, and who sold his Sister for a hundred and twenty
Crowns in money, and a horse, which the Ambassador valued at ten Crowns. This
Ambassador was at least seventy years of age, but very vigorous, and used much
Hemp Seed, baked in the Embers, whereof the Persians eat abundance, out of an
opinion, that it revives Nature, yet hinders Conception.

Sept. 7. we left Astrachan, Leave Astrachan.
and embarked upon the Wolga, the Ambassadors dividing their retinue, and
taking each of them a Boat. We cast anchor within half a league of the City,
expecting the Persian Ambassador, who came to us the next day, with three
Boats. We gave him a volley at this arrival, and set sail together.

The 10. we passed before the Island of Busan, where the Tartars of Crim and
Precop, are wont to swim over the River, which in that place is somewhat
narrow. The Muscovites, to prevent them, had set a Guard there, of fifty
Musketteers, who sent to us for some Bread, and got a bag of Suchary.

The 15. we cast anchor before Tzornogar, Come to Tzornogar.
which the Muscovites call also Michailo Novogorod, from the Great Duke Michael
Federouits, who built it, within three hundred werstes, or sixty German leagues
from Astrachan. The Weywode sent the Ambassadors a Latin Letter, which Alexei
Savinouits had left for them, and sent one to invite them to come to refresh
themselves in the City: but they would not lose so much time.

The 24. we got before Sariza, To Sariza*
two hundred werstes from Tzornogar.

The 29. the wind fair, we got forty werstes. The Muscovites attributed the
cause of it to the Great Duke's name, whose Feast was celebrated that day,
being St. Michael's.

October 2. one of the Persian Ambassadors Boats was a-ground. OCTO.
They were so long getting it a-f^oat again, that the Ambassadors went ashore,
where they dined together. Their people made also acquaintances among
themselves, and those of Persia took so much Aquavitae, that we were forced to
carry, and drag them to the Boats like so many Beasts.

The Persians must also needs fall out with the Musketteers, who guarded them.
Cudgels and Cymitars were employed, and the Ambassador himself, who was got as
drunk as any of his people, was going to draw upon them, when our Ambassadors
came in, and reconciled all.

The night following, one of the Persian Ambassadors Pages, who was sick of a
bloody Flux, fell into the water, yet none perceived it till the next morning.

The 6. we came before Soratof, To Soratof.
350. werstes from Sariza. We there heard, that a party of Cosaques would have
set upon the Caravan; but fearing they might come by the worst on it, they only
crossed their march with a great noise, and, by means of their breeding-Mares,
got away some Archemagues, or Persian horses, intended for breed.

The 14. the wind South-west, there rose such a tempest, that it scattered all
our Boats. That of the Ambassador Crusius, and two of the Persian Ambassador's,
which carried horses, were forced upon the shore, and immediately sprung such
aleak, that we had hardly time enough to get out our Baggage, and the Persians
their horses, whereof there was one drowned. This Tempest having continued two
days, we got our Boats ashore, caulk'd them, and departed thence the 17. but
the Persian Ambassador, who had two Boats unserviceable, was forced to send
away his horses by land.

The 24. we came before the City of Samara, To Samara.
seventy leagues from Soratof.

November the sixth, NOV.
we passed by the mouth of the great River Kama, and entered, with the night,
into the River Casan: To Casan.
in very good time for us, in regard the next morning, the River Wolga was
frozen over.

The Weywode of the City, John Wasilouits Moroson, who, at the time of our
former being at Moscou, was Counselor of State to the Great Duke, received us
but very indifferently, as well in regard the Ambassadors had not made their
acquaintance with him by Presents, as by reason of his siding with the
Muscovian Merchants, who opposed our negotiation, and would have prevented the
establishment of our Commerce. The Ambassadors sent their Steward to him, with
the Great Duke's pass, entreating him they might be assigned Lodgings in the
City; but he sent him back with this answer, that he might return to the Boat,
and there the Ambassadors should hear further from him.

The next day, he sent to the Ambassador Brugman's Boat, a Sinbojar, who
addressing himself to the Ambassador, asked him, which of the two was the
Ambassador, which the Merchant. Brugman, thinking himself affronted by that
discourse, took him by the arm, and said to him, Go tell thy Master, that if he
cannot read, let him get one that can, and withal may show him, what quality
the Great Duke gives us. But notwithstanding all this, we were forced to
continue several days on the River, though the weather were very cold. The
Weywode indeed sent us word, that we might lodge in the City for our money; but
he issued out orders, that none should entertain us, and commanded the
Sentinel, who had permitted the Steward to pass, and a Boy, who had been his
guide through the marsh, from the Riverside to the City, to be cudgelled.

Nov. 11. the Persian Ambassador made his entrance into the City, and was
lodged in that part of it which is bult of wood. He prevailed so far with the
Weywode, that he permitted us to land, which we did the 13. taking up our
Quarters in the Suburbs.

Nov. 20. the Ambassadors bestowed the two Boats on the Weywode, and made him
some other Presents, which put him into another humor, and made him very much
our friend.

December the 16. the Muscovites celebrated the Festival of their Patron, DECEMBER.
St. Nicholas, for the space of eight days together, during which a man could
see nothing but perpetual drunkenness, and extraordinary bebauchdness, in both
men and women. The Care or Parson of the Parish, came one day to my Quarters,
accompanied by his Clerk, as well to incense the Images, as to comfort the
Mistress of the house, whose husband was put in prison for debt.

He told us, that, about forty years before, there had been found in the
Monastery of Spas, which is in the said City of Casan, the bodies of two Monks,
named Warsinosi, and Kursi, whose sanctity was approved, not only, in that
their bodies had been found entire, after so many years, but also by the many
miracles they did, there being no sick person but recovered his health, after
he had done his devotions at their Sepulcher. I asked him, why he complained of
his back, and how it came to pass, there were so many blind people, and so
great a number of other sick persons at Casan. The Priest had not a word to
say, but grew angry, and went his way.

Having stayed at Casan five weeks, Leave Casan.
till the Ice and snow were able to bear, we departed thence, the 13. of
December, with sixty Sledges, leaving, by order of the Weywode, the Persian
Ambassador behind us.

We took our way upon the Wolga, Come to Nise.
and came, the 21. to Nise, sixty leagues, or three hundred werstes, from
Casan. The Ambassadors lodged at Mr. Bernards our Factor, and the retinue, up
and down the neighborhood. There it was we left the last Lutheran Church.
Their Pastor died six months before, so that our Minister preached there, the
Sunday before Christmas. The said Church was very desirous, the Ambassadors
should stay there till after Christ-mass day, that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper might be administered that day: but the Ambassador Brugman was against
it, and ordered our departure thence on the 23. in the afternoon, qnitting the
Wolga, to take our way by the River Occa, which was also frozen up.

The 25. we had a Sermon, at two in the morning, at a Village named Kurim, ten
leagues from Nise, and traveled that day ten leagues further.

The 29. we came to Woladimer, 42. leagues from Nisan, and 28. from Moscou. The
ruins of the walls, towers and houses, which were to be seen up and down, are
undeniable demonstrations of the antiquity of the City.

December the last, we came to a Village, named Rubossa, within eight leagues
of Moscou, where our Pristaf, who had gone before, to acquaint the Great Duke
with our arrival, came and told us, that, within two days we should make our
entrance into Moscou. The Ambassador Brugman fell into such a peevish humor at
this place, that he threatened some of the retinue to have their noses and ears
cut off, as soon as he were come into the Frontters of Germany. But his menaces
troubled no body, nor did so much as any one offer to run away.

M.CD.XXXIX.
The first of Iunuary, 1639. IANUA.
we departed, before day, and traveled five leagues, to a Village named
Bechra, whither we came betimes, and there did our devotions.

The 2. we made our entrance into Moscou, Make their entrance into Moscou.
conducted by two Pristafs, whom his Czaarick Majesty had sent to meet us. The
Ambassadors sat, each of them with a Pristaf, in a rich Sledge, lined with
Crimson Satin, and hung with the richest Persian Tapistry, and the chiefest of
the retinue had excellent horses sent them from the Great Duke's Stable, all
white, twelve in number. We were lodged at the ordinary house appointed for the
reception of Ambassadors, and, during our stay there, we were supplied with all
things requisite for the Cellar and the Kitchen. The Ambassadors horses, and
such of our people as went from Astrachan along with the Caravan, were arrived
there some time before; and Reusner was gone for Holstein, according to the
agreement between him and the Ambassador Brugman.

Ian. 6. Twelf-day, the Muscovites celebrated the confecration of the holy
Water; at which Ceremony, the Great Duke and the Patriarch were in person.

The 8. the Ambassadors had their first private Audience, which laste'd above
an hour.

The night following, The Czaar's second son dies.
died Knez Iuan Michaelowits, second son to the Czaar, in the eighth year of
his age.

His departure put the whole City into mourning, especially the Court. Both men
and women put off all manner of ornament, as gold, silver, jewels, and garments
of silk, clothing themselves only in old vestments, for the most part of a
dark gray color.

Ian. 21. the Ambassadors had their second private Audience, and had a
conference of two hours. There were sent to them and those of their retinue
black horscs, and they found the whole Court hung with mourning, and all the
Senators clad in black Chamlet.

Ian. 30. departed thence the Sieur Vchterichs. He had a long time before
desired leave to return into Germany, to look after some affairs of his own,
but he could not obtain it of the Ambassador Brugman till then, and that under
a promise, that he would not carry Letters for Holstein from any but himself.
But he deceived the deceiver, and showed him the Letters of the Ambassador
Crusius, who was content they should be seen, and carried away the rest without
showing them to him.

February the second, FEBRU.
died the Sieur Gruneauld, a Senator of Dantsig, who had traveled with us, as
a Gentleman belonging to the Embassy. He was a person of much worth, and one
who had before traveled into the East and West Indies.

The 5. the Persian Ambassador made his entrance into Muscou, and the 8. had
his first Audience.

The 11. the Ambassador Brugman desired, and had, a private Audience, without
acquainting his Colleague therewith.

Febr. 23. the Ambassadors had their public Audience, in order to their
departure, at which they took leave of his Czaarick Majesty.

March the 7. the Persian Ambassador departed, MARCH
going before us, toward Germany.

The 15. the Ambassadors left Moscou making what haste they could thence, Leave
Moscou*
that they might have the convenience of Sledges, till they came to the
Frontiers of Germany: and fearing, the spring, then near, would spoil the
ways, they traveled so hard, that the 18. they came to Tuere, and the 19. to
Tarsok.

Tarsok is but a small City, yet has it thirty Churches and Chapels, whereof
one is of stone, and makes a handsome show at a distance: but the Muscovites
would not permit us to come within the City.

The 23. we came to great Novogorod, Enter Ingermania*
where we found the Persian Ambassador. We left it the next day, and getting
out of Muscovy the 27. entered Ingermania.

March the last, the three Ambassadors made their entrance into Narva, where
Colonel Wrangel came to meet us, with a party of fifty horse.

The Persian Ambassador was lodged at one of the Senators houses, Make their
entrance into Narva.
about which there was got such a multitude of people, to see his wife, that he
was half in a mind to get out of the City, and take up his Quarters in the open
fields, that none might see her: so that they were forced to get the people
away. This obliged him to take another course for the future, which was, to
have a Curtain drawn from the Wagon, or Sledge, that brought her, to the house
where she was to be lodged, that she might not be seen going in.

April the 14. the Ambassadors left Narva and lodged at the Village of Purtz
where they staid one day, to change their horses.

The 8. they came to Kunda, APRIL
a house belonging to a Senator of Riga, where they staid four days. Leave
Narva.
Here we were forced to give over traveling with Sledges, for want of snow,
and to make use of horses and wagons.

The 13. we came to Revel, Come to Revel.
where the Senate received us very magnificently. The persecutions which the
Secretary of the Embassy was forced to suffer from the Ambassador Brugman,
obliged him to take the opportunity of a Vessel, which went thence the 15. for
Lubeck, and so for the Court of Holstein, where he expected the arrival of the
Ambassadors, who staid three whole months at Revel, without any necessity for
it, or other reason than this, that the Ambassador Brugman, who was loath to
return, as fearing what might be alleged against him, would have it so.

Their stay in that City had this consequence, that many of the retinue found
their satisfaction there in the matter of Wedlock, and among others the
Ambassador Crusius, who married a Senator's daughter of that place.

July the 11. the Ambassadors, JULY.
and a Muscovian Poslanick, whom the Great Duke sent to the Duke of Holstein,
Embark at Revel.
embarked, and after eleven days sail, arrived upon the Coasts of Holstein,
near the Island of Femeren, intending to get into the haven of Kiel, but the
contrary wind obliged them to cast anchor, Come to Travemunde.
before Neustadt, within two leagues of Lubeck. They soon understood that the
Plague was there, whereupon they immediately departed thence, and went to
Travemunde, whither they got the next day, July the 23.

Thence they sent their people and the Baggage by Sea, To Eutin.
to Kiel, and the Ambassadors came the 28. to Eutin, where Duke John of
Holstein, Bishop of Lubeck, our Prince's Brother, received us, and treated us
magnificently.

The 30. they came to Kiel, To Kiel.
where our Ambassadors left the Persian, and the Muscovian Poslanick, to go and
wait on His Highness, whom they found at Gottorp, the first day of August. AUGU.
And so they concluded their Travels into MUSCOVY, TARTARY, and PERSIA. To
Gottorp.


FINIS.
THE Voyages and Travels OF J. ALBERT de MANDELSLO (A Gentleman belonging to
the Embassy, sent by the Duke of HOLSTEIN to the great Duke of MUSCOVY, and the
King of PERSIA) INTO THE EAST INDIES. Begun in the year M.DC.XXXVIII. and
finished in M.DC.XL. Containing a particular description of The great MOGUL's
Empire, the Kingdoms of DECAN, CALICUTH, COCHIM, ZEILON, COROMANDEL, PEGU,
SIAM, CAMBODIA, MALACCA, SUMMATRA, JAVA, AMBOINA, BANDA, The MOLUCCAS,
PHILIPPINE, and other Islands, JAPAN, the Great Kingdom of CHINA, the Cape of
GOOD HOPE, MADAGASCAR, etc. In three Books. Illustrated with Maps and Figures.
Rendered into English by JOHN DAVIES of Kidwelly. The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for I. Starkey, and T. Basset, in Fleet Street, at the Mitre,
between the middle-Temple-gate, and Temple Bar, and at the George near
Cliffords-Inne. 1669.

To the Right Worshipful The Governor, Deputy, Committies, and Fellowship of
English Merchants, trading into the EAST INDIES.
Right Worshipful,
YOu have here the Travels of a young Gentleman, who went along with the
Embassy, sent by the Duke of Holstein, into Muscovy and Persia. That it was
his resolution to see the other parts of Asia, appeared by the express
permission he obtained from his own Prince, before his departure, to do it. For
the particular description we have of Persia, we are indebted to Adam Olearius,
the Author of the Ambassadors Travels into Muscovy and Persia, which I dare
affirm to be such as is infinitely beyond ought came abroad of that part of the
World before. What our present Author Mandelslo gives of it, is only what lay
in his way between Ispahan and the City of Ormuz. But of his departure from the
former, the motives upon which he went, and the assistances he received from
some of this Nation, be pleased to receive this account.

His acquaintainces with some English Merchants at Ispahan, the Metropolis of
Persia, heightened in him the design of these Travels into the East Indies;
their recommendations conducted him first to Ormuz, and afterward thence to
Surat. The kindnesses he received from the English President, and other
Merchants he met with there, were such, as not only engaged his stay some time,
but also found him the conveniences of diverse Caravans, with whom he traveled
into several parts of the Mogul's Country, and particularly to the Court of
that powerful Prince, where he had staid longer, had not an accident, which
happened at Ispahan, during the time of the Embassy, occasioned in his sudden
removal thence. But what further Observations he might have made of those
parts, are supplied not only by the said Olearius, but also by the person who
rendered his Work into the French, out of which, as being the most complete,
this Translation into the English is done. Having continued among the English
Merchants at Surat, till the Ships bound for England were ready for their
departure, he comes thence, along with Master Methwold, who had newly resigned
his charge of President to Mr. Fremling, at the Ceremonies whereof he was
present. Being come to London, he found the same person, and others of the
East India Company as liberal of their kindness and hospitality, as they had
been in those parts where he grew first acquainted with them; and such they
continued, till his desires to wait on his own Prince, and put a Period to his
Travels, occasioned his return into his own Country.

The civilities and endearments he received from them, were indeed such, as not
only, then, obliged the Person, to whom they were shown, but have, since,
engaged all those who have made any advantage of the Travels occasioned
thereby. It was therefore a noble and necessary gratitude in the Author, to
make the frequent acknowledgments he does thereof in several places of his
Work. It was a commendable compliance with his humor, in those who put it into
other Languages, to propose both, as examples to their Countries. But for my
part, I conceive there lies the greater Obligation upon me to make this address
of my Labors herein, in that I am to let the World know, whose encouragements
it is obliged to for these Travels, and to celebrate in our own Language and
Country what was so nobly and generously done by some of your illustrious body
in the more remote parts of the Universe, and show withal what induced me to
this presumption of assuming the quality of,

Right Worshipful, Your most humbly devoted Servant, I. DAVIES.

THE PREFACE.
THe Relation of these our Travels would not be perfect, if at the return of
our Embassy, 1638.
we gave not an account what became of Monsieur Mandelslo, whom we left at
Ispahan, with a design to travel into the Indies. This young Gentleman, who was
born in the County of Meklenburgh, Mandelslo 's person.
put off the quality of Page, when his Highness the Duke of Holstein resolved
to send the Sieurs, Crusius and Brugman, into Muscovy and Persia, and expressed
so great a desire to see Countries and Kingdoms so far distant from his own,
that his said Highness did not only suffer him to go along with the
Ambassadors, in the quality of a Gentleman of the Chamber, but also to leave
them as soon as they had finished their Negotiation in Persia, His Design.
and to put in execution the design he had to travel farther, and see other
parts of Asia.

He was so well looked upon in the King of Persia's Court, S^ach Se^^ loves
him, and offers bin a Pension of 10000. Crowns.
that that Monarch pressed him to stay there for some years, and to that end
profferd him many great advantages, and among others, a Pension of five or six
hundred Tumains, which amount to near 10000. Crowns; many of the greatest about
the Court, perceiving that the King had an affection for him, courted his
Friendship, and, one after another, entertained him with continual Feasting,
out of a hope to engage him in the heat of Wine, and by such great expressions
of their kindness toward him. Those who were the most importunate with him,
(and to that end appointed several meetings, whereat they gave him all the
divertisements which might induce him to forget the inclinations he had toward
his own Country) were the Master of the Horse, He considers whether he were
best stay at Ispahan.
the great Faulconer, and the high Steward. They could not absolutely prevail
with him, but shook his resolution so, as that he went and advised with the
Prior of the Italian Carmelites, a person that by the abode of twenty four
years at Ispahan, was perfectly acquainted with the Court of Persia. This good
religious man, who was called Father Tinas, a person of eminent vertue^ told
him, that to put him out of the perplexity he was in, he would allege unto him
two instances, whereby he might himself judge, what fortune he was to expect in
Persia. One was, that he had known a French Gentleman, who had so well
established himself in the Court, that the King, who had employed him in two
great Embassies of great importance into Europe, which he very faithfully
m^nnaged, had, to oblige him to spend the rest of his days in Persia,
prevailed with him to marry a Persian Lady, but allowing him the freedom to
live according to his own Religion. That some years afterward, this Gentleman
desired leave to return into France, but the King forbad him to depart the
Kingdom; and to prevent him from attempting it, caused all he had to be seized
upon. That, even that unkindness had not smothered in him the desire he had to
return into France, so that he made his escape notwithstanding that
prohibition; but he was killed by the way. That his Lady, who had received
Baptism, fled into the Monastery of the Carmelites, where she lay concealed,
till she had an opportunity to disguise her self, and to go to Rome, whither
the Pope had invited her. The other Story was, that another Gentleman, an
Italian, of the house of the Gabrieli, who was no less favored at the Court
then the French man, growing weary of living so long among Mahumetans, the
professed enemies of his Religion, bethought him to make a discovery to the
King, of some notice he had, that there were about Ormus certain Mines, out of
which Gold might be gotten, and showed him a sample of it. The King did not so
absolutely credit him, but that he sent along diverse Lords and Gentlemen, who
were to observe him: but coming to Gamron, he made them so drunk with Sack,
which the Portuguese had furnished him with, that he made a shift to get to the
Seaside, where finding a Boat ready, he made his escape to Ormus. That this
escape of his had so incensed the King, that it raised in Schach-Abas the first
thoughts of besieging the City of Ormus, which he reduced to his obedience the
year following.

To this the good Father added, that he had several other reasons to give him,
which might divert a Gentleman of his age, and one so handsome in person, from
staying in so depraved a Court as that of Persia: but that he conceived M.
Mandelslo himself was better acquainted with it, then to engage him in a
discourse of that nature. And indeed what he had said was enough to settle his
resolution, so that before they parted, Mandelslo promised him to leave Ispahan
with the soonest, and prosecute his design of going to Babylon, and thence to
Jerusalem, whence he made account to go to Aleppo, and to return by the
Mediterranean Sea into Europe. But having understood that the Grand Seigneur
had besieged Bagdat, or Babylon, he changed his resolution, and took that of
going to Ormus, and thence to the Great Mogul's Court, and so into the Indies.

To that end having disingaged himself from the Ambassadors on the one and
twentieth of December 1637. he stayed at Ispahan, till the 16. of January
following. But in regard he himself has taken the pains to set down the
particulars of his Travels, and to make a very exact relation thereof, it were
an injury to him, not to let him speak himself. He begins his relation thus.

MANDELSLO's TRAVELS INTO THE INDIES.
The First Book.
THe Ambassadors of Holstein, having left Ispahan, the Metropolis of Persia, I
resolved to make use of the Permission which the Duke my Master had given me,
and having taken my leave of the Ambassadors two Leagues thence, I returned to
the City, where I stayed almost a month, to put all things in order for the
prosecution of my Design. During which time the King ordered Imanculi
Esichagasi, a Native of Karabath, to make himself ready for the Embassy, upon
which he would send him into Holstein.

Accordingly, January 10. 1638. Imanculi sent away the baggage, and the
Presents that were to be made to the Duke, consisting in excellent Horses, and
several Stuffes of Gold and Silk, amounting, as they were valued by the
Persians, to 1500. Tumains, which make 20000. Crowns.

They about the Court, who had expressed a kindness for me, perceiving I was
fully resolved to be gone, procured me a particular audience in order to my
departure, to which I was introduced on the 12. of January IANVARY.
by the Master of the Horse. I kis'd the hem of the Kings garment, Mandelslo
leaves Ispahan.
who with much kindness was pleased to allow of my departure. The days
following I spent in taking leave of my friends, and the 16. of January I left
Ispahan, with a retinue of three persons, a Surgeon, a Lacquey, and a Groom,
all three Germans, and one Persian servant, Mr. Honywood, Agent of the English
at Ispahan, accompanied by several Merchants of the same Nation, and some
French Merchants, brought me a League out of the City.

I traveled that day eight Leagues, Comes to Majar.
to a Village called Majar, where I stayed all the next day, expecting a
Carmelite Father, who had promised me his company. But hearing that he had left
Ispahan a day before me, I traveled on the 18. and came that day to the
Village of Kamscha, six leagues from Majar. To Kam^cha
All this way was one continued walk, set with trees on both sides in a direct
line, with very pleasant Gardens adjoining; so that I do not think there can be
a more delightful place then that Village? but the Carauansera, where I was to
take up my lodging, had nothing but the bare walls. The 19. I got six leagues,
to the Village of Machsud. Machsud.
This Village has a Carauansera well furnished with Lodgings and Stables.

The 20. I lodged in a Carauansera, Hannabath
near a Village called Hannabath, which is very well seated, on the descent of
a pleasant hill. The 21. I traveled 10. leagues, to a Carauansera, cal'ed
Iurgisthan, Jurgis^han
very ill way, and so much the more incommodious, by reason of the wind and
snow, which hindered me very much.

The 22. I was forced to travel 12. Farsangs, or Persian Leagues; for, from
Iurgisthan there is neither Village nor Carauansera, Surma.
where a man may be lodged; so that it was night ere I got to Surma. By that
great days journey, I overtook the Mules of certain Persian Merchants, who
came from Ispahan a day before me.

The 23. I was in like manner forced to travel 12. Leagues, Gus^i.
to the Village of Gusti, where we were very ill accommodated, our Horses
having not so much as a house over their heads, though it were very bad
weather, and snow'd all night. The 24. we had a days journey, as great as the
two precedent, but a much worse way; for as soon as we were out of Gusti, we
came into mountains covered with snow, and had that day very cruel weather,
though the Country thereabouts a man may think should afford a very pleasant
prospect in Spring and Summer. Maderre Soliman.
We lodged at night in a great Village, called Meshid Maderre Soliman, by
reason of a sumptuous Sepulcher, which is within half a league of it. The
Sepulcher is in a little Chapel built of white Marble, upon a high square of
free-stonework, so as that the going up to its is by steps of all sides. The
air and rain have eaten into the wall, in several places, but time has in a
manner consumed several great pillars of Marble, whereof what remains may be
seen all about the Structure: upon the wall of the Chapel there are yet to be
seen in Arabian Characters these words, Mader Suleiman. The Inhabitants say,
that Solomon's Mother was interred there; but the Carmelite Fathers of Schiras,
with more likelihood of truth, told me, that it was the Sepulcher of the Mother
of Scach Soliman, the 14. Calif, or King, of the posterity of Aaly. Elmacin, in
his History of Arabia, l. 1. c. 14. says, her name was Wallada, the daughter
of Abbas Abbasceam, and that this Soliman lived in the year 715. and relates,
among other things, one very remarkable, to wit, that the King, who was a very
handsome graceful person, viewing himself one day in a Looking-glass, said,
that he might justly assume the quality of King of Youth, as well as of his
Kingdom; whereto one of the Seraglio-Ladies answered, that he might indeed
justly do it, if his beauty would continue still the same, and were not subject
to that change which is natural and common to all things; but that he must
consider with himself that it was perishable, and that happily he should not
enjoy it long; and that these words made such an impression in him, that,
failing into a deep melancholy, he within a few ^^yes died of it. In this
Village I met with the Carmelite Father, who came from Ispahan before me, with
an Armenian Caravan.

The 26. I got five Leagues to the Village of Siwan; Siwan. Mardasch.
The 27. six Leagues to Mardasch. This last Village is very famous, for the
Antiquities which are to be seen near it, and which obliged us, as they do all
that travel that way, to make a particular Observation thereof. They are the
ruins of an old Castle, Tzilminar.
which the Persians, call Tzilminar, that is to say, forty pillars from a word
compounded of Tezehil, which signifies 40. and minar, a pillar or Tower; in as
much as the towers of the Metschid or Mosqueys of the Persians, having neither
bells nor steeples, are of the form and bigness of a pillar. They are no doubt
the ruins of one of the most magnificent structures that ever were; and the
Persians say, that their King Szemscid Padschal, Grandfather by the mother
side to Alexander the Great, (of whom mention is made in the precedent Travels
of the Ambassadors into Muscovy and Persia) was the Founder of that Castle;
though others say King Solomon built it; and some would have it done by Darius,
the last King of Persia. The Religious men of Schiras told me, Persepolis
that the learned were clearly of opinion, that the ancient Persepolis had
stood thereabouts, and that these were the ruins of Cyrus's Palace. Whatever
they were, they are at this day such as would ravish those who can ever so
meanly judge of the excellency of ancient Monuments. The Groundwork of it is
twenty two Geometrical feet in height, having at each of the four corners a
pair of stairs of white Marble, consisting of 95. steps, which are very flat,
and so broad, that twelve horse may go up together abreast. Upon the square of
it, before you come within the structure, may be seen the ruins of a wall, as
also what is left of two great Gates, which have catv'd upon them each a horse,
with harness and saddles very antic; and in the two other pieces, two
creatures, whereof the hinder part has some resemblance to the body of a
horse, but the head, which is crowned, resembles that of a Lion, and both have
wings of each side. On the one side, there are nineteen pillars of black and
white Marble, whereof the least were eight, the biggest t^n^els high, without
the bases. They told us, that not long before there were forty pillars
standing; but it cannot be well judged, whether they had been designed for the
ornament of some great Hall; or set there in the air purely for show. A little
further are the ruin^s of two chambers, which, as far as may be judged by the
doors and windows, were not very large. All is of Marble, so smooth and
polished, that it might serve for a Looking-glass, as well as that of the
palace Royal at Ispahan. On both sides of the doors, there are several figures
of men, carved, whereof some are sitting, others stand, but much exceeding the
n^tural proportion. They have all their hair so long, that it falls down over
their shoulders, great beards, and habits falling down to their heels, with
very wide sleeves, and a girdle about their garments. They have all round caps
upon their heads; which, being much different from the ordinary habit of the
Persians at present, argues a great antiquity. At a small distance, there are
two other Chambers, built after the same manner, and of the same bigness,
whereof there is nothing left but the doors, and the cross-bars of the windows.

The structure seems to have had many doors, which the Persians observe to this
day in their buildings, so to make way for the winds they stand in need of to
cool themselves. Near these chambers there may be seen, engraven upon a square
pillar, certain unknown characters, which have nothing common with either the
Greek, Hebrew, or Arabian, nor indeed with any other language. There are twelve
lines of these characters, which, as to their figure, are triangular,
Piramidal, or like obelisques, but so well graven and so proportionate, that
those who did them cannot be thought Barbarians: Some believe they are
Telesmes, and that they contain some secrets which Time will discover. Besides
these, there is also a great Court, upon the same groundwork, which is ninety
paces square, having on each side two gates, whereof some are six, others but
three paces wide, all built of a very well polished marble, whereof the several
pieces are eight foot in length and three in breadth. In another Court there
are represented in carv'd-work, in marble, battles, triumphs, and Olympic
games, very well done, and with an exact observance of proportion. Upon every
gate is represented a man, with a graceful countenance, sitting, and holding in
one hand a Globe, in the other a Scepter, though the Kings of Persia never sat
in that posture. I had the curiosity to get up on high, where I found the
figure of a King at his devotions, adoring the Sun, Fire, and a Serpent. It is
not easy to affirm, whether the Architecture of this Palace be of the Ionick,
Dorick, or Corinthian order, the building is so ruined, though there be yet as
much left as would find work for a good able Painter for six months. It Is a
thousand pities, that no body has yet had the curiosity to have it graven, had
it been only out of this motive, that the barbarous people thereabouts ruin it
dai^^ more and more, and convey away the stones to carry on private buildings.
Ae^ian says, Lib. 1. c. 5^.
that the Grand Cyrus was grown famous for the Palace he had built in the City
of Persepolis, whereof he had himself laid the foundation; Darius, for that
built by him at Susa; and Cyrus the younger, for the pleasant Gardens which he
had himself planted and cultivated in Lydia. Lib. 17.
If this be the same place which Diodorus Siculus makes mention of it is
certain, that both as to greatness and magnificence it exceeded all those of
that time. He says it was encompassed with three walls of Marble, whereof the
first was 16. the second 32. and the third 60. else high, with the gates and
balconies of brass. The work of so many years, and all that wealth were
destroyed in a few hours, by Alexander the great, who, upon the persuasion of a
common Prostitute, caused it to be fired, as Quintus Curtius gives an account
of it in his History. Lib. 5* c. 7.
Having viewed these Antiquities, which with those of Derbent, were all we met
with in our Travels, I prosecuted my journey the 28. of January, and got that
day ten Leagues, to the City of Sehiras.

In this City I met with four Italian Carmelites, who have a very handsome well
built Monastery there, and enjoy an absolute liberty of conscience, under the
jurisdiction of the King of Persia. The City of Schiras described.
There had also been heretofore a Monastery of Austin-Friers; but they were
forced thence, with the other Portuguez, when the City of Ormus was taken from
them. Schiras is the chief City of the Province of Fars, at 29. degrees, 36.
minutes, seated in a very pleasant place, at the foot of certain Mountains upon
the River Sendemer, heretofore called Ar^xes, which disembogues it self into
the Persian Gulf. We were told, the City had been much bigger then it is now,
though there be in it at present above ten thousand houses; which I the more
easily credited, in that we found all about it, and half a league beyond, the
ruins of the gates and walls of a great City. Whatever Nature supplies mankind
withal, not only for necessity, but also for pleasure, is here to be had in
great abundance; as Wheat, Wine, Oranges, Lemmons, Pomegranats, Almonds, Dates,
Pistachoes, etc. and the lovely Cypress-trees afford a pleasant shade against
the excessive heats. The best Wine of all Persia grows hereabouts, and in such
abundance, that it is transported all over the Kingdom, especially to the
Court, where the King and great Lords drink not any other. It Is more sprightly,
and more pleasant then Canary; but in regard no person of quality but drinks of
it, and is willing to treat his friends with Schiras Scharab, it is dear enough
at Ispahan, where it is sold at half a Crown a pottle. The soil hereabouts is
very fertile, and produces abundance of Wheat and Fruit. The Sheep which are of
an Ash-grey color, with an eye of white, have their wool curled or frizled,
and their tails are so big, and so fat that they weigh 18. or 20. pound. The
adjacent Forests afford abundance of Mastick, which the Country people gather
in dishes fastened to the Trees. It is at first green, but the Air in time
corrupting it gives it the brown color it is of, when brought into Europe. I
stayed eight days at Schiras, as well to rest my Horses as to fortify my self
against the hardship I was to expect in my future travel, it being a hundred
Leagues to Ormus, through a Country where I should not find what I left behind
me at Schiras, which is doubtless the principal City of Persia, for Wine and
Women; and affords so great enjoyments to those who can use these two things
with moderation, that the Persians are wont to say, FEB^VARY.
that if Mahomet had tasted the pleasures of Schiras, he would have desired God
to make him immortal there: I left it the fifth of February, and passed by two
Caravanseras, and took up my lodging at the third, having traveled that day
ten Leagues, through a fair even way.

The sixth, I got seven Leagues, having a very bad way, but in sight of many
Villages, whereof the prospect was the more pleasant, by reason of the
Date-trees all about them.

The seventh I passed by one of these Caravanseras, and got that day ten
Leagues, taking up my quarters in the little City of Scharim, in the middle of
a Forest of Date-trees. The five days following were the most troublesome of
all my life. For the eighth of February, we got but five Leagues, through the
most horrid way in the world. I cannot imagine how people made a shift to
travel that way, before Imanculi Chan (of whom somewhat has been said
elsewhere, who was so cruelly put to death with all his children, by Schach
Sefi) caused it to be repaired, with incredible expense, when at this day a man
cannot pass, but in great danger of his life, by reason of the uneven and
narrow ways, between steepy mountains on the one side, and dreadful precipices
on the other; where I very narrowly avoided a misfortune, which happens there
very often. For my Horse's hoof, which I was leading by the bridle, being
filled with snow, he stumbled upon me, forced me out of the way, so as that had
I not caught hold of a wild Almond tree, which happened to be there, as it were
by miracle, I had there ended both my travel and life, in the precipices. I
lodged at night in a Caravansera, where I had a house over my head; but that
was all, for there was neither provender for my horses, nor any thing for my
self and my servants to eat.

The ninth, having traveled three Leagues, I came to a Caravansera, where I
found horsemeat. After dinner, I got five Leagues farther, to another
Caravansera; but meeting there with the Armenian Caravan, and the Carmelite
Father, whom I spoke of before, I rode on, and traveled two Leagues farther to
a Village called Berry, Berry.
and lodged not far from it, in one of the best Caravanseras that I met with in
all my journey.

The tenth I had very ill way along the mountain: I preferred this before
another fairer way, which I might have taken by the Plains, but more about by
four Leagues: L^te at night I came to the City of Laar.

The City is seated at the foot of a Mountain, L^ar.
in a spacious Plain, its houses are built of brick baked in the Sun; but the
Citadel is very advantagiously seated on the mountain, and well fortified with
a Rampire of freestone. There is no Wine, but abundance of Dates in these
parts. The Inhabitants drink only water, which being thick and troubled, must
needs be very unwholesome, as is also the Air thereabouts; whence it comes that
no Inhabitant almost but is troubled with a kind of worm, which breeds between
the flesh and the skin, about an ell long, and which is with much difficulty
got out after the manner we shall have occasion to speak of hereafter; hitherto
we had been more sensible of cold then heat; but in this place we began to
think the heat of the Sun troublesome.

I stayed one whole day at Laar; but when I would have gone thence the twelfth,
they would not suffer me to go out of the Caravansera, till I had paid half a
Tum^in, which amounts to between forty and fifty shillings. I stood out, and
alleged, that being no Merchant, they could not exact that duty from me: but
the receiver of it very much pre^^ing the payment, I sent my Pasport, and the
Letters of recommendation which the King had written on my behalf to the Sultan
of Gamron, to the Governor of the Citadel, who immediately sent an Officer of
the Garrison, with order for my departure, without any further trouble.

They say the City of Laar was built by Pilaes, the son of Siroes, who had to
his Successor Gorgion M^l^ch, Laar described.
first King of Laar, and of whom the two and thirtieth Successor was Ebrahim
Chan, who was ejected by S^ach Abas, King of Persia, in the year 1602. It has
about four thousand houses, but neither gat^s nor walls, but only a Castle
built there by the Persians since their conquest, upon a steepy rock, which
commands the City, there being but one way to go up to it, and that so narrow,
that two horses can hardly go abreast in it. The walls of it are cut out of the
rock, and the Garrison consists of a hundred men, a suffi^ient number to make
good that place, though there be in the Magazine Arms for three thousand men.
The water they have within it is brackish; so that those of the Garrison are
obliged to save that which falls from the Sky, whereof they have abundance at
certain seasons of the year. I traveled that day 14. Leagues to a Caravansera
near a little Village.

This great days journey did me no small prejudice, The Authors indisposition.
though I had felt some alteration in my health at my departure from Schiras.
But the great journeys, especially the last I had made since; the water, which
was troubled and corrupted, and the insupportable heats, brought me to such
gripings in the belly, which were accompanied by an oppression of the stomach,
and a very great looseness, that I began to be out of all heart. I caused
enquiry to be made for a Litter, but there being none to be found, I was forced
to get on the Horse which carried the sumpter, which I had so ordered, as that
I had the convenience of resting my back. In that posture I went away the 19.
and got that day to a great Village within 12. Leagues of the City of Gam^on,
and took up my lodging at the Calenter's of the place. In the evening came to
the same lodging an English man, who was to succeed him who was the chief of
the Merchants at Ispahan, accompanied by another Merchant of the same Nation,
with whom I had some acquaintance during my abode at the King of Persia's
Court. They were well provided with that kind of Spanish Wine, which is called
Seck, though the true name of it be Xeque, from the Province whence it comes;
which, together with two good meals whereto they had invited me, a little
comforted my stomach, and recruited my spirits, at least as far as the posture
of my health would permit. They gave me Letters of recommendation to an English
Merchant of Bandar Gamron, whom they entreated to lodge me in the Indian
Company House there, and to assist me all that lay in his power, in my Voyage
to Suratta. They took horse after supper, but my indisposition kept me there
till the 22. of February. Leaves Laar.
That day I traveled six leagues to a Caravansera, where I rested my self till
the heat of the day was over, and then got three leagues further to another
Caravansera. I grew worse and worse, insomuch that my former indisposition
being heightened into a burning Fever, I was reduced to the greatest extremity.
Comes to Gamron.
But there was no staying in a place where I could not be relieved, so that I
resolved to get to Bandar, whatever it cost me, out of the confidence I had
that there, among so many Merchants of several Nations who trade thither, I
should find some ease. Accordingly, as soon as I was got thither, the 23. of
February, the English, French and Dutch came to give me a visit, and having had
an account of my quality and design, as also of the nature of my indisposition,
which was come to a bloody Flux, with a burning Fever, they took me so much
into their care, that within four days the Fever left me, and I made a shift
to visit the Sulthan or Governor of the City.

I had before sent him the Letters of recommendation which Schach Sefi had
given me, Dines with the Sulthan.
directed to him, so that he no sooner heard of my recovery, but he sent to
invite me to dinner, whither I went the 28. As soon as I was come into the
room, he made me sit down by him, and to further my diversion and
entertainment, he had entreated the Dutch Merchants to bear me company, by
which means I had the opportunity to be acquainted with them. I shall say
nothing of the particularities of this Entertainment, because there was nothing
in it extraordinary, or more then we had seen at Ispahan and elsewhere.

The same day came to Gamron a Vessel from Suratta, of 600. MARCH.
Tun burden. It belonged to the Governor of Suratta, who had employed an
English Carpenter in the building of it. There came in it a certain Queen, who
was a Widow, Mother to the King of G^lkende, with her Daughter. The King fell
in love with the Daughter, and would have married her, but the Mother would by
no means consent to that incest, upon which he had forced her out of the
Kingdom. The Daughter came along with her Mother, preferring the miseries of
exile before the enjoyments of that incestuous marriage. It was reported, the
Mothers design was to marry her Daughter to the King of Persia, or one of the
chiefest Lords of the Kingdom.

March 11. The Pesians celebrated their N^urus, or first day of their year,
with the ceremonies mentioned in the fourth book of the precedent Travels into
Persia; the same day the Sulthan invited me again to dinner, with several
English and Dutch. In the evening came to Bandar Mr. Chapman, whom I had met
near Laar, who had accompanied the new English Captain who was going to
Ispahan. He brought along with him another English Merchant, with whom I had
contracted a particular friendship, and whose conversation was so much the
greater comfort to me, in that from my departure from Ispa^an, I had not met
with any friend that I could in the least be confident of. For though the Dutch
entertained me very highly, Mandelslo's distrust of the Dutch.
and made great expressions of their kindness toward me, yet could I not well
trust them, especially when I considered how little reason they had to have any
affection for us, after the difference we had had with them at Ispahan.

March 13. I left the Caravansera, Quem laesimus, o^imus.
to take up my Lodgings at the House belonging to the English, who incessantly
importuned me to accept of it.

The 21. came to Gamron one Mr. Hall an English Merchant, with 253. Bails of
Silk, valued at 200 l. a Bail, which he had received upon the account of the
sum of 30000. Tumains, or 150000. Pistols, which the King of Persia was
endebted to the English, for one moiety of the Customs of Gamron, whereof we
shall speak more anon.

The same day died my Surgeon of a burning Fever, on the seventh day of his
sickness. I must confess the loss of him was a very great affliction to me. For
besides the great services he had done me, and those he might still do me in my
sickness, which I had not quite shaken off; I might have expected many other
good offices from him, upon the account of his being well skilled in the
Languages he had gotten by traveling into Spain, Italy, Poland, and the East
Indies, where he had been twice. To alleviate this affliction, I went one day
abroad a walking with one of the English Merchants, along the River side, where
I saw one of those Trees which Q. Curtius makes mention of in the ninth Book of
his History, in these terms, Alexander having crossed the River with Porus,
went a good way into the Indies, where he saw Forests of a very vast extent
full of trees, which were very thick with boughs, and of an extraordinary
height. Most of the Branches being as big as the boal of ordinary Trees bowed
down to the ground, and having taken earth, grew up straight again, so that a
man would think they were not branches that started up, but other trees growing
upon their own roots.

And indeed so it was, that the branches which came out of the boal of the
tree, getting to the earth did there take root, and made another new tree,
which at the height of fifteen or twenty foot cast forth other branches, and so
became a Forest, rather then a Tree, since that which I saw there was two
hundred and fourteen paces about, and might well afford shade to two thousand
persons. Arbol de Rays, or the Indian Fig Tree.
The Portuguez call it Arbol de Rays, and those who have written the natural
History of those parts, The Indian Fig-treee, by reason of its fruit, which is
about the bigness of a man's thumb, and full of grains within, as the common
Fig, but its taste more unpleasantly lushious, and its color red, and the
leaves of the tree are much like those of the Quince-tree.

At the foot of that tree, The Sepulcher of a Benjan Saint.
from which all the rest sprung, there is a little Chapel, built in honor of
an Indian Saint, or Benjan, that lies buried there. The Guardian of the
Sepulcher, who sat at the door, received us very kindly, and treated us with a
collation of Almonds, Nuts, Dates, and very good fair Water. He suffered us to
come into the Chapel, where we found the Saints Tomb all strewn with Beans of
several colors, and above it, under a Canopy of Satin, several Lamps, which
the Religious man is obliged to keep in night and day. We shall have occasion
to speak elsewhere of the Religion of the Indians, and particularly of that of
the Benjans; and therefore we shall here only say, that it was not by chance
that the Tomb was covered with Beans; but hence, that that Saint, and the
Guardian of his Sepulcher, were of the Sect which is called the Benjans, who
trade much to Gamron, and believe, with Pythagoras, that the souls of departed
persons retreat into Beans: an opinion which is very common, not only among the
Heathens of the Indies, but also all over China.

April 1. APRIL.
there came to Gamron an Envoy from Scach Sefi, Schach Sefi sends the Sulthan
of Gamron an ^ssurance of his savor.
King of Persia, who brought the Sultan a present, which was a Garment, as an
assurance to him of the favor of his Prince. The Sulthan got on horseback,
without any Arms about him, and having desired the English and Dutch Merchants
to honor him with their company in his Cavalcade, and to afford him their
presence at that Ceremony, I got in among them, and followed him about a
quarter of a League out of the City, where the Envoy had caused a Tent to be
pitched in the Field. Being got thither, they made us all sit down, but the
Sulthan stood, and with great submission received the Kings Letter, which he
kissed and put to his forehead, as also the Robe, which the Envoy presented to
him at the same time, with the Turbant and Girdle, which were of a very fine
and thin silk, with Flowers of Gold. He immediately put on the Robe, and the
other Presents, and having made a short prayer for the Kings prosperity,
lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven, and received the Complements of the
whole company, he mounted again, and returned to the City where he was received
with the great Guns of both the Castles. At the entrance of his Palace he met
the Molla, who made a speech to him that lasted a quarter of an hour, after
which the Sulthan treated the strangers, and the principal Officers of the
Garrison very magnificently.

The City of Gamron, A description of the city of Gamron.
or Bandar Gamron, i. e. the Port of Gamron, lies at 27. degrees. latitude. For
though the Persians and Arabians in their Catalogues put it at 25. degr. yet is
the observation which the Hollanders have made of it, and which we here follow,
very just and exact; it being certain, that most of the Maps that have been yet
made, and particularly that of Persia, are very defective. The error of
certain Geographers.
Their error proceeds hence, that they put the Caspian Sea too high, and
consequently allow Persia a greater breadth from North to South, then it really
has. For they put the City of Resht at 41. degrees, whereas it is at 37. and
so the breadth of all Persia can be but 10. degrees, taking it from Gamron to
Rescht, or 12. at most, if we should grant Ormus to be at 25. degrees: so that
Boterus is extremely mistaken, when he allows Persia the extent of 18. degrees.

It is not long since that this place was but a little Village, consisting of
some few Huts, which the Fishermen had set up for their conveniences, and it
is since the reduction of Ormus that the goodness of the Port has raised it to
a City of great Trade. The Dutch and English Ships, and the Moor Bottoms which
come there daily, by reason of the convenience of the Road, and the Merchants
of Ispahan, Schiras, and Laar, who bring their stuffes thither, as Velvet,
Taffa^a, raw-Silk, etc. and exchange them for others, will in time make this
City one of the most considerable of all the East. The Situation of Gamron.
It is seated upon the Persian Gulf, between two good Castles, which defend it
against the descent of Pirates, and keep the entrance of the Haven, where there
is a square Redoubt, with four pieces of Canon upon it. The Fortifications of
the Castle are antic, with round Bastions, but very well furnished with great
Guns. The Haven is so commodious, that Ships may anchor very safely at five or
six fathom water. Its Houses.
The houses at Gamron built of a certain stone, which they make of stiff Clay,
Sand, shredded-Straw and Horse-dung mixed together, whereof having set a Layer,
they cover it with a Layer of Straw or Fagots, and then another Layer of Clay
and Straw, and so alternately, till they have brought it six or seven foot
high: then they set fire to it, and so bake the Stone; and to fasten and cement
them together, they make a composition of the same Paste with Salt Water, and
some Lime, and by that means make a kind of Mortar, which is almost as hard as
the Stone it self.

The best Houses are those of the Sulthan, or Governor of the City, and the
Lodgings, or Ware houses of the Dutch and English, which lie so near the Sea,
that at High Water the Tide comes up to the walls of them, which is a great
convenience for the loading and unloading of their Merchandises. The lower
rooms serve for Kitchins and Warehouses, and the upper for Lodgings, which are
the more commodious in this respect, that being high, they are the more fit to
receive the wind of all sides, so in some measure to moderate the excessive
heat of the Sun. The meaner sort of people have no other covering over them,
then what they make with the branches and leaves of Date-trees, which they call
Adap, Its Streets.
and are the only trees that find them fruit, and timber for building. The
Streets are narrow, The Air.
irregular, and not kept clean. The Air is very unwholsom thereabouts, by
reason of the excessive heat, as also of the continual change of the Winds
which r^ign there, and which in the space of twenty four hours go through all
the points of the Compass. For in the morning they have an East Wind, which is
extremely cold; about noon a South Wind, which brings insupportable heats along
with it; in the evening a West-wind, which coming fromwards Arabia, brings
sufficient heats with it; and at midnight a North Wind, which comes out of the
Mountains of the Country, and is cold enough. It rains so seldom, that it was
observed in the year 1632. that with the rising of the Wind, there falling a
great shower, A great drought.
after a continual drought of three years, the Inhabitants kept a day of
public thanksgiving for it. Whence it comes that in the Country all about this
City, there is not so much as a Grass to be seen, unless it be in some Gardens,
where they are forced, twice or thrice every day, to water the Pot Herbs and
Pulse which they sow in them, and among the rest, particularly, Garlic,
Onions, Chibols, Radishes and Cucumbers. But the Isle of Kismisch, The Isle of
Kismisch.
which is but three Leagues distant from Gamron, and which is 15. Leagues in
length, and three in breadth, supplies the City with all sorts of Fruits. For
in the month of June, and during the greatest heats of Summer, they have
Grapes, Damsens, Peaches, Mangas, Quinces, Oranges, Lemons, and Pomegranates
red and white. In October they have Melons, Citruls, Cucumbers, Radishes,
Onions, Turnips, Almonds, Pistachoes, Apples, Pears, and several other Fruits,
which are very excellent, and in such abundance, that they are cheaper there
then in any other place of Persia. The Inhabitants live for the most part upon
Fruits, and Pulse, and the Fish which they take in the neighboring Sea, and
find more wholesome and delicious then Flesh, which meeting with but little good
sustenance, by reason of the extraordinary heats, must thereabouts be of ill
nourishment, and in a manner without any taste. Among other sorts of Fish, they
take there abundance of Pilchards and Smelts, as also Oysters and Crabs. They
have good store of Cattle, as Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Goats, and several other
Creatures; but they have such abundance of Goats, that they are sold for six or
eight pence a piece. There are also a sort of Rams that have four horns, but no
wild Fowl at all. Their ordinary drink is only Water, unless it be that some
have a little Aqua vitae, made of Dates or Rice. Schiras Wine, which is brought
thither only in Bottles, is very scarce and very dear there; nay the fair
Water, which they get two Leagues from the City, is sold at such a rate, that
what I and my servants spent, cost me about two pence every day.

Persons of quality, and Merchants, are clad after the Persian mode, but all
the rest go naked, and cover only the privy parts. The Women wear about their
arms and legs a great many Rings, or Plates of Silver, Brass, or Iron,
according to their conditions and abilities. They fasten to their hair a
Bodkin, or a long flat piece of Silver gilt, or Brass, which hangs down over
the middle of their foreheads to the end of the nose, and they thrust through
the left nostril a Gold Ring, having in the middle a Turquese, a Granat, or
happily a little Gold Knob or Button enameled, or simple, and the Pendants they
wear in their ears are so heavy, that if those were not well fastened to their
heads, they would go near to force them thence.

The great heats begin to abate in October, and so from that time till the
beginning of May is the season of greatest trading. Then it is that all Nations
come thither with their Commodities, as Persians, Arabians, Indians, Banians,
Armenians, Turks, Tartars, English and Dutch. These last come thither by Sea,
but all the others by Land, with the Caravans, which they call Caffilas, and
which go at a certain day from Aleppo, Bagdat, Ispahan, Sciras, Lahor, Herat
and Bassara; coming all together in Troops, and having a Convoy of certain
Ianizaries, for the Security of their travel, against the incursions of the
Arabians.

The Hollanders and the English bring thither ready money, The Traffic of the
English and Dutch there.
and some certain Commodities, which they either take up in Europe, or go to
the Indies for, and sell them there to very good profit. The Dutch are the
better settled there of the two, and do furnish in a manner all Persia, with
Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves, and other Spicery, though they also expend very much
ready money in their trading, as we said before, and especially Spanish Ryals
and Rixdollars, which the Persians prefer before all other money, because they
melt them, and make them into their own Coins with great advantage.

The English do either sell or truck their English Clothes, Tin, Steel, Indico,
Silk Stuffes, and Cottons out of the Indies; forthough there are excellent good
ones made in Persia, yet are those of the Indies more esteemed, because they
are finer and closer woven. They buy of the Persians Satins purfled with Gold
or Silver, Silk-Stuffes, and the Cottons of the Country, Persian Tapistry,
which those of the Country call K^lichey, and the Portuguez, Alcatifer, raw
Silk, Cotton, Rhubarb, Saffron, and Rose Water. This Water is made at Schiras,
and in the Province of Kerman, either by infusion, and then they call it
Gul-ab, whence no doubt the word Iulip comes, or by extraction in a Still, and
then they call it Areka-gul, that is to say, the swe^ of Roses. They esteem the
former incomparably beyond the other, and it is one of the best Commodities
that a man can carry to the Indies, where they sprinkle it about their
Chambers, and use it in the preparations of perfumes. There is made also in
those parts great quantities of Linnen-cloath; but the Weavers, instead of
doing their work in Looms at their houses as they do elsewhere, fasten the woof
of the cloth to some Tree, without the City, and having made a pit in the
ground, they put their feet into it, so that when they come home at night, it
is no great trouble for them to bring their work and things belonging thereto
along with them, in as much as they consist only of certain Canes fastened to
the woof.

They have a certain Copper Coin, Their ^oney.
which they call Besorg, whereof six make a Peys, and ten Peys make a Chay,
which is worth about five pence English. Two Chays make a Mamondy, two whereof
make an Abas, and three Abas's make a French Crown. A hundred Mamoudis make a
Tumain, Weights.
which is worth five Pistols. As to their weights, a Man weighs six pounds, a
Mancha twelve, and a Mansurats thirty.

There is also a great commerce of Pearls, Pearls.
which are fisht for near the Isle of Bahram, six Leagues from Gamron. The
m^nrer of fishing for them.
They put about the Fisher-mans head a Cap or Case of boiled Leather, so close,
as that it has no hole but by a pipe which comes up above the water. In that
posture he is let down to the bottom; where he gets together all the Shells he
can meet withal, and having filled a bag therewith which hangs about his neck,
upon a sign made to his Camerades, who wait on him in a Boat, he is drawn up.

The Governor of the City has the quality of Sulthan, The King of Persia's
Offi^ers at Gamron.
and has under him, not a Calenter, but a Visir or Secretary, and a Couteval,
who is, as it were, the Captain of his Guard.

The King of Persia has there also a Sabandar, or Receiver, who does not only
receive the duties at the coming in, and going out of Commodities, but sets
such an Imposition upon them as he thinks fit, and strictly searches the Ships,
to see what Merchandises are brought in. The Hollanders pay no duties,
according to a privilege they obtain^d of Scach-Abas, and whereof they
endeavor all they can to preserve the enjoyment by the Presents they ever and
anon make to the Officers of the Court of Persia: But the English are so far
from paying any thing, The privileges of the Eng^ish at Gamron.
that on the contrary they enjoy many other privileges and exemptions, and
should by right receive one half of the Customs, upon what account we shall
declare anon, but they have hardly the tenth part allowed them, nay, are
obliged to take that little which they have in Commodities. And this the
Persians do with so much confidence, and so openly, that they stick not to
affirm, when they are surpised in their frauds, that it is not ill done of
them to endeavor the advantage of their own Prince, though ever so much to the
prejudice of Strangers, especially if they be Christians. Among others, the
English have this further privilege, to send away yearly out of Persia twelve
Horses, without paying any thing, whereas the Dutch are obliged to pay for the
License of Transportation fifty Crowns at least for every Horse, as the English
are also, if they send away above twelve. Persian Horses much esteemed among
the Indians.
The Persians, who have a great advantage over the Indians in this respect,
that they are better horsed then the others, are very unwilling that Horses
should be sent over to the Indians, who are their enemies, among whom they are
so highly esteemed, that an ordinary Horse there will bring four hundred Crowns.

The Inhabitants of Gamron are for the most part Persians, Arabians, or
Indians, but all in a manner speak the Portuguez Language, which they learnt by
the Commerce they have had with that Nation, who were a long time possessed of
the City of Ormus. But now, that is the only Nation which is not permitted to
come to Gamron, though all others are suffered to trade there. Christians and
Jews are welcome thither, as also Mahumetans and Pagans; but ever since the
reduction of Ormus, the Portuguez, and the King of Spain's Subjects, are not
admitted thither; yet these last are suffered to come to a little Island within
three Leagues of it, and there to traffic, where the King of Persia has a
Sulthan, who commands the Castle, receives the Duties at coming in and going
out, and hinders the Portuguez from approaching with their great Vessels: so
that these Nations being, as it were, in open Hostility, the Portuguez come
sometimes with their Frigots, and take Prizes even in sight of Gamron, and
often Land parties in the neighboring Islands.

The City of Ormus is seated in an Island, The City of Ormus described.
which is distant from the Continent two Leagues, and is thought to be about
six about. It is as barren as the Country about Gamron, for it is a continued
Rock, which produces nothing but Salt; insomuch that it does not yield even
fresh Water. And yet its Haven is so good, and its situation so advantageous,
that the City became so eminent for Commerce, that not only it had its
particular Kings, but the Arabians said of it by way of Proverb, that if the
Universe were but a Ring, the City of Ormus was the Diamond that should be set
in it. Teixera says, that Scach Mahomet, the son of an Arabian King, who lived
in the tenth Age, having reduced under his Jurisdiction the Provinces that are
seated upon the Persian Gulf, as far as Besra, passed over into the Island,
where he laid the first foundations of the City of Ormus. Schabedin Mahomet,
eleventh King of Ormus, of the posterity of Mahomet, dyed in the year 1228. And
he who lived when the Portuguez became Masters of it, was called S^yfadin, and
paid Tribute to the King of Persia. D. Alfonso d' Albuquerque made a Conquest
of it in the year 1605: for Emanuel King of Portugal; of which attempt, the
manner and success of it, take the following Account.

Tristan de Cugna, Taken by the Portuguez.
who had taken the Island of Zocotora, whereof we shall have occasion to speak
hereafter, left certain Vessels under the command of Albuquerque, with Orders
to visit the Coasts of Arabia, while he attempted some new Conquest in the
Indies; he being a person of great resolution, thought his only course, to
settle himself there, was to set upon the Kingdom of Ormus, which he did with
470. Soldiers, whom he had aboard his Fleet. Emanuel Osorio, Bishop of Selvas
in Portugal, says, that Albuquerque made his advantage of the Mahumetan Kings
weakness, who then reigned. For understanding that the principal Minister of
State, whose name was Cojeatar, a Forreigner, a Native of Bengala, and an
Eunuch, had exasperated the people against him, by converting the public
Revenue of the Kingdom to his own profit and advantage, having left his
Sovereign only the bare Title of King, he thought fit to strike in at that
conjuncture of Affairs, and to that end left Zocotora upon the 20. of August,
and having in a very few days taken in the Cities of Cala^ate, Curiate,
Mascate, Soar, and Orfassam, he took his march directly to the principal City,
to which he came the 25. of September. The first thing he did, was to defeat a
very strong Fleet, which the Moors had within the Haven, and by that means
obliged the King to come to a capitulation, by which the King of Ormus promised
to take the Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity to the King of Portugal; to pay him
every year fifteen thousand Ducats as a Tribute, in Gold, Silver or Pearls, and
five thousand toward the charges of the present War; and to permit Albuquerque
to build a Citadel where he should think most convenient for the preservation
of the City.

The Portuguez began the said Citadel on the 25. of October following, and
gave it the name of Our Blessed Lady of Victory. It is true, this establishment
was not so absolute at the beginning, but that the Moors made some attempts to
rid themselves of these new Guests: but the Portuguez made a shift to maintain
what they had gotten, and to make the place they were in a Magazine of Arms
for the Indies; taking occasion by that means to engross all the Commerce to
themselves, and obliging all the Persians and Arabians to buy of them all those
Commodities which they stood in need of from the Indians. Nay, this was so
rigorously observed, that the Governor of Ormus prohibited the Inhabitants to
sell any of their Commodities, till such time as he had sold his own. The
permitted Seyfadin to live in the Island, but at a certain place far enough
from the Citadel, so not to give the Portuguez any occasion of jealousy.
Scach Abas, King of Persia, being no longer able to endure the insolence of the
Portuguez, and very much incensed at their receiving into Protection the
Gentlemen of the House of the Gabrieli, whom we have spoken of elsewhere,
bethought himself of some course to get these Foreigners out of those parts.
To effect this, he addressed himself to the English, who traded at Ormus; and
by the advantageous proffers that he made, obliged them to promise him all the
assistance they could to carry on the siege of that City, which was a^^aulted
and taken by the English, in the year 1622. They put both the City and Citadel
into the hands of the King of Persia, who found in it six hundred great Guns,
some Iron, some Brass, which Scach Abas caused to be transported to Laar and
Ispahan, all but fourscore Pieces, which he left in the Citadel; He caused the
walls of the City to be demolished, and the Materials thereof to be translated
to Gamron, which began even at that time to raise it self upon the ruins of
its Neighbors. The King of Persia, desirous to reward the services which the
English had done him upon that occasion, did not only grant them an absolute
exemption from all Impositions, but he also bestowed on them one moiety of
those Duties which other Merchants were to pay there; but, as we said before,
the English come very far short of receiving what is due to them.

I found in the Port of Gamron an English Ship called the Swan, of 300. Tun,
carrying 24. Guns. Master Honywood, Agent for the Affairs of England,
recommended me to the Captain of it, and commanded him to carry me over to the
Indies, and to defray all my charges till I came to Suratta. I had brought
eight Horses with me, making account to sell them with very great advantage in
the Indies; but the Ship was so full of Goods, that it was with much ado that I
could get in only two of them: So that I was forced to put off the other six,
to very great loss, as being able to get but thirty pound for those which had
cost me sixty pound at Ispahan, and which I should have sold at above one
hundred and fifty pound at Suratta.

I embarked the sixth of April, APRIL.
with Mr. Manley and Mr. Hall, English Merchants, whom the President of the
English at Suratta had ordered to come from Ispahan, Mandelslo embarks for
Suratta:
about some business concerning the Company, and went aboard accompanied by
most of the Strangers that were at Gamron, as also many Indian Merchants, with
whom I had upon some occasions made acquaintance. The Captain ordered four
Pieces to be fired at our coming aboard, and received us with much civility,
inviting us, it being then about noon, to dine with him.

We went from Gamron to Suratta in nineteen days, during which the Captain
treated me very magnificently, and did me the honor to resign his own bed to
me, and to give me precedence upon all occasions. He was well furnished with
Fowl, Mutton, and other fresh Meat, but above all things, with excellent good
Sack, English Beer, French Wines, Arak, and other refreshments; which proved so
well for me, that by the help of these good Cordials, and the benefit I had by
the drinking of Ptizanne, which I caused to be made with Cinnamon and rinds of
Pomegranats, at my arrival at Suratta, I found my health perfectly recovered,
though I must also acknowledge, as much contributing thereto, my using of The,
to which I had so accustomed my self, that I ordinarily took it twice or thrice
a day.

The contrary wind prevented our departure the day that we came aboard, so that
we lay at Anchor all the night following; and the next day, being the seventh,
we set sail, taking our course toward the Isle of Ormus: but toward night
there rose so great a tempest, together with a West-wind, that to avoid running
upon the shore, we were forced to cast Anchor in sight of the Isle.

Sunday, being the eighth, we laveer'd it with a West-wind, endeavoring to
pass between the Isles of Ormus and Kismich, which are four Leagues distant one
from the other. About two in the afternoon, we cast overboard the body of a
young Seaman, who died of the Bloudy-flux two days before. This Ceremony,
which I had not seen before, put me into so much the greater fright, in that
being still troubled with the same disease, I imagined they would shortly do as
much by me.

The night following we passed in sight of the two Islands we spoke of last, to
wit, Ormus and Kismich; and the next day, being the ninth, we discovered the
Continent of Arabia, taking our course along the Coast, which is thereabouts,
without any danger.

Tuesday 10. A calm staid us at the same place, and the 11. we put off from the
Coasts of Arabia, to make toward those of Persia, which we still kept in sight
of till Thursday night, April 12. Then a good West-north-west wind rising, we
took our course toward the East-south-east, at 25. degrees, 50. minutes
elevation.

Friday morning, we could perceive no Land, but had sight of a Pirate, who by
his making ever and anon more or less sail, discovered he had somewhat to say
to us. One while he came somewhat near us; another, he kept at a great
distance; but at last* perceiving we made it our business to get the wind of
him, he made toward the Isle of Zocotora.

This Island is seated at 21. degrees 40. minutes, The situation and
description of the Island of Zocotora.
at the entrance of the Red Sea, having toward the South-west, and North-east,
the Country of Melinda or Aethiopia, and toward the South Arabia, from which
it is distant about sixteen Leagues. It is about 25. Leagues in length, but not
above ten in breadth, having on all sides very good riding for Ships, and safe
Harbors. It is indifferently well peopled, and is subject to the King of
Arabia, under whom it is governed by a Sulthan.

The Inhabitants are of low stature, Its Inhabitants.
and rather lean then fat, of a duskish complexion, and very laborious. Their
only sustenance is Fish and Fruits, living very temperately. They treat their
Wives, whom they buy in Arabia, with much civility, and have a certain respect
for them; but will not permit Strangers to see them. They are very crafty in
their trading, and delight much in it, though they have but few things to sell.
And whereas they adulterate almost all their Commodities, they are accordingly
distrustful of those which are brought to them.

They reduce Dates into a paste, and it serves them instead of Bread. The
Island affords very few Oranges, and those not very good, Tobacco, and Citruls.
There are also some Cocos-trees, but not many, the fruit not coming to ripeness
there, by reason the ground is very full of stones.

Their main wealth consists in Aloes, The Aloes of Zocotora.
the juice whereof they gather in bladders, or Goatsskins; and dry it in the
Sun. They have also the gummy juice called Dragons-bloud, and Civet, which may
be bought there at about three or four Crowns an Ounce: but those who are not
very well skilled in that Drug are many times cheated; for the Inhabitants of
the Island put Grease and other nasty stuff into it. They keep abundance of
Civet-cats about their houses, but they have very little tame Fowl; wild none
at all. They have Camels, Asses, Oxen, Cows, Sheep and Goats, whose hair about
the thighs is curled much after the manner that Satyrs are painted. The Town
where the Sulthan has his residence is called Tamary, and has in it a Fort,
which is distant from the Sea about a Canon-shot, with four Guns.

Their Arms are a kind of broad Swords, T^eir Arms.
whereof the hilt is very large, but without any guard. In their Girdles they
wear also Poniards, the blades whereof are above three fingers broad toward
the handle, but very sharp toward the point. They are so curious, as to have
something of Silver or Copper about the handles, but their Firearms are not
well kept, and yet they are very expert at the handling of them, as they are
also in mannaging those little Bucklers, wherewith they defend themselves in
fight.

Ships may take in fresh water there without any trouble, for the waters which
come from the Mountains fall into the Sea like a River. They have no other
Boats then such as are absolutely flat-bottom'd, which they make use of in
their fishing, which is very good thereabouts. They have this common with the
Arabians and other Mahumetans, that they eat no Swines flesh; but even in
Tamary it self there is no Mosquey, nor any other place for them to meet at to
do their Devotions. These they do morning and evening, at the rising and
setting of the Sun, to which they make very low reverences, and mutter certain
words between their teeth; this they do also three or four times a day besides.

The 14. of April, we were at 23. degrees, 24. minutes. The 15. at 22. degrees,
40. minutes. The 16. at 22. degrees, 40. min. The 17. at 21. degrees, 55.
minutes. This day the Captain of our Ship fell sick of a burning Feayer. The
18. at 21. degrees, 8. minutes. The 19. at 20. degrees. 42. min. The 20. at 20.
degrees. 50. min. The 22. at 29. degrees. 50. min. The 23. at 20. degrees, 18. minutes
latitude.
The 25. of April, Comes to Surat.
we came before the City of Surat, and cast Anchor two Leagues from Land, by
reason it being the Captains intention not to stay there above three or four
days, he would be sure of the convenience of parting thence when he pleased.
Besides, there is no Road along that Coast where Ships can lie with any safety,
from May to September, by reason of the continual Tempests and furious winds
which reign there during that time; whereas on the Eastern Coast of the Indies,
in the Gulf of Bengala, it is fair and calm at that time.

The year is divided into three very different seasons; The year bath there but
three Seasons.
for in the months of February, March, April and May, it is extremely hot
weather; in June, July, August and September, there is nothing but continual
Rains, with Thunder and Lighting; and the months of October, November,
December and January, are cold, at least as far as is consistent with the
Climate.

April 26. The Captin sent one to the President of the English at Surat, to
give him notice of his Arrival. The President sent him back the 28. accompanied
by two young Merchants of the same Nation, who brought Orders to the Captain,
and in the Presidents name entreated me to come with the soonest to Surat,
where he should make good in effect those proffers which they were then come to
make to me of his service. Having acknowledged the Captain's civility by a
small Present, and leaving him very sick, and much troubled at our separation,
after the friendship we had contracted together, I left the Ship the 29. of
April.

Within a League of the Road we entered into the River upon which Surat is
seated, and which has on both sides a very fertile soil, and many fair
Gardens, with pleasant Country-houses, which being all white, a color it seems
the Indians are much in love with, afford a noble prospect amidst the greeness
whereby they are encompassed. But this River, which is the Tapte, called by
others Tynde, is so shallow at the mouth of it, that Barks of 70. or 80. Tun
can hardly come into it. We came ashore near the Sulthan's Palace, and went
immediately to the Custom-house to have our things searched by the Officers
there: which is done with such exactness in this place, that they think it not
enough to open Chests and Portmantles, but examine peoples clothes and pockets.
The Sulthan or Governor, nay the Customers themselves, oblige Merchants and
Passengers to part with, at the price they shall think fit to put upon them,
those Goods and Commodities which they had brought for their own private use.
Accordingly the Sulthan himself, who came to the Custom-house as soon as we
were got thither, having found among my things a bracelet of yellow Amber, and
a Diamond, would needs buy them both of me: whereto when I made him answer,
that I was no Merchant, and that I valued those things, only for their sakes
who had bestowed them on me, he was pleased to return me the Diamond, but
detained the Bracelet, telling me I should have it again when I honored him
with a Visit.

While we were in this contestation, came to the place an Indian Coach, drawn
by two white Oxen, which the English President had sent to bring me to their
House; so that leaving the Sulthan with the Bracelet, I went into it. At the
entrance of the House I met the President, with his second, that is to say, he
who commands under him, and in his absence, whose name was Mr. Fremling, who
received me with extraordinary kindness, and very civilly answered the
Complement I made them, upon the freedom I took to make my advantage thereof.
The President, who spoke Dutch very well, told me I was very welcome; that in
the Country where we then were, all Christians were obliged to assist one
another, and that he was the more particularly obliged thereto as to what
concerned me, in respect of the affection I would have expressed toward some
of his Nation at Ispahan. He thereupon brought me to his Chamber, where there
was a Collation ready. It consisted of Fruits and Preserves, according to the
custom of the Country. As soon as we were set, he asked me what my design was,
and understanding that I intended to return for Germany within twelve months,
he told me I was come too late to get away that year, by reason no more Ships
would come that way, but that if I would stay with him five or six months,
till there were a convenience of passage, he would take it kindly: that during
that time, he would contribute all he could to my divertisement: that he would
find out a means how I might see the most eminent places in the Country, nay,
that he would send some of his own Nation along with me, who should find me
those accommodations I could not otherwise hope for. This obliging discourse
soon prevailed with me to accept of these proffers, so that the he showed me
all the house, that I might make choice of a convenient Lodging, which I took
near his Seconds Chamber. In the evening, some Merchants and others, belonging
to the President, came and brought me from my Chamber to supper into a great
Hall, where was the Minister with about a dozen Mer^^nts, who kept me company,
but the President and his Second supped not, as being (...) stom'd to that
manner of life, out of a fear of overcharging their Stomachs, digestion being
slowly performed, by reason of the great heats which are as troublesome there
in the night time as in the day. After Supper the Minister carried me into a
great open Gallery, where I found the President and his Second taking the
coolness of the Sea-Air. This was the place of our ordinary rendezvous, where
we met every night; to wit, the President, his Second, the principal Merchant,
the Minister and my self; but the other Merchants came not but when they were
invited by the President. At dinner he kept a great Table, of about fifteen or
sixteen dishes of Meat, besides the Desert.

The respect and deference which the other Merchants have for the President was
very remarkable, The respect the English at Surat have for their President.
as also the order which was there observed in all things, especially at Divine
Service, which was said twice a day, in the morning at six, and at eight at
night, and on Sundays thrice. No person in the house but had his particular
Function, and their certain hours assigned them as well for work as recreation.
Our divertisement was thus ordered. Their divertisement*
On Fridayes after Prayers, there was a particular Assembly, at which met with
us three other Merchants, who were of kin to the President, and had left as
well as he their Wives in England, which day being that of their departure from
England, they had appointed it for to make a commemoration thereof, and drink
their Wives healths. Some made their advantage of this meeting to get more then
they could well carry away, though every man was at liberty to drink what he
pleased, and to mix the Sack as he thought fit, or to drink Palepuntz, which is
a kind of drink consisting of Aqua vitae, Rose Water, juice of Citrons and
Sugar.

At our ordinary meetings every day, we took only The, which is commonly used
all over the Indies, not only among those of the Country, but also among the
Dutch and English, who take it as a Drug that cleaness the Stomach, and digests
the superfluous humors, by a temperate heat particular thereto. The Persians
instead of The; drink their Kahwa, which cools and abates the natural heat
which The preserves.

The English have a fair Garden without the City, whither we constantly went on
Sundays after Sermon, and sometimes also on other days of the week, where our
Exercise was shooting at Butts, at which I made a shift to get a hundred
Mamoudis (or five pound sterling) every week. After these divertisements, we
had a Collation of Fruit and Preserves, and bathed our selves in a Tanke or
Cistern which had five foot water, where some Dutch Gentlewomen served and
entertained us with much civility. What troubled me most was, that my little
acquaintance with the English Tongue made me incapable of Conversation, unless
it were with the President, who spoke Dutch.

But before I relate what happened to me in this Voyage, and what I saw during
my stay at Surat, it will not be amiss, to give here a general, but short
description, of the Mogul's Country, and the Provinces whereof it consists; so
to make the readier way for what we shall have to say of it hereafter.

The Country properly called India, A general description of indosthan.
which the Persians and Arabians name Indosthan, reaches, on the West Side,
from the River Indus or Sindo, and the Kingdom of the same name (the
Inhabitants whereof are called Abint, or from the Frontiers of the Kingdom of
Maecon, which some call Gelsche Macquerona, whereof the Inhabitants are
Baloches, or Baluches) as far as Ganges. The Ancients called this Province
Carmania, and it has a Port or Haven called Guader, at 25. degrees on this
side the line. The Persians and Arabians call the Kingdom of Sindo Diul. The
same Persians, and the Indosthans call the River Indus, Pangab, that is to say,
five waters, because so many Rivers come into it before it falls into the Sea
under that famous name. The first is that of Bugal, or Begal, which rises near
Kabul. The second is called Chanab, and rises in the Province of Quesmir or
Cassimier, fifteen days journey above Lahor, toward the North. The third is
that of Ravy, or Ravee, which runs by Lahor, and rises not far from it. The two
others, viz. Via and Osuid or Sind, come from a great distance, and meet near
Bakar, which lies at an equal distance between Lahor and the Sea. Whence it is
to be inferred, that those Geographers are in an error, who put this River at
24. degrees on this side the Line, and confound it with that which runs by
Diul. Some say the great Mogul's Kingdom is of so vast an extent, that a
Caravan would have much ado to travel through it in two years; but these are
Fables. Its certain Frontiers, according to the description of Edward Terrin,
are on the East Side, the Kingdom of Mavy; on the West, part of Persia and the
South Sea; on the North, Mount Caucasus and great Tartaria; and on the South,
the Kingdom of Decan and the Gulf of Bengala, containing thirty and seven great
Provinces, which were heretofore so many Kingdoms: to wit,

Candahar, Its Provinces.
which takes its name from, or derives it to the chief City, is the most
Western Province of all the Indies, and lies upon the Territories of the King
of Persia, who has several times been Master of it. 1. Candahar.
It is indeed for this Province, that the Kings of Persia are in continual war
almost with the great Mogul; as they are in Turkey side for Badgat and Ervan.

The Province of Kabul, 2. Kabul.
which is no doubt the richest of all the Kingdom, derives its name also from
the Capital City, and has for Frontier on the North-side great Tartary. In
this Province rises the River Nibal, which changes its name into that of Begal,
and falls into the Indus, as we said before. It is conceived by some, that this
is the Coa, or the Suastus of Ptolomy.

The Province of Multan owes its name also to the principal City, 3. Multan.
and is seated along the River Indus, having on the West Side the Kingdom of
Persia, and the Province of Candahar.

The Province of Haca-chan, 4. Haca-chan.
or Hangi-chan, lies toward the East, and has on the West the River Indus. It
is called also the Kingdom of Balochy, as we shall express elsewhere; but it
has no considerable City.

Bachar, 5. Bachar.
or Buckar, the chief City whereof is called Bacherhukon, lies also along the
River Indus, which divides it in the middle, and makes it one of the most
fertile Provinces in the Kingdom. It has on the South-south-west-side, the
Province of Tatta, and toward the West, the people called the Bolaches, a
cruel and warlike Nation.

The Province of Tatta, which has also its name from the chief City, is
divided into several Isles by the River Indus. 6. Tatta.
This Province has the reputation of having the most industrious Tradesmen of
all the Kingdom.

Soret is a small Province, 7. Soret.
but very well peopled. Its chief City is Iangar; and it reaches Eastward to
the Province of Guzarata, and Westward to the Sea.

The Province of Iselmere has but one City in it of the same name, 8. Iselmere.
and has for Frontiers Westward, the Provinces of Soret, Bachar, and Tatta.

That of Attach, 9. Attach.
and its capital City, from which it is so called, are seated upon the River
Nibal, which coming from the West, falls into the Indus, which divides it from
the Province of Haca-chan.

The Province of Pang-ab is one of the greatest, 10. Peng-ab.
most fertile, and most considerable of all the Kingdom. The five Rivers we
spoke of, which pass through it, give it that name. Lahor is the chief City
thereof.

The Province of Chismer, 11. Chismer.
or Quexmer, the chief City whereof is called Syranakar, is seated upon the
River Bezat, or Badt, which makes a great number of Isles in this Province, and
after a great compass falls into the Ganges. It touches some part of the
Province of Kabul, and is cold enough by reason of its Mountains, though it may
be affirmed, that in comparison of the Kingdom of Tliebet, which is as it were
its Frontiers on the Eastside, it is very temperate. About eight Cos (which
make four Leagues) from the chief City, in the midst of a Lake which is three
miles about, there is a little Isle, where the Mogul has built a very fair
House, for the convenience of hunting the wild Goose. All along the River which
runs through the middle of this Lake, there is a kind of tree, whose leaves are
like that of a Chestnut, but the wood, which is somewhat of a brownish color,
is checkered with small streaks of several colors, which makes it much sought
after by persons of Quality.

The Province of Chismer has on the East Side that of Bankisch, 12. Bankisch.
the chief City whereof is Beibar, or Beithus,

The Province of Iengapar, 13. Jengapar.
or Iemipar, so called from its chief City, lies between the Cities of Lahor
and Agra.

The Province of Ienba, 14. Jenba.
or Iamba, which has also its name from the Metropolis thereof, has on the
West Side, the Province of Pang-ab, and is very hilly all over.

The Province of Delly, 15. Delly.
and its chief City of the same name, lies between Ienba and Agra, toward the
source of the River Gemini, by some called Semana, which passing by the City of
Agra, falls into the Ganges. The chief City of Delly is very ancient, and was
sometime the Metropolis of all Indosthan, as may be seen by the ruins of its
palace, and other magnificent Structures.

The Province of Bando, 16. Bando.
and its Metropolis of the same name, has on the West Side, the City of Agra.

The Province of Malway, 17. Malway
or Malwa, is very fertile, its chief City Ratipore, though Thomas Row, an
English Gentleman, calls it Vgen. The River Cepra, upon which is seated the
City of Calleada, the ordinary residence of the ancient Kings of Mandoa, passes
within half a League of it, and disembogues it self into the Sea, by the Gulf
of Cambaia.

The Province of Chitor was heretofore a very considerable Kingdom, 18. Chitor.
but the Metropolis from which it derives its name, and whereof the walls were
heretofore six Leagues about, is now so ruined, that there is to be seen but
the Relics of what it has been, with the sad remainders of its sumptuous
Mosquies, and magnificent Palaces. The great Mogul, Achabar, great Grandfather
of Schach Chiram, reduced it to that condition, and conquered it from one of
the Successors of Rana, who forced to make his escape came to a capitulation
with him, and acknowledged the Sovereignty of the Mogul, in the year 1614. This
Province has on the East Side that of Candisch, and on the South, that of
Gusuratta.

The Province of Gusuratta, 19. Gusuratta.
which the Portuguez call the Kingdom of Cambaya, upon the account of its chief
City, where they have their main trading, is without all question the noblest
and most powerful of all the Mogul's Country. Its Metropolis seated in the
midst of the Province, is called Hamed-ewad, that is to say, the City of King
Hamed, who built it. It is now corruptly called Amadavat, or Amadabat, whereof
we shall have occasion to speak more at large hereafter.

The Province of Candisch, 20. Candisch.
the Metropolis whereof, Bursampour, or Brampour, was heretofore the ordinary
residence of the Kings of Decan, before the Great Mogul united it to his Crown,
is very large, and well peopled. The River Tabet, or Tapte, which falls into
the Sea by the Gulf of Cambaya, divides it from the Country of the Prince of
Partapha, who is also a Vassal of the Great Moguls.

The Province of Berar, 21. Berar.
whereof the Metropolis is Shapore, or Shaspour, reaches Southward, and touches
that of Gusuratta, and the Mountain of Rana.

In the Province of Gualor, 22. Gualor.
or Gualier, which has its name from the chief City, there is a Citadel,
wherein the Mogul confines such as are Prisoners of State, and those Lords, of
whose carriage he conceives any jealousy, and keeps there also some part of
his Treasure, and abundance of Gold and Silver.

The Province of Agra, 23. Agra.
which derives its name to the Metropolis thereof, which is not very ancient,
is at present the chiefest of all the Mogul's Country, according to the account
we shall give of it hereafter.

The Province of Sambel, 24. Sambel.
or Sambel, so called from its Metropolis, is divided from that of Narvar by
the River Gemini, which falls into Ganges near the City of Halebasse, where
these two Rivers meeting make a kind of an Isle: Whence some have taken
occasion to call this Province Doab, that is to say, between two waters; as if
one should say, Mesopotamia, or Interaquas.

The Province of Bakor lies on the West Side of the Ganges, 25. Bakor.
its chief City is called Bikameer.

The Province of Narvar, 26. Narvar
the Metropolis whereof is call Gehud, has running through it a most noble
River, which falls into the Ganges.

The Province of Nagracut, 27. Nagracut.
or Nakarkut, is one of the most Northerly Provinces of the Mogul's Country. In
the chief City thereof from which it has the name, there is to be seen, in a
sumptuous Chapel, the floor whereof is covered with plates of Gold, the
Effigies of an Animal, or rather a Monster, called Matta, which brings thither
every year a great number of Indians, who go to do their devotions there, and
offer unto it a little snip which they cut out of their own tongues. In this
same Province is the City of Kalamaka, famous for its Pilgrimages, which are
the more frequent there, by reason of the flames cast forth by the cold Springs
as they come out of the Rock, which flames the Inhabitants adore.

The Province of Siba, 28. Siba*
whereof the Metropolis is Hardwari, gives its rise to the River Ganges. The
Inhabitants of the Country imagine, that the Rock out of which it issues has a
Cows head, for which Beast they have a certain veneration, and that there is
somewhat divine in that production. Whence it comes that they bathe themselves
every day in the River. This Province is no less mountainous then that of
Nakarkut, though it be not so much toward the North.

Kakares, 2^ Kakares*
the principal Cities whereof are Dankaler and Binsola, is a very spacious
Province, but very full of Mountains. Mount Caucasus lies between it and
Tartaria.

The Province of Gor, 3^. Gor.
which has its name from the chief City, is also full of Mountains, and gives
its rise to the River Perselis, which falls into the Ganges.

The Province of Pitan, 31. Pitan.
or Partan, and its chief City, which gives it the name, has running through
them the River Kanda, which also falls into the Ganges. This is also a very
mountainous Province, and has on the West of it that of Iamba.

The River Iderclis divides the Province of Kanduana, 32. Kanduana.
the chief City whereof is Karaeh, by some called Katene, from that of Pitan.
This Province, and that of Gor, are the further-most of the Mogul's territories
toward the North.

The Province of Porena is as fruitful as the two last named are barren. 33.
Porena
It lies between the Rivers of Ganges, Perselis, Gemini and Candach, and is so
called from its chief City.

The City of Rajapore, 34. Jewal.
or Reyapor, is the Metropolis of the Province of Iewal.

The Province of Meuat, 35. Meuat.
the chief City whereof is called Narnol, is a Country barren enough, reaching
from the Ganges Eastward.

The Province of Voessa, 36. Voessa.
or Voeza, the chief City whereof is Iascanat, is the uttermost Province of the
Mogul's Kingdom toward the East.

The Province of Bengala may no doubt be numbered amongst the most powerful of
all the Country, 37. Bengala.
giving its name to the Gulf, into which the Ganges disembogues it self by four
several channels, or mouths. Its principal Cities are Raymebel, Kaka, or Daeca,
Philipatan and Satigam. It is subdivided into many other lesser Provinces, the
most considerable whereof are Puna, and Palan, from which several Kings have
not thought it much to assume their Titles.

Texeira, in his description of Persia, speaking of certain Provinces of the
Indies, names that of Vtrat, with its chief City, but he only names it, without
giving any account of its situation. He speaks also of the Kingdom of Caeche,
and says it is considerable for the Race-horses it breeds, near Cambaya,
toward the North: but certainly, it is no other then the Province of Candisch,
before spoken of.

The extent of the Mogul's Country, The extent of the Mogul's Country.
from East to West, is about six hundred Leagues, and from North to South,
about seven hundred French Leagues, since its uttermost Frontiers toward the
South are at twenty, and the furthermost toward the North at forty three
degrees.

As concerning the Province of Gusuratta, A description of the Kingdom of
Gususatta.
which the Portuguez, improperly, call Cambaya, it lies all along the Seaside,
extending it self much like a Peninsula into the Sea, and having on both sides
a Gulf or Bay, one whereof is eight Leagues broad at the entrance, and grows
narrower and narrower for forty Leagues thence. The Land extends it self
Westward along the Seacoast, and Northward it has the Provinces of Soret,
Quismer and Bando; Eastward, those of Chitor and Kandish, and Southward the
Kingdom of Decan. Heretofore its Frontiers reached along the Seacoast, as far
as Gualor, eight days journey beyond Amadabat, and Southward as far as Daman.

But though its extent be not so vast at present as it has been, Its extent.
yet it is now a very great Province, it being certain that it reaches above
sixscore Leagues along the Seacoast, and comprehends above twenty thousand
Cities, Towns, and inhabited Villages; besides the places which were laid
desolate some years since by War or Famine. Its principal Cities, most whereof
are Maritime, Its principal Cities.
are Surat, Broitschia, Gandeer, Goga, Cambaya, Diu, Patepatane, Mangalor,
Gondore, Nassary, Gandivi, Balsara, or Belsera. The City of Hamed-Ewad, or
Amadabat, which is the Metropolis of the Province, is at a great distance from
the Sea.

The principal Rivers of this Province are the Nadabat, Its Rivers.
which passes by Broitschia, the Tapta, and the Wasset; besides these
conveniences, it has two of the best Ports in all the Indies, Its Ports.
which are that of the Com of Suhaly; to wit, that of Surat and that of Cambaia.

There is no Province in all the Indies more fertile then Gusuratta, Its
Fertility.
nor any that affords more Fruits and Provisions, which grow in such abundance
there, that all the neighboring Provinces are thence supplied: It Is true
indeed, that in the year 1640. the great drought, and the year following, the
continual rains reduced it to so deplorable a condition, that the particular
account might be given thereof would deprive the Reader of the diversion, which
it is our design to find him in this Relation. But the Province has since that
time well recovered it self of that desolation, yet not so as but the marks of
it may be seen every where. But to prosecute our Relation, as to what happened
to me during my stay at Surat.

While I was at Ispahan, The Relation continued.
having fixed my resolution to travel into the Indies, I took into my service a
Persian, who was to serve me as an Interpreter for the Turkish and Persian
Languages, which I then began a little to understand. He was born of Christian
Parents, his father and mother having been of those whom Scach-Abas had caused
to be translated from Georgia to Ispahan, where his brethren then lived in good
rank. Which considerations obliged me to treat him with the greater civility,
and to promise him by way of wages four Crowns a month. He had made me believe
that his engaging himself into my service was partly out of this respect, that
he might thereby have the convenience of re-imbracing the Christian Religion:
but he had no sooner made his first acquaintances at Surat, ere he understood,
that an Uncle of his by the Mother-side could raise him to great fortunes at
the Mogul's Court, where he was Master of the Horse. Upon this intelligence, he
soon took a resolution to leave me, and to desire the protection of the
Sulthan, who kept him a while at his own house, and afterward sent him to
Agra. I was the more startled at this departure of the young fellow, the more
it run in my thoughts, that knowing all the particulars of our engagement with
the Indian Ambassador at Ispahan, his design might be to betray me into the
hands of my enemies. And certainly, had I known of his going to Agra, I should
not have had the confidence to take that place in my way: though it might
appear, by what happened afterward, that God sent him to that place expressly
to save my life, since, had it not been for him, I might have lost it there.

In May, MAY.
there came news to Surat, that the Chan, who commanded at Candahar for the
King of Persia, The Governor of Candahar delivers up his place to the Mogul.
had revolted, and had rendered the place to the Mogul, upon this account, that
the Scach had threatened to put him to death. The Mogul sent immediately 500000.
Crowns to the place, as a requital for the Governors service, and to pay the
Garrison, which had revolted along with him. Alymerdan-Chan, Governor of the
same place, had done such another trick at the beginning of Schach-Sefi^s
Reign, who would needs oblige him to bring his head to Court, which if he had
done, he had never carried it away again upon his shoulders. Soon after Scach
recovered Candahar again; and it was partly upon this account, that the Mogul
had sent to him the Ambassador I spoke of before, though among his other
Instructions, he had order to demand the Myrsa Polagi, his Nephew.

June 16. JUNE.
I went out a hunting with a young Dutch Merchant, and another English
Merchant, with whom having crossed the River, they brought me to an old ruined
City, called Reniel, where the Dutch have a Warehouse. The Inhabitants of this
City are called Naites, and are for the most part either Mariners or
Tradesmen, and of the Mahumetan Religion. The streets of it are narrow, and
the houses so raised from the foundation, that there is not any but has one
step to get up to it. There we staid all night, and were nobly treated by the
Merchants, who had the management of the Trade there.

The next day we went to a Village called Bodick, and in our way let fly at a
wild Duck and a Heron; there we saw about twenty Deers. Their skins which were
somewhat greyish, were checkquer'd all over with white spots, and they had fair
Horns, with several Brow-ancklers. There was among them a sort of creatures
about the bigness of our Ro-Bucks, the Skins whereof were inclining to a dark
brown, checkquer'd also with white spots, having very graceful Horns. Some are
of opinion, that these are the same that Aldrovandus calls Cervi-capras, and
that it is from this kind of Beast that we have Bezoar. We went thence to
another Village, called Damre, where we saw abundance of wild Ducks in the
Rice, whereof there grows great store in those parts. All the fields have a
little ascent raised about them to keep in the water, the Rice requiring much
moisture. In this Village we found some Terry, Terry, of Palm-Wine.
which is a Liquor drawn out of the Palm Trees, and drunk of it in Cups made of
the leaves of the same Tree. To get out the Juice, they go up to the top of the
Tree, where they make an incision in the bark, and fasten under it an earthen
pot, which they leave there all night, in which time it is filled with a
certain sweet Liquor very pleasant to the taste. They get out some also in the
day time, but that corrupts immediately, and is good only for Vinegar, which is
all the use they make of it.

The City of Surat, Suratta described.
or Suratta, lies at 21. degrees 42. minutes upon the River Tapta, which rises
near Barampour, and falls into the Sea four Leagues below the City. It lies all
along the River side, and is built apiece. It has no wall to the River
side, but on the Land side it has a good Rampire of Stone, and a Castle all of
Freestone.

The City has three Gates, Its Gates.
whereof one goes toward the Village of Brion, where those who go to Cambaya
and Amadabat cross the River; another goes to Barampour; and the third to
Nassary. Its Houses.
All the Houses are flat, as those of Persia, and most have very fair Gardens.

The Castle, The Castle*
which they say was built by the Turks, upon an Invasion which they made into
this Country, has but one Gate, which looks into a spacious Plain which serves
for a Meidan to the City. Not far thence, and at the entrance of the City,
stands the Governors Palace and the Custom-house, and near them the Bazar, as
well for foreign Merchants as those of the City. The Governor of the Castle
has no dependence on him of the City, whose business it is to look after the
administration of Justice, and the payment of the Customs at the Exportation
and Importation of all Merchandises, which pay three and a half in the hundred,
except it be Gold and Silver, whether coined, or in wedges, or made into bars,
which pay but two in the hundred.

The Dutch and English have their Houses there which they call Lodges, and are
spacious and well built, consisting of many fair Appartments, Lodgings,
Chambers, fair Halls, Galleries and Chapels.

The Haven of Suratta is two Leagues from the City, The Port. The Kom of Suhaly.
at the Village of Suhaly, whence the Dutch and English call it the Kom of
Suhaly. There Ships are unladen of their Commodities, which are brought thence
to Suratta by Land. This Road lies at 21. degrees, 50. minutes, upon the course
of North-east and South-west. The entrance into it is not very broad, since
that at high water there is but seven fathom water, and at low but five. The
Haven it self is not above 500. paces broad before the Village, sandy at the
bottom, and most of the banks are bare and dry at low water, and so sharp and
steepy, that sounding there is to no purpose at all. It Is very safe riding,
there being no danger of any wind but that of the South-west. But from May to
September there is no staying on those Coasts, by reason of the winds and
tempests, accompanied by extraordinary thunder and lightning, which reign there
during all that time.

The Inhabitants of Surat are either Benjans, Bramans, or Moguls. These last
are Mahumetans, The Inhabitants.
and much better looked on then the others, as well upon the account of their
Religion, which they have common with the Great Mogul, and the chiefest Lords
of the Country, as upon that of the profession they make to bear Arms. They
have an aversion for Trades and Merchandise, and had rather serve, then engage
themselves in any honorable employment: for if they can but once get to be
Masters of a Horse, they court Fortune no further, and immediately list
themselves in the service of their Prince. The Benjans on the contrary, are a
reserved people and laborious, and apply themselves to Trades and Merchandise,
and have an extraordinary devotion for the things that concern Religion; as we
shall have occasion to insist on more at large hereafter.

There are also in the City some Arabians, Persians, Armenians, Turks and Jews,
who either have their habitations there, or trade thither; but there are no
Foreigners so considerable for their settlement there as the Dutch and
English. They have there their Lodges, their Storehouses, their Presidents,
their Merchants, and their Secretaries, and indeed have made it one of the most
eminent Cities for Traffic of all the East. Surat the general Factory of the
English Trade.
The English particularly have made it the main place of all their Trading into
the Indies, and have established there a President, to whom the Secretaries of
all the other Factories are obliged to give an account. He manages Affairs with
the assistance of 20. or 24. Merchants and Officers, and has under his
superintendency the Factory of Agra, where they have a Secretary accompanied by
six persons; that of Ispahan, where they have a Secretary and seven or eight
other Merchants; that of Mesulipatan, with fifteen; that of Cambay, with four;
that of Amadabat, with six; that of Brodra and Broitscheia, with four; and that
of Dabul, with two persons: who are all obliged to come once a year to Suratta,
there to give an account of their Administration to the President.

The English have also a Factory at Bantam, in the Isle of Iava; but that has
its particular President, who has no dependence on that of Suratta, which
hinders not but that he has a certain deference for him, as have indeed all
the English Ships, which perfect not their Voyage without casting Anchor at
Suratta.

The places about this City are the most delightful of any in the world. The
places about Surat.
For, besides, the fair Gardens, where they have all sorts of Fruit Trees, all
the Champion seems to want nothing that might recreate the eye. Among other
things, I observed there one of those Trees, whereof I have given a description
when I had occasion to speak of the City of Gamron, as also very many sumptuous
Sepulchers built of Marble, and a Tanke or Cistern made eight-square of
Freestone, having at every angle a pair of stairs to go down into it, and in
the midst, the Sepulcher of the Founder of that magnificent Structure, which is
so spacious, that it contains water enough to supply the whole City, even in
the greatest heats of the year.

The tempests of Rain begin to cease with the month of September. SEPTEMBER.
About that time, Two English Ships arrive at Surat.
viz. the 14. of that month, news was brought that two English Ships were
arrived at the Port of Subaly. The President would have gone thither in person,
but some business he had with the Governor hindered him; so that he was forced
to send two of the chiefest Merchants, who took me along with them. We came to
Suhaly about noon, and having left our Horses in the Village, went aboard one
of the Ships, called the Discovery. 'Twas a Vessel of 600. Tun, having 28.
Guns, and 190. Men. Captain Menard, who commanded her, and the three Merchants
who came to the President for Orders, received us kindly; and being come
directly from England, they told us all they knew of the Affairs of Europe;
which discourse made us pass away the best part of the night pleasantly enough.
The next day we went to the other Vessel, called the Mary, which was 1200. Tun
burden, and carried 48. Guns. She had past by Aden on the Red Sea, where she
had lost her Captain, who died of sickness. The Merchant, who commanded her
instead of the Captain, made us a reception equal to what we had in the other
Ship; and both of them obliged us to come every day to see them, till the
President were come, which was not till eight days after. Which hindered not
but that we went sometimes a walking, and a hunting, but so as that we lay
every night in one of the Ships.

As soon as the Commanders heard that the President was come to Suhaly, they
went a shore, and meeting him on the River side, he made a short discourse to
them, exhorting them to show their fidelity and compliance to their Superiors,
during the time they should stay in the Indies. Which done, he went into the
Boat, to go aboard of the first Ship, where they fired twelve Guns at his
arrival. After supper, he went along with the whole company, to the other,
where they fired sixteen Guns, besides those that were discharged at the
drinking of the King of England's health, and those of some other persons of
Honor in that Country. The two days following were spent in feasting, at
which the Commanders of the two Ships treated the President, who afterward
returned to Suratta; but night overtaking us by the way, we were forced to take
up our Lodging in the little City of Reniel.

The 24. of the same month arrived two other Ships, Boldue a Dutch Vessel of
1400 Tun.
whereof one was called Boldue, a Hollander, of 1400. Tun. She came from the
City of Batavia in the Isle of Iava, and was returning for Holland, laden with
Pepper and other Spices: The other was an English Vessel, called the Swan, and
had been sent by the Secretary of Mesulipatan into Persia for Silks; but the
contrary winds having kept her four months together at Sea, had obliged her to
put in at Suratta, whereas the Hollander had in less time made the whole Voyage
from the Texel to the Indies. I again accompanied the Merchants, who went to
the Port to see their Ships. We went first aboard the Hollander, who received
us very nobly, and we were shown all the conveniences of the Vessel, which no
doubt was the best contrived, and the biggest that ever came out of the Ports
of Holland. It was twenty foot longer then the Mary, but not altogether so
broad.

During my abode at Suratta, I wanted for no divertisement; for either I walked
down to the Haven, or found company in the City, especially at the Dutch
Presidents, who had his Family there, and with whom it was the easier for me to
make acquaintance, in as much as I could converse with them in my own Language.
But understanding that the English Ships, with which I intended to return into
Europe, would not be ready for their departure under three or four months, I
resolved to take a journey into the Country, to the Great Mogul's Court, taking
my advantage of a Caffila, or Caravan, of thirty Wagons laden with
Quicksilver, Roen^s, which is a root that dies red, Spices, and a considerable
sum of Money, which the English were sending to Amadabat. The President had
appointed four Merchants, certain Benjans, twelve English Soldiers, and as
many Indians, to conduct and convoy this small Caravan; so that confident I
night undertake this journey without any danger, (which it had not been safe
for me to attempt without this convenience, by reason of the Rasboutes, and
their robberies upon the highway;) I took the Presidents advice, and put my
self into their company.

These Rasboutes are a sort of Highway men, Rasboutes.
or Tories, who keep in the Mountains between Brodra and Broitscheia, which are
called Champenir, where they have their fortified places and retreats, wherein
they sometimes make their party good against the Mogul himself. Not long
before, he had taken in one of their strongest places, and by that means kept
them a long time in subjection; but they revolted again, and exercised their
robberies with greater cruelty then ever.

We left Suratta the last of September, Leaves Suratta to go to Amadabat.
being accompanied by the President and some English Merchants, who having
brought us a League out of the City, there took leave of us. We took our way
toward Broitschia, and came to the Village of Briou, or Briauw, where we
crossed the River. Then, at four Leagues distance from Briou, we passed by
Cattodera, which is a ruined place, seated upon a River of the same name, and
then by Enklisser, where we soon made a shift to take above thirty wild Ducks,
and many other Waterfowl, wherewith we feasted our people. We also killed a
Roebuck, and met with so many Deer and wild Boars, that it was no hard matter
for us to get us a good supper, since the Dutch and English never travel
without their Cooks, who dress the Fowl and what else their Masters kill, which
they never fail to do in abundance. The next day we crossed a River which is
more broad then deep, Comes to Broitschia.
before we came to the City of Broitschia, into which we were no sooner entered,
but the English Secretary sent to us to dine with him, which we did.

The City of Broitschia is at 21. degrees, 56. minutes, 12. Leagues from
Suratta, Broitschia described.
and 8. from the Sea, upon a River falling out of the Mountains, which divide
the Kingdom of Decar from that of Balagatta. It lies upon a pretty high
Mountain, having its Walls of Freestone, and so well built, that it may be
numbered among the strongest places of all the Indies. On the Land side, it has
two great Gates, and two small Gates toward the River, by which is brought
abundance of Timber for building, which none dare unload without the Governors
express permission. There is a Guard kept in it, as well upon account of the
place it self, which is very considerable, as upon this, that they exact there
two in the hundred upon all Merchandises that pass through it. The City is
sufficiently well peopled, as also its Suburbs, which are divided into two
quarters, which they call Poera, though very few persons of Quality live
therein, most of the Inhabitants being only Weavers, who make of those kinds of
Cottons called Bastas, which are finer then any made in the Province of
Gusaratta. All the fields about this City lie flat and even, unless it be that
about five or six Leagues from it, toward the South-west, may be seen the
Mountains called Pindatshce, which reach as far as Barampour and beyond it, and
are very fertile, as is also all the rest of the Country, which brings forth
Rice, Wheat, Barley, and Cotton in abundance. It is out of these Mountains that
the Agat is gotten, whereof are made such noble drinking Cups, Seals, Handles
of Knives and Daggers, and several other rarities, which are commonly to be
bought at Cambays.

The jurisdiction of the City of Broitschia extends it self over 84. Villages,
the Demesne whereof belongs to it, but heretofore its territory comprehended
three other Cities, who have now their particular Governors. Four Leagues
below the City, the River divides it self into two branches, which there make
an Isle near half a League about, below which it falls into the Sea, by two
several channels. It has no Port, but only a Road, which is so much the more
dangerous, in that the Ships, which may indeed anchor there at seven fathom
water, lie open to the mercy of all Winds.

Eight Leagues from Broitschia, Indico.
upon the way of Cambaya, there is a great Village called Ianbaysar, or
Iambouser, where abundance of Indico is made: and upon the Road to Amadabat,
there is to be seen the Sepulcher of a Mahumetan Saint, named Pollemedory,
whither the Moors, or Moguls, go in pilgrimage with so great devotion, that
some of them put Padlocks on their mouths to keep them from speaking, A
fabulous miracle.
and never take them off, but only when they are to eat. Others fasten Iron
chains to their arms; and it is reported, that the Padlocks are opened, and the
Chains loosed, by some supernatural power, as soon as they have accomplished
their Vows at the Sepulcher.

We left Broitschia in the Evening, Leaves broits^hia.
accompanied by the Secretary, who would needs bring us half a League out of
the City. He returned thither, but it was to the end he might overtake us five
Leagues thence; for, being entrusted with the management of the Commerce of
Brodca, as well as of that of Broitschia, he thought fit to go along with the
Caravan. We traveled all night, and the next day, till the extraordinary heat
forced us to encamp near a Fish Pond, where we passed away the rest of that
day, and some part of the night following, our recreation being to set a
dancing the Women that were among the Benjans in the Caravan. We went thence
after midnight. I entreated the Secretary to come into my Coach, where I learnt
of him several particulars of the Country, which by reason of my small stay in
those parts, it was impossible I could have observed. We passed through the
Village of Karawanet and Kabol, where they made us pay a certain passage-Toll.

Being come within some Leagues of the City of Brodra, Comes to Brodra.
the English Secretary went on before to take order for our lodging and
entertainment. We met him with his Second, about half a League from the City,
OCTOBER
whither we came the seventh of October. The Kaffila passed through the City,
to be lodged on the other side of it; and the English Merchants carried me into
a pleasant Country House without the City, purposely built for a Maus^leum, to
a person of Quality of the Country, whose desire it had been to be there buried
with all his Family. Having taken two or three turns in the Garden, we went to
the Lodge belonging to the English, where they made the greatest entertainment
imaginable; and to come to the height of that Countries endearments, they sent
for some Benjan women, who were very desirous to see my clothes, which I still
wore after the German fashion, (though the English and Dutch, who are settled
in the Indies, go ordinarily according to the mode of the Country) and would
have obliged me to put them off; but perceiving I was unwilling to do it, and
withal that I made some difficulty to accept of the proffers they made me to
strip themselves naked, and to do any thing I would expect from persons of
their sex and profession, they seemed to be very much troubled, and so went
away.

The City of Brodra Brodra described.
lies in a sandy Plain upon the little River Wasset, 30. Cos, or 15. Leagues
from Broitschia. This City is of no long standing, as having been built by
Rasia Ghie, son of Sulthan Mahomet Begeran, last King of Guzuratta, out of the
ruins of the ancient Brodra, which was heretofore called Radiapora, from which
it is distant about half a League. It is fortified with good Walls and
Bastions, according to the ancient manner of Fortification, and has five
Gates, one whereof is damm'd up, because there is no highway abuts upon it. The
Inhabitants of it, especially those of that part of the Suburbs which is
toward the West Side of the City, are for the most part Benjans and Ketteris
by profession, Weavers, Dies, and other workers in Cotton, as being the place
where, of all the Province, the best Clothes are made, which are more close,
but a small matter narrower and shorter then those of Broitschia; and it is by
that they are distinguished from the others. There are several sorts thereof,
to wit, Bastas, N^quamas, Madasons, Cannequins, black Chelas, blew Assamanis,
Berams, and Tircandias. We thought fit to name these several species, that we
may the better understand the relations which come daily from those parts.

The jurisdiction of the Governor of Brodra extends it self over two hundred
and ten Villages, sixty five whereof are designed for the maintenance of the
Garrison, and the Mogul disposes of the 135. for the advantage and
entertainment of certain Officers of the Court, who have their pensions charged
upon those Villages. Among which there is one called Sindickera, eight Leagues
from the City, which yields yearly above 25000. pounds of Lacca. Lacque.
This Lacque is a Gum taken out of a certain kind of Tree, which is not much
unlike our Plum-trees; and there is abundance of it gotten all over Guzuratta.
Its color is of a red brown; but when it is well dried, and beaten to powder,
the Indians give it what color they please, black, red, green, yellow, etc.
and make it into sticks to seal Letters withal, or use it to adorn and
beautify their household stuff, as Chests, Boxes, Cabinets, Tables, Bedsteads,
etc. whereby they give them such a luster, as none yet could ever imitate in
Europe, especially upon black. This Country does also produce much Indico.

Besides the Sepulcher we spoke of before, The Sepulchers of Mahumetan Saints.
there are many others to be seen without the City, most of them very
magnificently built, having spacious Gardens about them, which are open for any
that would go in.

The same day I took leave of the Secretary, and went along with two English
Merchants to the Caravan, which we found encamped at the corner of a Grove of
the Palms, which bear Cocos, and out of which they get Terry, which is the
ordinary drink of those parts. In the evening came the Dutch Secretary or
Deputy of Brodra, who presented us with some bottles of Sack, and kept us
company till after midnight.

One of the English Merchants came along with the Caravan as far as Wasset,
which is an old Castle partly ruined, built upon a high Mountain, where there
is kept a Garrison, consisting of a hundred Horse, who there received a certain
Impost of a Ropia and a half, which amounts to somewhat under four shillings,
for every Wagon: but we had a Passport from the Mogul, by virtue whereof we
were to pass without paying, upon which account it was that one of their
Merchants came along with the Caravan to that place. Accordingly the Soldiers
of the Garrison staid some of our Wagons, and would have forced us to pay the
ordinary duties; but we opposed it, and drew up our Convoy, who made their
passage by force. We crossed the River, and lodged in a Village, fortifying our
selves with our Wagons against the attempts which might have been made against
us. We found afterward that this circumspection was no more then needed. For
ere we had quite supped, came the Receiver with some thirty Soldiers, well
armed with Half-pikes, Swords, Bucklers and Guns, and desiring a conference
with us, we suffered him to enter with three of his Soldiers; but he demanding
the duties of us, we told him, that we were not to pay any, and that the
Mogul's Pass freed us; yet to avoid further trouble, and out of our good will
to the Soldiers of the Garrison, we should make them a present of five or six
Ropias. They would not hear of any such proposition, and still stood upon the
payment of the whole duty. And so they went away, but with a design to return
the next morning, as indeed they did. At the same time came a Dutch Merchant,
who conducted a Caravan of 170. Wagons, guarded by 50. Soldiers, all
Indosthans. He told us that the Soldiers of the Garrison had felled down a
great Tree, and laid it cross our way, purposely to hinder our passage. We
immediately commanded out four of our Soldiers to go and clear the way; which
obliged those of the Castle to send some of theirs to hinder them: but in
regard they could not go by, without coming within reach of our Muskets, we put
our selves into a posture of disputing their passage, and they attempted to
force us out of our retrenchment, which occasioned the coming back of those
whom we had sent to clear the way. There was some firing on both sides; but we
had so much the advantage of them, that those of the Castle came to a
composition, and represented to us by the Dutch Merchants, that having no other
pay then what they received from the Merchandises passing that way, they were
forced to make passengers pay the duties, that they might have wherewithal to
subsist, and that they would be content with one half of what was ordinarily
received, nay, to avoid further inconvenience, with what we had proffered them
the day before; so that they had at last six Ropias, which amount to about
three Crowns. Their number, during this contest, increased to a hundred; and
the Indian Soldiers, who conveyed us, refused to take up Arms against them,
alleging it was not lawful for them to fight against the Soldiers of their
Sovereign, and that it was their business to defend us against the Robbers, who
might set upon us in the Highway. Two Leagues and a half thence is the Village
of Ammenoygii; and at three and a half further, that of Sejuntra, whence we
came to the little City of Nariad, Comes to Nariad.
which some call Niriaud, nine Leagues from Brodra. Its houses are handsome
enough, and there are made in it Cottons and Indico, but not such abundance
thereof as there is in the places before mentioned.

October 11. we came to Mamadebath. To Mamadebath.
This little City is within five Leagues of Nariad, upon a pretty large River
which is very full of Fish. It is a handsome pleasant place, and was built by
two Brothers, who have made a very considerable Castle on the Northside of the
City. The Inhabitants of it are Benjans, and they make there great quantities
of Cotton-thread, wherewith they drive a great Trade.

October 12. We traveled five Leagues, and having passed by Canis, Batova, and
Issempour, where there is a very fair Caravansera, To Amadebat.
or, as they call it in India, a Sary for the lodging of the Caffilas, or
Caravans, we got the same day very safely to Amadabath.

The two Merchants and my self went before, and we took along with us the Wagon
that carried the provisions. Within half a League of the City, we entered into
one of those Gardens, in which persons of Quality are wont to have their
Sepulchers, and staying there for the coming up of the Caravan, we sent to the
principal Merchant, who managed the Commerce in those parts, to acquaint him
with our arrival. His name was Benjamin Roberts, and he had no sooner heard the
news, but he took his Coach and came to receive me. The Indian Oxon as
metalsome as the Horses in Germany.
His Coach made after the Indian fashion, was gilt all over, covered with
several pieces of rich Persian Tapistry, and drawn by two white Oxen, which
expressed as much metal as we could have expected from the best Horses in
Germany. There was also led by the Coach a very stately Persian Horse, the
harness whereof was covered with plates of Silver. He took a Collation with us
of the little Sack and English Beer we had left, after which he took me into
the Coach with him, and brought me to the City, ordering the Merchants to stay
in the Garden till the Caravan were come up.

The English House or Lodge is in the middle of the City, well built, and has
many fair and convenient Apartments, with spacious Courts for the disposal of
Merchandises, Master Roberts brought me first into his own Chamber, which
looked into a little Flower-garden, in which there was a Fountain. The floor
was covered with Tapistry, and the pillars which sustained the structure were
set out with Silk-stuffes of several colors, and above, a great white tassel
according to the custom of the great Ones of the Country. We had a Collation;
after which he showed me the whole house, and brought me into a very fair
Chamber, with a large Closet in it, which he had designed for my Lodging. We
supped in a great Hall, whither the Dutch Deputy came after supper to see us,
with some of his Merchants, with whom I had occasion to be acquainted at
Suratta. After he was gone, the whole company conducted me to my Chamber, where
my Host kept me company till after midnight. And that there might not be ought
wanting in my entertainment (which in answer to the recommendatory Letters I
had brought from the President, he would needs have in all things
extraordinary) he sent for six Women-dancers, the handsomest could be found in
the City, and told me, that if I liked any thing in them besides their singing
and activity, I needed only to express my desires, and be confident, that they
would give me all the satisfaction and divertisement which those of their sex
are able either to give or take. I thanked him for his civility, but besides
that, I had had some touches of my discase by the way, I made some scruple to
meddle in that kind with a Pagan.

They admired my clothes, but above all that Lock of my hair that hung down
over my shoulders: and could hardly be induced to believe I was what I really
am.

Having slaid two days at Amadabath, my noble entertainer took me along with
him in a Coach, followed by two others, and showed me some part of the City.

He first brought me to the great Marketplace, called Meydan-Schach, or the
Kings Market, The Meydan.
which is at least 1600. foot long, and half as many broad, and beset all about
with rows of Palm Trees, and Date-trees, intermixed with Citron-trees and
Orange Trees, whereof there are very many in the several Sterets: which is not
only very pleasant to the sight, by the delightful prospect it affords, but
also makes the walking among them more convenient, by reason of the coolness.
Besides this Meydan, there are in the City four Basars, or public places,
where are sold all kinds of Merchandises.

The same day, The Castle.
I saw also the Castle, which is very large, and built of Freestone, insomuch
that into is one of the most considerable in the Kingdom. Not far from the
Meydan, we went into a House built of Brick, which they call the Kings Palace.
Over the Gate, there was a kind of Curtain or Stage, for the Music, consisting
of Violins, Haw-boys and Bag-pipes, which play there in the morning, at noon,
in the evening, and at midnight, as they do in Persia, and all other places,
where the Prince professes the Mahumetan Religion. All the Appartments of the
House were sumptuous, gilt and adorned with painting, according to the mode of
the Country: but more to their satisfaction, who are pleased with diversity of
Colors, then theirs, who look for invention, and stand upon the exactness of
proportions.

Then we went out of the City, to see the Walls of it, which are very fair,
having twelve Gates, and many great Towers, with a Ditch sixteen fathom broad,
but in many places it is ruined, and without water.

We returned into the City, A. Mosquey of the Benjans.
to see the principal Mosquey of the Benjans, which without dispute is one of
the noblest structures that can be seen. It was then new, for the Founder, who
was a rich Benjan Merchant, named Santides, was living in my time. The Mosquey
stands in the middle of a great Court, which is enclosed with a high Wall of
Freestone, all about which there is a Gallery, much after the manner of our
Cloisters in Monasteries, having all its Seats or Cells, and in every Cell a
Marble Statue, white or black, representing a Woman naked, sitting, and having
her legs lying cross under her, according to the mode of the Country. There
were some had three Statues, to wit, a great one between two little ones.

At the entrance into the Mosquey, there are two Elephants of black Marble done
to the life, and upon one of them the Effigies of the Founder. The whole
Mosquey is vaulted, and the Walls adorned with several Figures of men and other
living Creatures. There was not any thing within the Mosquey, save that at the
further end of the Structure there were three Chapels, or obscure places,
divided one from the other by wooden Rails, wherein might be seen Statues of
Marble, like those we had seen in the Cells, with this difference only, that
there was a lighted Lamp before that which stood in the middle. We saw there
also one of their Priests, who was then busy in receiving from the hands of
such as came thither to do their Devotions, Flowers, wherewith he adorned his
Images, as also Oil for the Lamps which hung before the Rails, and Wheat and
Salt for the Sacrifice. While he set the Flowers about the Statues, his mouth
and nose were covered with a Linnen-cloath, left the impurity of his breath
should profane the Mystery, and coming ever and anon near the Lamp, he
muttered over certain Prayers, and rubbed his hands up and down in the flame
thereof, as if he had washed them in the smoke, and sometimes stroak'd his face
with them. This was a kind of Purification, done out of a persuasion which
these people have, that Fire having a far greater power of purifying then
Water, they may after this Ceremony lift up clean and pure hands to God. But he
continued this foolery so long, that we had not the patience to see the end of
it; so that we left him in the midst thereof, to go and see the Sepulchers,
which are the most remarkable Rarities of the City, whereof we shall here give
a short description.

Amadabath, Amadabath described.
the Metropolis of all Guzuratta, lies at 23. degrees, 32. minutes on this side
the line, 18. Leagues from Cambaya, and 45. from Suratta, upon a small River,
which not far thence falls into the Indus. It is a very great and populous
City, comprehending with its Suburbs, and the Villages adjacent thereto, which
are part of it, near seven Leagues in compass. The Streets of it are very
broad, and both public and private buildings very magnificent, especially the
Mosqueys, and the Governors House of the Province. There is a Guard kept there
day and night, and the Garrison is very considerable, by reason of the Badures,
a sort of people distant thence but 25. Leagues, who acknowledge not the Mogul
for their Sovereign, and make perpetual incursions upon his Subjects. There is
not in a manner any Nation, nor any Merchandises in all Asia, which may not be
had at Amadabath, where particularly there are made abundance of Silks and
Cotton-stuffs. It Is true, they seldom use any Silk in that Country, much less
any out of Persia, because it is somewhat too course and too dear; but they
ordinarily make use of that of China, which is very fine, mingling it with that
of Bengala, which is not quite so fine, but much beyond that of Persia, and
much cheaper. They also make there great quantities of Gold and Silver
Brocadoes, but they put too much thin Lace into them, so that in goodness and
substance they come not near those of Persia, though some of them amount in the
Country to eighteen Crowns the Piece.

At the time of my being there, they had begun to make a new kind of Stuff of
Silk and Cotton with flowers of Gold, which was very much esteemed, and sold at
five Crowns the Ell; but the Inhabitants were forbidden the wearing of it, upon
this account, that the King reserved it for his own, yet not so strictly, but
that he permitted Forraigners to buy of it, to be transported out of the
Kingdom.

They make there also all sorts of Sattins and Velvets of all sorts of colors;
The principal Commodities there.
Taffata, Sattins for linings, of both Thread and Silk, Alcatifs or Carpets,
the ground Gold, Silk or Yarn, but not so good as those of Persia, and all
sorts of Cottons. The other Commodities to be commonly had there, are Sugar,
Candy'd or in Powder, Cummin, Honey, Lacque, Opium, Borax, Ginger, dry and
preserved Myrobalans or Indian Plums, and all other sorts of Preserves,
Saltpeter, Sal armoniack, and Indico, which the Inhabitants call Anil, and
which grows there in great abundance. There are also Diamonds to be sold there,
but in regard they are brought from Visiapour, they may be had cheaper
elsewhere.

There is also to be had some Ambergris, and Musk, Musk and Ambergris.
though the Country affords not any; for the best Ambergris comes from
Pegu, and Bengala, from Mosambique and Capo verte, and is sold at Amadabath, at
40. Momoudis, or 8. Crowns the ounce. Some are of opinion, that Amber is the
feed of the Whale, hardened or congealed by cold in the Sea: but if this were
so, there would be plenty of it found in the North, where men look after this
Fish merely to get out of it a certain liquor, which is as stinking and
infectious as the smell of the Amber is sweet and pleasant. Nor can I approve
of their opinion, who believe there are within the earth certain veins or
sources of Amber, as there are of Nefte, or certain Mines, as those of
Brimstone, since there is none to be found but toward the Sea, wherein it
grows as Mushrooms do upon the earth, and is fastened to the bottom, till such
time as the Sea, A piece of Ambergris that weighed eighty pound.
being tossed up and down by the Winds, casts it toward the shore. Peter de la
Brouck, a Hollander, who made a Voyage to Angola, Guinny, and the Indies, in
the years 1605. and 1606. says in his Relation, that in his time, there was
found at Cabo verde, at the mouth of the River Gambi, a piece of Ambergris,
which weighed eighty pounds, whereof he bought some part.

As for Musk, Musk.
all are jointly of opinion, that it comes of an Imposthume or Swelling, which
rises about the Navil of a certain Animal, which some affirm to be about the
bigness of a Fox, and others say, is like a Roe-buck. Whether then it be that
this rising of the flesh about that part happens every year, when those
Creatures go to rut, and that as they tumble up and down the Grass it breaks,
or that it is cut off when they are taken, certain it is that it comes from a
living Creature, which some Authors call Gazela; but the Inhabitants of Pegu
give it another name, which I could not learn, and which is not to be found in
the Relations, or Natural Histories of the East -Indies.

Michael Boyen, a Jesuit, who some years since printed, at Vienna, a Treatise,
which he calls La Flore Chinoise, says, that the right Musk is made of the
Kidneys and Testicles of that Animal, which he calls Hiam, but that the China
Merchants, who adulterate most of their Merchandises, put among it some of the
flesh and blood of the said Animal, and so make up a kind of composition,
wherewith they fill the little Purses made of the Skin of the same Beast, which
the Portuguez call Popos, and endeavor to make them pass for the right Cods.
However this may hold, certain it is, that this excellent scent proceeds from a
Beast, and that it may be called the soul of all Perfume. But there is not any
thing so considerable as the convenience which this place affords for matter of
exchange, the Benjans having their Correspondents in all parts of Asia, even at
Constantinople; and this is so much the more to the advantage of the Merchant,
the more he stands in fear of the Rasboutes, and other Robbers, who make
traveling very dangerous, notwithstanding all the expense the Mogul is at, to
maintain a great number of Soldiers, who are particularly kept for the safety
of the Highways.

There is nothing paid here, Merchandises pay no duties or custom at Amadabat.
either at the exportation or importation of Merchandises, save that the
Couteval, or Kings Lieutenant, has given him by way of Present, about 15.
pence for every Wago^; and it is lawful for all Foreigners to buy, and sell,
and trade in all sorts of Merchandises, those only excepted which are
prohibited, as Gunpowder, Lead and Saltpeter, which may not be transported
without the Governors permission; but that it is no hard matter to obtain,
making but a slender acknowledgment of his favor therein.

The City of Amadabat comprehends within its territory twenty five great Towns,
and two thousand nine hundred ninety and eight Villages, Its jurisdiction and
revenue.
so as that the revenue thereof amounts to above six millions of Crowns,
whereof the Governor has the disposal, and therewith maintains the Soldiers,
whom he is obliged to keep for the Kings service, especially against Robbers
upon the highways; though many times he protects them, and divides the booty
with them. The Couteval, who is as it were the King Lieutenant, commands under
the Sulthan, and mannages the political Government, nay meddles also with the
administration of Justice jointly with the Kasi or ordinary Judge. The Mogul
has there also several other Officers, who are as it were Controllers and
Supervisors of those we last named.

The days following I spent in seeing the Sepulchers which are about the City,
and among others, The Sepulcher of a Kasi.
particularly that which is in the Village of Zirkees, about a League and a
half from Amadabat. It Is the work of a King of Guzuratta, built by him to the
memory of a Kasi, who had been his Praeceptor, and is grown very famous upon
the account of many pretended Miracles done by him after his death. The whole
Structure, wherein there are four hundred and forty great pillars, thirty foot
high, is of Marble, as also the floor of it, and serves for a Sepulcher to
three other Kings, who would needs be buried there with their Families. At the
entrance of this sumptuous Monument, there is a large Tanke, or Cistern, full
of water, and enclosed with a wall, which has several windows all about it.
The Mahumetans of those parts go on Pilgrimage thither; and in this Village of
Zirkees is made the best Indico in all the Country. About a League thence,
there is a spacious Garden, with a fair House within it, which the Mogul, Chon
Chimauw, built, in memory of a Victory gained by him in that place over Sulthan
Mahomed Begeran, last King of Guzuratta, upon which he united that Kingdom to
his Crown, as we shall express hereafter.

About a League and a half from the City, we were shown a Sepulcher, which they
call Betti-Chuit, The Sepulcher of an incestuous Father.
that is to say, thy daughters shame discovered. There lies interred in it a
rich Merchant, a Moor, named Hajam Majom, who falling in love with his own
Daughter, and desirous to show some pretense for his incest, went to an
Ecclesiastical Judge, and told him in general terms, That he had in his youth,
taken the pleasure to plant a Garden, and to dress and order it with great
care, so that now it brought forth such excellent fruits, that his neighbors
were extremely desirous thereof, that he was every day importuned to
communicate unto them, but that he could not yet be persuaded to part
therewith, and that it was his design to make use of them himself, if the Judge
would grant him in writing a License to do it. The Kasi, who was not able to
dive into the wicked intentions of this unfortunate man, made answer, That
there was no difficulty in all this, and so immediately declared as much in
writing. Hajom showed it his Daughter, and finding nevertheless, that neither
his own authority, nor the general permission of the Judge, would make her
consent to his brutal enjoyments, he ravished her. She complained to her
Mother, who made so much noise about it, that the King Mahomet Begeran coming
to hear thereof, ordered him to lose his head.

Not far from Amadabat begin to appear the dreadful Mountains of Marva, The
mountains of Marva.
which reach above 70. Leagues toward Agra, and above a hundred toward Ouyen,
and are so inaccessible, that the Castle of Gurchitto, (where lives Rana one of
the principal Radias of those parts) is accounted impregnable, Where live
Princes not subject to the Mogul.
in so much that the Kings of Pettan, and the Mogul himself, found much ado to
reduce it. The Indians, who are Pagans, have still a great Veneration for that
Prince, who, they say, was so powerful, as that he could in a short time bring
120000. Horse into the Field.

In the Mountain which lies between Amadabat and Trappe, there lives another
Radia, who is not subject to the Mogul, by reason the Woods and Deserts secure
him against that Prince, who with all his power is not able to force him out of
the places he is possessed of, no more then he is the Radia of Ider, who is his
Vassal, but many times refuses to obey his Orders.

One of the noblest Gardens about the City is that of Schach-bag, Schach-bag
Corden.
in that part of the Suburbs which is called Begampour. It is the King Garden,
very spacious, encompassed with a high Wall, and has within it a very fair
House, the Ditches whereof are full of water, and the appartments richly
furnished. I went thence along a Stone Bridge, which is four hundred paces in
length, to another Garden, called Niccinabag, that is to say, the Jewel, and
they say it was planted by a beautiful and rich young Lady. The Garden is not
very great no more then the House within it; but both very advantageously
seated in a place high enough to discover all the adjacent Champion, and upon
the avenues of the Bridge, to make the noblest prospect that ever I saw. The
Rain which falls in the Winter time supplies a great Fish-poud or Pool in the
middle of the Garden, but in Summer they make use of certain Engines, wherewith
many Oxen put together draw up the water out of Wells, which are so deep, that
they are never dry. A man can seldom go to this Garden, but he shall find some
young Women bathing themselves, they will not persuit the Indians should see
them, but suffered us to come in and speak to them.

There are so many other Gardens about Amadabat, and the whole City is so full
of Trees, that a man may say, it makes all but one Garden; for as he comes to
the City, he sees such abundance of them, that he may well think he is going
into a Forest. Among other things I took particular notice of the Highway,
which they call Bascaban, and leads to a Village six Leagues distant from the
City. It is so straight, that it should seem they took a great pleasure in
planting the Trees about it, whereof there is a double row on both sides upon a
straight line. They are Cocos-Trees, which at all times refresh Travelers with
their shade: but this road comes nothing near that which goes from Agra to
Barampour, An Ally 150 Leagues together.
which makes but one continued Ally for a hundred and fifty Germans Leagues
together. All these Teees lodge and feed an incredible number of Apes, among
which there are some as big as Greyhounds, and strong enough to set upon a Man;
but they never do it unless they be angered. They are most of them of a greenish
brown color, and their beards and eyebrows long and white. They multiply
extremely, by reason the Benjans, who are much more numerous in those parts
then the Mahumetans, believe the Metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls,
and permit not the killing of beasts, and these much less then any other,
because they have some resemblance of Man, and are persuaded, that the merriest
and best humored souls, after their departure out of the body, retire into
these Creatures; whence it comes that the City is full of them. They come into
people houses at any time with all the freedom imaginable, and in so great
numbers, that those who sell Fruits and Preserves have much ado to keep them
from their houses, and to secure their Ware. I remember one day I counted above
fifty at the English house at the same time, which fell a playing and putting
themselves into several postures, as if they had been sent thither purposely to
make me sport. I one day chanced do cast some Dates and Almonds among two or
three Apes that came in, which they liked so well, that they waited every
morning at my Chamber door for their Breakfast, and became at last so familiar,
that they would take Fruit, or Bread, or any thing else out of my hand. I would
sometimes catch one of them by the Foot, so to oblige the others to snarle at
me, and as it were to demand their Companion, which I did till such time as I
saw them make ready to set upon me, so to force him out of my hands.

The same Trees maintain all sorts of wild Fowl, Parrots.
but especially an infinite number of Parrots, whereof there are several kinds.
The biggest are called Indian Crows. Some are all white, or of a Pearl color,
having on their Crowns a tuft of Feathers of a Carnation red, and they are
called Kahatou, from that word which in their chattering they pronounce very
distinctly. These Birds are common all over the Indies, where they make their
Nests in Cities, under the Eaves of Houses, as Swallows do in Europe. The
lesser sort of them, which are the more valued for the beauty and diversity of
their colors, their Feathers being checkered between a lively Carnation and a
bright Green, build their Nests in the Woods, and fasten them to the tops of
the branches, so as that they hang in the Air, by which means they preserve
their young ones from the Serpents that would devour them. They build their
Nests with Hay or Stubble, and many times they fasten two together, with a
covering above, and another beneath. These Birds are a great annoyance to the
Fruits, and do much mischief in the Rice, because none kill them; nay, the
Benjans are so supertitious as not to hinder them from eating; which freedom
they also give the wild Ducks, Herons and Cormorants, Cormorants.
whereof there are abundance abut the River. In the precedent Travels of the
Ambassadors into Muscovy and Persia, there is some mention of these Birds,
upon occasion of those which we saw upon the River Wolga; We shall only add
here, that it is the same kind of Fowl, that the Natural Histories call
Onocratalus, from the noise it makes in the Water, when it puts its Beak into
it, imitating in some sort the braying of an Ass. It has the subtilty to
swallow down Muscles, and keep them in the Stomach till the heat thereof has
opened the shell, and then cast them up again to take out the Fish.

There is no kind of wild Fowl, nor Venison, Fowl and Venison.
which may not be had in these Forests, but especially, Fallow-Deer, Roebucks,
Ahus, or wild Asses, wild Boars and Hares.

They have also store of tame Creatures, Tame creatures.
as Buffles, Oxen, Cows and Sheep: And the Rivers is so well furnished with all
sorts of Fish, Fish.
that it may be confidently affirmed, there is no place in the world where a
man might live more deliciously.

They want nothing but Wine; but to supply their want of that, they have Terri,
taken out of the Cocos-trees, No Wine iu Guz^ratta.
which drinks as deliciously as Wine. They have the most excellent Water in the
World; and out of Rice, Sugar and Dates, they extract their Arak, Arak.
which is a kind of Aqua vitae, much stronger and more pleasant then that which
is made in Europe.

But as the Kingdom of Guzuratta is furnished with Creatures beneficial to man,
Hurtful creatures.
as to carriage or otherwise, so are there also some which he must have a care
of. There is no River but is pestered with abundance of Crocodiles, Crocodiles.
called by the Inhabitants Cayman, which do much mischief, as well in the
Water, as upon the Land among the Cattle, nay, sometimes among Men, whom they
surprise when they go a swimming, or when they go in Boats near the shore; this
Creature being so nimble, that a Man has much ado to escape by running, though
it were no hard matter for him, by frequent turnings and windings to avoid his
pursuit: for the Crocodile having no Vertebrae or joints either in his neck or
back, he cannot turn himself, and thence it comes that most commonly he rather
surprises Men then pursues them. He commonly lurks in the high Grass on the
River side, to catch at those who come for Water; and the Benjans, who believe
that the Souls of those who are thus devoured by these Creatures, are
immediately admitted into Paradise, take no course to destroy them. It is very
certain, that in the Ditches of the City of Pegu there were Crocodiles above
thirty foot in length, Crocodiles 30. foot long.
and fed so much upon Man's flesh, that no day passed but they devoured some or
other, and yet the Benjans took no course in the world to prevent it and
destroy them. A Crocodile swallows a woman with all her clothes.
But the King having caused one to be more particularly observed, which did
more mischief alo^e then all the rest, had it taken and killed. There was one
had swallowed down a Woman with all her clothes about her. They cover their
Eggs, having laid to the number of 28 or 30. with Sand, about the change of the
Moon, and so leave them till the wane, by which time they are hatched; when
they uncover them, How they lay their Eggs.
they kill a great many of the young ones, which hinders them from multiplying,
as they would do otherwise to infinity. Iohnston in his Natural History says,
that near Panama, Crocodiles 100. foot long.
in the West- Indies, there were found Crocodiles above a hundred foot long.
But we shall not here make a digression into Natural History, and ingenuosly
acknowledge, that those we saw were about twelve or fifteen foot long. The
skin, or rather scales of their backs is harder then Armor musket-proof; so
that to destroy them, a man must go on one side of them, and run them into the
belly. The Inhabitants of the Country affirm, that this Creature is of its own
nature cowardly, and that it avoids those who stand to it, and has courage
only when it has to do with those that have not any, and run away from it.

Another quality which this Country has, not common with all places, is, that
it produces abundance of Snakes and Serpents, Serpents.
which are here very dangerous, and among the rest those, which from a Greek
word are called Amphisbenes, and have two heads. I must confess I never saw any
of them, and expect not that upon my testimony any should condemn the opinion
of those, who with much probability affirm, that Nature produces no Creature
with two heads, unless she intend to make sport, and frame a Monster; and that
their error, who speak of the Amphisbene, proceeds only hence, that they have
seen Serpents, which, contrary to the ordinary form of all Reptiles, are as big
toward the tail as toward the head. We might also very well esteem those
somewhat ridiculously conceited, who would have people believe, that these
heads command' and obey alternately by years, if those of the Country did not
affirm as much, and if Nirembergius, in his Natural History, write, that an
Inhabitant of Madrid, named Cortavilla, had assured him that he had seen it:
but he does not himself believe what he adds to that Story; to wit, that this
Creature has under one of its Tongues the Remedy against the Poison which the
other had cast.

The Woods are full of Lions, Leopards, Tigers and Elephants; whereof we shall
have occasion to speak elsewhere.

But there is no Creature more common in these parts, Batts as big as Crows.
as also all over the Indies, then the Batts, which are as big as Crows with
us, nay, there are some about the bigness of our Hens. They are so great an
annoyance to Gardens, that people are obliged to watch them, for the
preservation of the Fruits.

The City of Amadabat maintains for the Mogul's service, Amadabat maintains
12000. horse.
out of its own Revenue, twelve thousand Horse, and fifty Elephants, under the
command of a Chan, or Governor, who has the quality of Radia, Raja, or Rasgi,
that is to say, Prince. He who commanded there in my time, The Governors
wealth.
was called Areb-chan, and about sixty years of age. I was credibly informed,
that he was worth in Money and Household Stuff, ten Crou, or Carroas Ropias,
which amount to fifty millions of Crowns, the Crou being accounted at a hundred
Lake Ropias, each whereof is worth fifty thousand Crowns. It was not long
before, that his Daughter, one of the greatst Beauties in the Country, had been
married to the M^gul's second Son, and the Chan, when she went to the Court,
had sent her attended by twenty Elephants, a thousand Horse, and six thousand
Wagons, laden with the richest Stuffs, and whatever else was rare in the
Country. His Court.
His Court consisted of above 500. persons, 400. whereof were his slaves, who
served him in his affairs, and were all dieted in the house. (...) have it from
good hands, His Expense.
that his expense in housekeeping amounted to above five thousand Crowns a
month, not comprehending in that account that of his Stables, where he kept
five hundred Horse and fifty Elephants. The most eminent Persons of his retinue
were very magnificently clad, though as to his own person, he was nothing
curious, and was content commonly with a Garment of Cotton, as are the other
Indosthans, unless it were when he went abroad into the City, or took a journey
into the Country; for then he went in great state, sitting ordinarily in a rich
Chair, set upon an Elephant, covered with the richest Tapistry, or Alcatifs of
Persia, being attended by the Guard of 200. men, having many excellent Persian
Horses led, and causing several Standards and Banners to be carried before him.

October 18. I went along with the English Merchant to visit the Governor,
Mandelslo visits the Governor of Amadabat.
whom we found sitting in a Pavilion or Tent which looked into his Garden.
Having caused us to sit down by him, he asked the Merchant who I was: He told
him in the Indosthan Language, that I was a Gentleman of Germany, whom a desire
to see foreign Countries, and to improve himself by Travel, had obliged to
leave his own. That coming into Persia, upon occasion of an Embassy sent
thither by the Prince my Master, I took a resolution to see the Indies, Their
discourse.
as being the noblest Country in the world; and being come to that City, that I
hoped he would not take it ill if I aspired to the honor of waiting upon him.
The Governor made answer, I was very welcome, that my resolution was noble and
generous, and that he prayed God to bless and prosper it. He thereupon asked
me, whether during my abode in Persia, I had learnt ought of the Language. I
replied, that I had a greater inclination to the Turkish Language, and that I
understood it so far as to make a shift to express my self in it. The
Governor, who was a Persian born, made answer, that it was true indeed, the
Turkish Language was much more commonly spoken in the Scach's Court then that
of the Country, and thereupon asked me my age, and how long it was since I left
Germany. I told him I was 24. years of age, and that I had traveled three
years. He replied, that he wondered very much my friends would suffer me to
travel so young, and and asked me whether I had not changed my habit by the
way; whereto having made answer that I had not, he told me, that it was an
extraordinary good fortune, that I had traveled in that equipage through so
many Countries, without meeting with some unhappy accident, and that the Dutch
and English, to prevent any such misfortune, clad themselves according to the
fashion of the Country.

After about an hours discourse, we would have risen and taken our leaves of
him, but the Governor entreated us to stay and dine with him. He caused some
Fruit to be brought, while his people were laying the cloth, which was of
Cotton, laid upon a large Carpet of red Turkie-leather. The dinner was very
noble, and served up and dre^t according to the Persian way, the Meat being
laid in dishes, all Porcelane, upon Rice of several colors, in the same manner
as we had seen at the Court at Ispahan. Presently after dinner we came away,
but as I was taking my leave of the Governor, he told me in the Turkish
Language, Senni dahe kurim, that is to say, we shall see you again, giving me
thereby to understand, that he would be glad of some further discourse with me.

Accordingly we went thither again the 20. A second visit to the Governor.
but I had clad my self according to the mode of the Country, upon the design I
had to travel into Cambaya, which I could hardly do without changing habit. We
found him in the same appartment where we had seen him the time before. He was
clad in a White Vestment, according to the Indian mode, over which he had
another that was longer, of Brocadoe, the ground Carnation lined with white
Satin, and above, a Collar of Sables, whereof the Skins were sewed together, so
as that the Tails hung down over the back. As soon as he saw us come in, he
made us sit down by the Lords that were with him. He was about some business,
which hindered him for a while from discoursing with us, yet could I not but
observe that he was pleased at my change of habit. He dispatched several
Orders, and sometimes writ himself; yet did not his business take him up, so as
to hinder him from taking Tobacco, which he took after the same manner as is
elsewhere described in the precedent Travels of the Ambassadors, there
standing near him a Servant, who with one hand held to the Pipe to his mouth,
and set fire to it with the other. He quitted that exercise to go and take a
view of certain Troops of Horse and Companies of Foot, which were drawn up in
the Court. He would see their Arms himself, and caused them to shoot at a
Mark, thereby to judge of their abilities, and to augment the pay of such as
did well at the cost of the others, out of whose pay there was so much abated.
So that seeing him thus employed, we would have taken our leaves, but he sent
us word that we should dine with him, causing in the mean time some Fruit to be
sent us, whereof by his order we sent the best part to our Lodging.

Soon after he called for a little golden Cabinet, enriched with precious
Stones, and having taken out two Drawers, out of one he took Offion, or Opium,
and out of the other Bengi, a certain Drug, or Powder, made of the leaves and
seed of Hemp, which they use to excite luxury. Having taken a small spoonful of
each, he sent the Cabinet to me, and told me, that it could not otherwise be,
but that, during my abode at Ispahan, I must needs have learnt the use of the
Drug, and that I should find that as good as any I had seen in Persia. I told
him, that I was no competent Judge of it, in regard I had not used it often;
however I would then take of it for the Honors sake of receiving it from his
hands. I took of it, and the English Merchant did the like, though neither of
us had ever taken any before, nor did much like it then.

The Governor asked me, where I had learnt the Turkish Language, and whether I
had ever been at Constantinople. I told him, I never had been there, but had
employed the little time of my abode in the Provinces of Schirwan, and at
Ispahan, in learning that Language, The Governor of Amadabat ^ Persian born.
which is as common there as that of the Country. He told me that Schi^wan was
his Country, and understanding that I had been particularly known to Schach
Sefi, had dined at his Table, and been a hunting with him, he asked my judgment
of the King of Persia, and what I thought worthy commendation or censure in
that Prince? I made answer, that he was a Prince of a graceful Aspect and
Person, and one that had understanding and courage enough to be obeyed in his
Kingdom. But loves not the King of Persia.
He asked me, whether he still reigned as a Tyrant, and continued his former
cruelties? I answered, that Age having moderated his youthful extravagancies,
his government began to be also more moderate.

But the Chan replied, that Schach Sefi had assumed the Scepter with bloody
hands, and that the beginning of his reign had cost the lives of an infinite
number of persons, of all conditions and qualities: That Cruelty was hereditary
to his Family: That it descended to him from Scach-Abas, his Grandfather, and
that there was little hope he could rid himself of a quality that was become in
a manner natural to him, though he might happily dissemble it for a time: That
that was the only reason for which Alymerdan-Chan, Governor of Candahar, had
been forced to cast himself into the protection of the Mogul, and to deliver up
his place to him; as knowing his life was in danger, though he had never done
ought against the service of his Prince, and that he was sent for to Court, to
augment the number of those Lords whom that Tyrant had put to death: That he
was content to believe, that S^hach Sefi was an understanding person, but that
even as to that, there was no more comparison between him and the Mogul, then
there was between the poverty of the one and the vast wealth of the other, the
Prince his Master being able to maintain a War against three Kings of Persia. I
was loath to enter into any contestation upon so ticklish a subject, Mande^slo's
discr^tion.
and therefore only told him, that it was indeed true, there was not any
comparison between the Gold, and the Silver, and Wealth of Persia, and what I
had already seen of the Mogul's Kingdom; but that it must be withal confessed,
that Persia had one thing which could not be had elsewhere, and was in effect
inestimable, which was the great number of Kisilbachs, with whose assistance
the King of Persia might attempt the conquest of all Asia. Which I said
purposely, knowing the Governor was a Kisilbach, and that he could take no
offense at such a discourse. Accordingly he discovered his satisfaction
thereat, not only in saying, that he must grant it to be true, but also, when
turning to one of the Lords, who was a Persian as well as himself, he said to
him, Walla beksade, jasehi a-damdur, chassa adamlar souer, that is to say, I
believe this young Gentleman has courage, when he speaks so well of those that
have.

By that time we had ended this discourse dinner was brought in. The Carver
sat in the middle of the great Vessels wherein the meat was brought up, and
with a great spoon put of it into little dishes, to be served up to us. The
Cban himself would needs also put in some, to assure us of his being pleased
with our company. The room was full of Military Officers, whereof some stood
with Half-pikes in their hands, others sat about a Tanke or Cistern which was
in the room.

Immediately after dinner we took leave, but the Governor told us, that he
intended to give us the divertisement of the Women-dancers of the Country, and
that we should pass away the afternoon with him: but some business intervening
he could not do it then, and therefore was forced to put it off to some other
time. But the earnestess I was in to pros^cute my travels into Cambay^,
together with the little satisfaction I found in the lewd and insolent Postures
of those Women, whereof I had seen but too much in Persia, hindered me from
making any acceptance of his proffers.

The Governor of Amadabat was a judicious understanding man, A Character of
the Governor of Amadabat.
but hasty, and so rigorous, that his Government inclined somewhat to cruelty.
It happened one day, that the two principal Directors of the English and Dutch
trade there, being invited by him to dinner; a young Gentleman that waited upon
the former, comes into the Hall to attend upon his Master; He had on a slashed
doublet, much after the fashion which was worn about 30. years since, which the
Governor thought so ridiculous, that he could not forbear laughing at it, and
asked the English President, in what quality that slashed Gallant served him,
since that according to his habit, he conceived he kept him for his Fool. The
President made answer, not without some confusion, that he waited on him in his
Chamber, and that he had opened his Doublet in that manner to make way for the
Air, the better to avoid the excessive heats of the Country, which the
Europaeans could not well endure. Whereto the Governor replied, that that
reason gave some satisfaction, but what he most wondered at was, that the
Christians, who are a wise and understanding people, had not yet found out the
way to make their Doublets of several shreds, rather then cut and mangle whole
pieces of Stuffes to put themselves into that mode. This jesting with the
English Merchant put him into so good an humor, that he would needs devote the
remainder of the day to sport and divertisement, and thereupon sent for twenty
Women-dancers, who as soon as they were come into the room fell a singing and
dancing, but with an Activity and exact observation of the cadence, much beyond
that of our Dancers upon the Ropes. They had little Hoops or Circles, through
which they leaped as nimbly as if they had been so many Apes, and made
thousands of Postures, according to the several soundings of their Music,
which consisted of a Tumbeck, or Timbrel, a Haw-boy, and several Tabours.
Having danced near two hours, the Governor would needs send into the City for
another band of Dancers, but the Servants brought word, that they were sick and
could not come. This excuse being not taken, he sent out the same Servants,
with express order to bring those Prostitutes away by force; but they returning
the second time with the same excuse, he ordered they should be cudgelled. Upon
that, they cast themselves at the Governors feet, and acknowledged that it was
indeed true, they were not sick, but were at a certain place, where they got
Money at a more delightful and easier sport then dancing, and that they
absolutely denied to come, saying, they knew well enough the Governor would
not pay them. He laughed at it, but immediately commanded out a party of his
Guard to bring them to him, and they were no sooner entered into the Hall ere he
ordered their heads to b^ struck off. His cruelty. Mandelslo leaves Amadabat.
They begged their lives with horrid cries and lamentations; but he would be
obeyed, and caused the execution to be done in the room before all the Company,
not one of the Lords then present daring to make the least intercession for
those Wretches, who were eight in number. The Strangers were startled at the
horror of the Spectacle and inhumanity of the Action; which the Governor
taking notice of, fell a laughing, and asked them what they were so much
startled at? Assure your selves Gentlemen, said he, that if I should not take
this course, I should not be long Governor of Amadabat. For should I connive
once at their disobedience, these Bete-Seioth, or Sons of Whores, would play
the Masters, and drive me out of the City. It Is but prudence in me to prevent
their contempt of my Authority, by such examples of severity as these are.

October 21. I left Amadabat, with a Coach and one Saddle-nag, in the company
of a young English Merchant, who, by order from the President, was to be my
Fellow-traveller. The Rasboutes make the way between Amadabath and Cambaya very
dangerous, which made me take for my Convoy eight Foot-souldiers armed with
Pikes and Bucklers. This kind of Soldiers do also the office of Lacqueys,
running just before the Horses, and may be hired for a small matter; for I gave
them but eight Crowns for the whole journey, though I had them three days, in
which time I traveled thirteen of the Country Leagues.

All the English Merchants brought me half a League out of the City, where I
saw a sumptuous Tomb, Tschictbag Garden.
which they call Salu. I got that day to the Garden of Tschictbag, made in
memory of the place where the Sulthan Mahomet Begoran, whom we spoke of before,
was defeated, and is without all comparison the fairest of any in the Indies;
but it being dark ere I got thither, I shall forbear the description of it till
my return that way, at which time I had the convenience of taking a particular
view thereof.

The 22. Having traveled seven Leagues, I came to the Village of Serguntra,
where, saw not any thing remarkable, but a great Tanke, or Cistern, wherein
rainwater is kept all the year.

The 23. After five Leagues traveling, I came to Cambaya. I dined in sight of
the City among certain Trees, and in the mean time sent one of my
Foot-souldiers to a Brocker, that is to say, one of those Benjans, whom the
English and Dutch make use of as Interpreters, and who understand their
Language, together with the Portuguez, which they learnt by means of the great
Commerce that Nation has had all over the Indies. He immediately came in a
Coach, and having brought me into the City, lodged me at a Mahumetan Merchants,
where I was very well accommodated; which course I took, because the English
Factor being from home, I made some difficulty to lodge at the English House.
As soon as I was got into the City, I desired the Brocker to show me what was
most worth the seeing there.

The City of Cambaya lies 16. Leagues from Broitsc^ia, Cambaya described.
in a sandy place upon the River side, which makes there a great Bay, into
which the River May, having past by the Walls thereof, disembogues it self. The
Haven is incommodious, though at High Water there be above seven fathom water;
but at Low Water, the Ships lie dry in the Sand and Mud that is at the bottom.
The City is encompassed by a very fair Wall of Freestone, and has twelve
Gates, very large houses, and strait and broad streets, most whereof have Gates
which are shut up in the night time. It is much greater then Surat, as being at
least ten Leagues about. It has three Basars or Marketplaces, and four noble
Tanks or Cisterns, able to find the Inhabitants water all the year long.

The Inhabitants are for the most part Pagans, Benjans, or Rasboutes, whereof
some apply themselves to Commerce, others to a military life. Their greatest
traffic is at Achim, Diu, Goa, Meca, and into Persia, whither they carry all
sorts of Stuffes of Silk and Cotton, and bring back ready Money, both Gold and
Silver, to wit, Ducats, Chequins and Ryals; also Ruynas, Dates, and other
Commodities of those parts. After a walk of two hours, my Conductor carried me
out of the City, and showed me 15. or 16. public Gardens, but among the rest,
one, into which I went on that side that was toward the Sea, by a pair of
stairs of Freestone of many steps. It was enclosed with a high Wall, and had
in it two or three fair Structures, one whereof being over the Gate, had many
noble Appartments. In the midst of the Garden there is a very high place,
within which was the Sepulcher of the Mahumetan who had founded it, and was
there buried with all his Family. The Tomb was covered with Marble, and had
several Arabian Inscriptions: There is not any place in all those parts that
has so noble a prospect as this, not only toward the Seaside, but also
toward the Land, where a man has the sight of the noblest Champion Country in
the World. This is so pleasant a place, that the Mogul being one day at
Cambaya, would needs take up his Lodging in the Garden, and caused the Stones
of the Sepulcher to be taken away, that his Tent might be pitched there.

While I was taking a particular view of that Structure, came up to us two
English Merchants, who obligingly reproached me with the slurre I put upon
their Nation, in preferring the House of a Mahumetan before their Lodge, as if
I had been but poorly entertained at Suratta, and other places, where I had
lodged among them. They proffered me their company to walk, and promised to
carry me the next morning to a place, where an Indian Widow was to be burnt,
with her own consent.

I went at night to my Lodging, whither the Brocker brought several Alcatifs,
or pieces of Tapistry, quilted Coverlets, Silk-stuffes, Cottons, Vessels,
Handles for Knives, Seals, Bracelets, Rings and Buttons of Agat, Cornelian and
Jasper, etc. of all sorts of colors, which pleased me very well; but not being
in a condition to spare any money, I only bought some few trifles, to keep in
favor with my Merchant.

The next day, the English Merchants came to my Lodging, whence we went
together to the River side, An Indian Widow (...) burnt by her own consent.
without the City, where this voluntary execution was to be done. The Woman's
Husband was a Rasboute, and had been killed near Labor, 200. Leagues from
Cambaya. As soon as she had heard of his death, she would needs do his
Obsequies, by causing her self to be burnt alive; but whereas the Mogul and his
Officers are Mahumetans, who endeavor by degrees to abolish this heathenish
and barbarous Custom, the Governor had a long time opposed her desires, under
pretense that the news of her Husbands death being uncertain, he could not
consent to the doing of an inhumane action, whereof there would afterward
happily be cause to repent. The Governors design was to see, whether time would
abate any thing of her passion, and the earnestness she was in to follow her
Husband into the other World: but seeing she was daily more and more instant to
do it, he permitted her to comply with the Laws of her own Religion.

She was not above twenty years of age, yet we saw her come up to the place of
her execution with so much confidence, and a cheerfulness so extraordinary to
those who go to present and inevitable death, that I was much inclined to
believe, that she had dulled her senses with a dose of Opium, which is as
commonly used in the Indies as in P^^sia.

In the front of the Procession marched the Country Music, consisting of
Haw-boys and and Timbrels. Then followed a great many Maids and Women, singing
and dancing before the Widow, who was dressed in her richest Clothing, and had
her Fingers, her Arms and Legs laden with Rings, Bracelets and Carkanets.
After her came a confused company of Men, Women and Children, and so concluded
the Procession. She made a stop at the Funeral Pile, which had been purposely
erected for the Ceremony. The Woman had washed her self in the River, that she
might meet her Husband in a state of Purity, in regard the body of the deceased
being not upon the place, she could not accompany it in its passage into the
other World. The Pile was of the wood of Apricock-trees, among which they had
put in some Sanders and Cinnamon. Having looked upon it with a certain
contempt, she took leave of her Kindred and Friends, and distributed among them
the Rings and Bracelets she had about her. I was something near her on
horseback, with the two English Merchants, and I think she perceived in my
countenance that I pitied her, whence it came that she cast me one of her
Bracelets, which I had the good hap to catch, and still keep, in remembrance of
so extraordinary an Action.

As soon as she was got upon the Pile, they set fire to it, which she
perceiving, poured on her head a Vessel of persum'd Oly, which the fire
immediately taking hold of, she was smothered in an instant, so as that she was
not perceived to make the least wry face at it. Some that were present cast
upon her several Cruses of Oil, which soon reduced the body to ashes, while the
rest of the Assembly filled the Air with their cries and shouts, such as must
needs have hindered those of the Widow to be heard, if she had the time to make
any in the fire, which had made a sudden dispatch of her as if it had been
Lighting. The Ashes were cast into the River.

I was told, How the custom come up.
that this barbarous Custom had been introduced among the Pagans of those parts
upon this account, that Polygamy occasioning much heart-burning among the
Women, arising either from the little satisfaction they could have from a man,
who is obliged to divide his affections, or the jealousy, which is unavoidable
among Rivals of that Sex; it happened that the Women procured their Husbands
death; and 'twas found, that in one year there had been four Men buried for one
Woman; so that to oblige them to be careful of their Husbands lives, it was
ordered, that such as were desirous to be accounted honest Women, should be
engaged to accompany their Husbands at their death, and to be burnt together
with their bodies. Certain it is, that the Persians, and other neighboring
Nations, have ever had so particular a veneration for the fire, that it is not
to be admired they should choose rather to reduce their deceased to ashes, then
bury them. I say, this Obligation of dying with their Husbands was imposed only
on those Women who stood upon the reputation of honesty, yet so as they were
engaged thereto only by a principle of honor, there being not any punishment
to be inflicted on such as refused to follow them in that dreadful journey,
other then that they were not admitted into the company of Persons of quality,
as being looked on as infamous Women. They who are not so scrupulous, and stand
not so much upon the punctilio of Honor, and prefer their lives before their
reputation, do ordinarily strike in among the public Dancers.

The Ceremony being over, I went to see one of the chiefest Merchants of the
City, named Myrsabeg, to whom I had Letters of recommendation from the Director
of the Engglish Commerce at Amadabat. He was not at home, but I found him on
the River side looking on some Workmen he had about a Ship which was then a
building. He received the Letters with much civility, and having caused me to
sit down by him, he enquired after my health, the success of my Travels, and
the Design I was engaged in. He was a Mahum^tan, and spoke to me at first by
the means of my Interpreter; but having learnt from him* that I understood the
Turkish Language, he would make no further use of the Brocker, and spoke to me
in that. I told him, that I had not met with any misfortune by the way, and
that I intended to be gone the next morning, as having no further business that
might detain me at Cambaya, and that I had not stayed there that day, had it
not been for the honor of seeing him, The Civility of an Indosthan Mahumetan.
and delivering him the Letters directed to him. He made answer, that it very
much troubled him, that the small stay I intended to make at Cambaya, permitted
him not to express what he would do for me, not only upon the account of the
Letters I had brought him from his Friend, but also upon that of my own merit.

While we were engaged in these Complements, came up to us the Kings
Lieutenant, who alighting, saluted me with much civility. Having made the same
questions to me as the Merchant had done before, and received the same answer I
had made the other, he told me, I should do him a great kindness, if I gave him
a visit at his own Lodgings, which I promised to do. Myrsabeg told me, that he
would come, and know of me, wherein he might serve me, and so I took leave of
them both, with a design to spend the remainder of the morning in walking about
the City. As I rose from dinner were brought in the Presents of Myrsabeg, which
were two Muttons, twelve Capons and Pullets, a basket of Eggs, a Pan^^er of
Cocos, a great bundle of Sugarcanes, and a very fair Vessel of Agat. I
requited his pains who conducted ^^ose that brought in the Present, with a
small acknowledgment, and told him, I would not fail coming to thank his
Master. I thought to have done it the next morning, but he prevented me, and
surpised me, giving order for my departure. He told me, it would have troubled
him much, I should have departed ere he had taken leave of me. I thanked him
for the honor he did me, and the Presents he had sent me, and entreated him to
accept of a Pocket-pistol, made at London, which was a very neat one, excusing
my self, that as to the condition I was then in, it was impossible for me to
acknowledge, as I would desire, the kindness he had shown me. He made answer,
that it was unhandsome to receive Presents from a Stranger, but that it would
be a greater incivility to refuse what I proffered him, that he was far from
deserving what I then made him, but being bestowed with so much kindness and
obligation, he could by no means forbear accepting of it.

I give a particular account of this answer, that the Reader may judge thereby,
whether those persons who are so well furnished with Complements of this
Nat^re, should be looked on as Barbarians: and no doubt but he will be much
more surpised, when I shall tell him, that there is more civility to be found
among the Indians, then there is among those who pretend to the sole possession
of it, but seldom accompany it with the sincerity which ever attends it in the
Indies, where such as are friends, are such without any shiness or reservation,
to those to whom they have promised friendship, as they are, on the other side,
irreconcilable enemies to such as have injured them.

I entreated Myrsabeg to sit down, and caused to be presented to him a Box of
Bettele Bettele.
according to the custom of the Country, where they never entertain any friend,
but there is of that Drug brought him, it being so commonly used all over the
Indies, as that Bread cannot be more in Europe; in so much, that it may be
truly said, that it is one of the most advantageous, and most considerable
things of any produced in the Indies. The Malabares call it Bettele, the
Inhabitants of Guzuratta, Pam, and those of Malaca, Sir. Avicann^, an Arabian
Physician, calls it Tambul. Its predominant qualities are hot and dry, and it
is a Plant, whose leaves are like those of the Orange-tree, save that they are
not quite so broad, and when they are in their full ripeness, they are of a
brownish red color. The stalk of the Plant is very weak, whence it comes that
it is supported by a stake, or set near some other tree, to which it clings and
spreads about the branches, as Ivy does* It is commonly joined to that Tree
which they call Areca, upon this account, that the Indians never use the leaves
of Bettele without the fruit of Areca. Areca.
This Plant is very delicate, and must be cultivated with much care and
tenderness, especially as to the watering of it; for it must not have either
too much heat, or too much moisture, in as much as it is observed, that it
grows not in hot places, such as Mozambique and Zoffala, nor yet in cold
Countries; as for instance, in the more Northerly Provinces of China. It does
not bring forth any fruit in Guzuratta, but in Malacca it does, in form like a
Lizards tail, and the Inhabitants eat of it, and think it not unpleasant* In
all other places it brings forth only leaves, which are sold in bundles by the
dozen, and they keep fresh a long time. The Indians eat of them at any time of
the day, as also in the night, both men and women, insomuch that no person of
any mean condition, but spends two or three dozen of leaves a day. But in
regard this Drug is of it self very bitter, they put into every leaf an
Areca-nut, the predominant qualities whereof are cold and dry. This is that
which Avicenna calls Faufel, and the Tree that bears it is not much less then
that of the Cocos, which is commonly called the Indian Palm Tree. The Husk
wherein the Fruit is enclosed, is smooth on the outside, but within rugged and
downy, as that of the Cocos, and the Fruit it self is of the bigness of a
Wall-nut, but the kernel is no bigger then a Nutmeg, which is not much unlike,
not only without, but also as to the veins, which are to be seen when it is
cut. They mingle with it some of that Lime which is made of the Shells of
Muscles, and so^chew them together to get out the juice of it, which they
swallow, and spit out what remains in their mouths. They use it at any time of
the day, but especially after meals, as conceiving it promot^s digestion and
prevents vomiting. Those Foreigners that have lived any time in the Indies,
accustom themselves thereto out of compliance, but above all, the Portuguez
Women at Goa, who are perpetually employed about this Exercise, chewing this
Drug, as Cows and such other Cattle chew the Cud. It does indeed discolor the
Teeth, which by the frequent use of it become of a red color; but that is one
of the Beauties of the Indian Women. No corner of a Street but it may be had
ready prepared, so that a man need not to be troubled about the quantity he is
to make use of. Great Lords have it brought after them in Boxes of Lacque or
Silver, and take of it as they go along the Streets, nay many times when they
are about business of consequence, and that in any place. They are also of a
belief, that this Drug fortifies the natural heat, and accordingly account it
one of their delicacies; upon which account it is, that they abstain from it
when they are in affliction, and particularly when the Moguls and Mahumetans
celebrate their Fasts.

Myrsabeg having taken a little of it, took leave of me, and I got into my
Coach, intending to call on the Kings Lieutenant at his own house, as I passed
by, in regard I was to go by his door: but I met him in the Street in his
Coach, there being carried before him three Banners of Taffata, Red and Green,
charged with flames of Silver; as soon as he perceived me, he turned his Coach,
and obliged me to go along with him to his House. His House was seated in the
most delightful quarter of the City, having two Gates to enter in at, one
whereof led into a spacious Court, the other into a fair Garden, about the
Walls where of there was one continued structure. He treated me with Bettele
and Palm-wine; but having time little enough to perform the journey I intended
that day, I staid not with him above half an hour. He sent one of his Menial
servants after me to give order to the Officer of the Custom-house, and the
Guards at the Gate, that I might pass without paying ought.

I came in the Evening to Serguntra, Comes to Serguntra.
but it was so late, that the Benjans, who burn no Candles for fear that Flies
and such other Insects might be destroyed thereby, would not open their Shops
to sell me any forage for my Beasts. It is much different from what is
commonly used in Europe; What they keep traveling Beasts with.
For the Country bringing forth no Oats, and very little Grass, they accustom
their Beasts to another kind of sustenance, and keep them with a certain Paste,
which they make up of Sugar and Meal, into which they sometimes put a little
Butter. We were going to break open one of their Shops, but ere we had done any
harm, one of the Benjans brought us some forage.

The next day before noon, we traveled five Leagues to a great Village, where
we baited our Beasts, giving to each of the Oxen a pound and a half, and to the
Horses two pounds of Sugar, Tzietbagh Garden.
mixed with Meal. Thence we got to the Garden of Tzietbagh, where we baited
again.

This Garden, which, no doubt, is the most delightful of any in the Indies, is
also the most considerable of any in the whole Country, not only in regard of
the Victory which the Mogul gained in that place, over the last King of
Guzuratta, as we have mentioned before, and which gave it the name of
Tzietbagh, that is to say, the Garden of Victory; but also in respect of its
magnificent Structures, and the noble Fruits which grow there in great
abundance. It is seated in one of the most pleasant places in the world, upon
the side of a great Pool, having on the side toward the water several
Pavillions* and on that toward Amadabat, a very high Wall. The sumptuousness
of the buildings speaks the great Spirit of the Prince that founded it, as does
also the Caravansera adjoining thereto.

There are in the Garden many Allies of Fruit Trees; as Orange and Citro-trees
of all sorts, Pomegranate-trees, Date-trees, Almond-trees, Mulberry-trees, the
Trees which bear Tamarinds, Mangas, and Cocos, besides many other not known to
us; and there was such abundan^e of them, and they were planted so close, that
we could walk about the Garden in the sha^e, which was a great refreshing to
us: The branches of all these Trees were infinitely stored with Apes, which
added not a little to ^he divertisment and satisfaction of our walk. We staid
no longer in it then while our Horses were baiting, in regard we were resolved
to get that day to Amadabat, whither we came at night. I was that day on
horseback, and by way of sport, would needs frighten the Apes, which played a
thousand tricks about us, in so much that we began to think them troublesome. I
shot two of them with my Pistol, whereat the rest were so incensed, that they
seemed to conspire together, as if they had a design to set upon us. Their
cries and distorted looks discovered how much they were inclined to do us some
mischief, in so much that about twenty of the biggest of them followed us for
above half a League; but perceiving us ready to turn toward them, they got
among the Trees, and at last gave over their pursuit of us.

Coming to Amadabath, I met with a Caffila, or Caravan, of about 200.
Merchants, English and Benjans, which was going to Agra, the chief City of all
the Mogul's country. The English President had ordered him, Goes for Agra.
who had the conduct of the Caravan, to take me along with him, and the
Director of the Commerce at Amadabath, added thereto his particular
recommendations; so that those Merchants received me into their company, and I
went along with them thence on the 28. of October.

The weather and the way were very fair, but I met with so few Villages, that
the first I have any account to give of, was that of Paingat; and the sixth day
after our departure from Amadabath, we came to the City of Heribath, which is
fifty Leagues distant from it. This City is not very big, Heribath.
and has neither Gates nor Walls, as having been razed by Temurleng, or
Tamberlane, as had been also the Castle, whereof the ruins are yet to be seen
upon a high Mountain, Damtiges.
not far from the City. Between this City and that of Damtiges, which is
distant from that of Heribath other fifty Leagues, we met a Caffila of Benjan
Merchants, who told us, they had been set upon by 200. High-way-men, of the
Rasboutes, who had forced them to ransom themselves at a hundred Ropias, and
that we should do well to stand upon our guard, inasmuch as the day before they
had seen a hundred more of them, who having understood from them what they had
paid their Camrades, had siad no more to them, and only took away one of their
Oxen; but that they were gone to join with the former, and that they would not
fail to set upon us. We made our advantage of this Intelligence, and caused our
Wagons to be fastened together, and the Soldiers that guarded them were so
disposed, as that they might relieve one another, without the least fear of any
disorder. Near a certain Village we met with fifty of those rascally
Companions, but they thought us so well armed, and so resolved to stand upon
our advantage to defend our selves, that they passed by without saying ought to
us, yet discovering withal by their march, that they were come only to take a
view of us. We understood afterward, how that returning by the same Village,
they had said, that if we had been at a little further distance from it, they
would have disputed the way with us.

Fifty Leagues thence, we came near a Village called Syedck, which had in it a
very strong Castle. And whereas most of our Beasts were extremely wearied, by
reason of the great days journeys we had made, we ordered that some of the
Oxen and Wagons should go before. But they were hardly got into a little
bottom that was in the way, not above six hundred paces from us, ere they were
set upon by ten Rasboutes, who had lain in ambush behind a little Hill and at
the first onset wounded two Benjans, and were driving away the Wagons, which
they had before turned out of the Road, when we discovered them aftar off, and
sent to them some of our Soldiers, who forced the Robbers to forsake what they
had taken. Comes to Agra.
After this we met with no misfortune, and came safely to Agra, where I took up
my quarters among the English, whose Civilities to me here were consonant to
what I had received from them in other places.

The Mogul, or great King of Indosthan, does often change the place of his
abode, insomuch that there is no City in all his Kingdom, of any considerable
account, where he has not his Palaces; Agra described.
but he delights not so much in any as Agra, which, to do it right, is indeed
the noblest City in all his Dominions. It lies 28. degrees on this side the
Line, in the Province of Indosthan, upon the River Gemini, which falls into the
Ganges, above the Kingdom of Bengala. It is at least twice as big as Ispahan,
and it is as much as a Man can do to ride about it on horseback in a day. It
is fortified with a good Wall, of a kind of red Freestone, and a Ditch, which
is above thirty fathom broad. Its Streets are fair and spacious, and there are
some of them vaulted, which are above a quarter of a League in length, where
the Merchants and Tradesmen have their Shops, distinguished by their Trades and
the Merchandises which are there sold; every Trade, and every Merchant having a
particular Street and Quarter assigned him. It has its Merket-places.
There are in it fifteen Meidans and Basars, whereof the most spacious is that
which is before the Castle, where may be seen sixty great Guns of all sizes,
but not kept in any order so as to be made use of. There is also in that place
a high Pole, as at the Meidan of Ispahan, where the Court Lords, and sometimes
the Mogul himself divert themselves with shooting at the Parrot fastened at the
top of it. There are in the City fourscore Caravanseras, 80. Caravanseras.
for the accommodation and convenience of Foreign Merchants, most of them
three Stories high, with very noble Lodgings, Storehouses, Vaults and Stables
belonging to them, together with Galleries and private Passages for the
correspondence and communication of the Chambers. Every one of them has a
certain person, whose charge it is to lock them up, and to take care that the
Merchandises be safely kept. He does also supply the place of a Sutler, and
sels all sorts of Provision, Forage, and Wood, to those that lodge in them.

And whereas the Mogul, and most of the greatest Lords about his Court, profess
the Mabumetan Religion, Mosquey.
there is also in Agra a very great number of Metschid, or Mosqueys, and among
the rest seventy great ones, of which the six principal they call
Metschid-adine, because that it is in them they do their Devotions of
Holy Days.

In one of these last named, is to be seen the Sepulcher of one of their
Saints, called Seander, and they say he is of the Posterity of Aaly. The
Sepulcher of a Giant.
In another of them may be seen the Sepulcher of another Saint, who being 30.
foot in length, and 16. in breadth, must needs have been one of the mightiest
Giants that ever were talked of. His Tomb was covered all over with little
Flags, and we were told he had been one of their Heroes, who had sometime done
wonders in the wars. To this place there are great Pilgrimages made, insomuch
that the Devotions of the Pilgrims do, by the Offerings they make, very much
augment the wealth of that Mosquey, the Revenue whereof is very great without
those advantages. There are daily maintained in it a great number of poor
people, so that it may be truly said, that the Devotions done there are not
inferior to those done at the Sepulcher of Schich Sefi at Ardebil. Sanctuaries
These Metzids, and the Courts which depend on them, serve also for so many
Sanctuaries to persons guilty of any capital Crimes, as also to such as fear
imprisonment for their Debt. These are the Allacapi of the Persians, and are
called by the Indians, Allader, and the privileges of them in the Indies, are
equal to those the Allacapi are endued with in Persia, insomuch that the Mogul
himself, though his power be absolute, cannot force a man out of these
Sanctuaries, be his crime of ever so heinous a nature, by reason of the
Veneration which these people have for their Saints.

There are numbered in the City of Agra above eight hundred Baths, 800. Baths.
or Hot-houses, from which there comes in yearly to the Mogul a very
considerable sum of money, occasioned hence, that this kind of Purification
making one of the principal parts of their Religion, there passes not a day,
but that these places are frequented by an infinite number of persons.

The great Lords about the Court, who are called Rasgi, or Rajas, have their
Houses and Palaces in the City, besides their Country-houses, all magnificent,
both as to structure and household stuff. The King has several Gardens and
Houses without the City, whither he often retires himself with his
Women-dancers, who dance before him stark naked. But there is not any thing
gives a greater demonstration of the greatness of this Monarch, then his
Palace, which stands upon the River Gemini, and is near four Leagues about. It
is excellently well fortified, The Mogul's Palace described.
according to the fortification of that Country, with a Wall of Freestone, and
a great Ditch, having at every Gate a Drawbridge, the Avenues whereof are also
very well fortified, especially at the North-gate. The Gate which leads to the
Basar is on the West Side, and is called Cistery. Under this Gate is the Diwan,
or the place of public Judicature; and there is adjoining to it a spacious
Hall, where the principal Vizier dispatches and seals all Orders for the
ordinary and extraordinary Levies of men, whereof the Originals are kept at the
said place. As soon as a man is come within this Gate, he finds himself in a
spacious Street, having Shops on both sides, which leads directly to the
Mogul's Palace, which is called Derbar. The Gate by which a man enters into it
is called Achobarke Derwage, that is to say, King Achobar's Gate, and there is
such a respect observed at it, as that, the Kings Sons only excepted, all other
Lords, what quality soever they are of, are obliged to alight from their
Horses, and to go in a foot. It is in this quarter that the Women are lodged,
who divert the King and his Family with their singing and dancing. The Mogul
worships the Sun.
The fourth Gate, which is called Dersame, leads to the River, and thither it
is that the Mogul comes every morning to worship the Sun at his rising. It is
on that side also, that the Grandees of the Kingdom, who are about the Court,
come every day to do their submissions to the King, going up to a little
eminent place, whence the King may take the more particular notice of them. The
Hadys, or Commanders of Horse, do also give their attendance there, but they
stand at a greater distance, and make not their approaches, but upon the Kings
express Order, who comes also to this place to see the fighting of the Lions,
Elephants, Bulls and other wild Beasts, it being his ordinary divertisement
every day, Friday only excepted, which he spends in his Devotions. Besides all
this, there is yet another Gate, which leads into the Guard-Hall, which they
call Attesanna, where the Officers keep a Guard, and relieve one the other by
weeks. There is a passage through this Hall into a paved Court, at the further
end whereof there is, under a Portal, a row of silver Pillars, where there
stands a particular Guard, which keeps the people from getting within it, and
permits only the Great Lords that belong to the Court to enter there.

There it was I met with the Persian Servant who run away from me at Suratta,
and who proffered me to do me any service lay in his power, during my abode at
Agra; nay, would have brought me within the Pillars before mentioned, but the
Guards would not permit it. The Mogul's Throne.
A man must go within these Pillars to get to the Mogul's Chamber, where may be
seen, within another row of lesser Pillars, all of Gold, the Throne of that
great Prince, made of massy Gold, and enriched with Diamonds, Pearls, and
other precious Stones. Above the Throne there is a Gallery, where the King
shows himself every day, and receives their Complaints who have any violence or
injury done them. Those who have any Complaints to make, ring one of the little
Bells which are hung up above those Pillars; but unless a man have excellent
good Evidence to prove what he alleges, it will be dangerous to offer at it,
for he will hazard his own life. The Kings Sons only, who give him Air with a
kind of Fan, and keep off the Flies, and the Grand Vizier, are permitted to
come within those Pillars; The Seraglio.
and there is no person to go into any of the inner Lodgings, but the Godia, or
Eunuchs, who wait on the Ladies of the Seraglio, and are in number about a
thousand or twelve hundred.

There is also within this Castle another Appartment, which is known by a great
Tower, the covering whereof is of Gold, which shows what excessive wealth is
enclosed within it, in eight spacious Vaults, which are full of Gold, Silver
and precious Stones whereof the value is in a manner inestimable.

I was credibly informed, The Mogul's Treasurer.
that the Mogul, who lived in my time, had a Treasure, which amounted to above
fifteen hundred Millions of Crowns; and I have an Inventory of the Treasure
which was found at the death of Schach Achobar, great Grandfather of Schach
Choram, as well in coined Gold and Silver, as in Lingots and Bars, Plate,
precious Stones, Brocadoes and other Stuffes, Purcelane Books, Ammunition,
Arms, etc. so faithfully drawn up, that for the Readers further satisfaction,
I shall not think it amiss to insert it here.

This King Achobar had ordered the Coynage of a certain sort of Money of 25.
50. and a hundred Toles, A sort of money of eight thousand Crowns the piece.
which amounted to two thousand twelve and a half, four thousand twenty five,
and eight thousand and fifty Crowns the piece, which was coined accordingly, to
the sum of six Millions, nine hundred and seventy thousand Massas, which make
ninety seven Millions, five hundred and eighty Ropias, or, forty eight
Millions, seven hundred and ninety thousand Crowns.

One hundred Millions of Ropias, Fifty Millions in ready money.
or fifty Millions of Crowns, in a kind of Money, which from the said Kings
name, is called Achobar Ropias.

Two hundred and thirty Millions in another kind of money, A Million of Livers
in small money.
which they call Peyses, thirty whereof make a Ropia, and sixty a Crown: so
that what was found in Peyses amounted to seven hundred sixty six thousand, six
hundred sixty six Ropias, and twenty Pence, which amount to three hundred
eighty three thousand, three hundred thirty three Crowns, and ten Pence.

In Diamonds, Thirty Millions in precious Stones.
Rubies, Emeralds, Saphires, Pearls, and other precious Stones, to the value of
sixty Millions, twenty thousand and one and twenty Ropias, or, thirty Millions,
two hundred and sixty thousand, and twenty six Crowns.

In Figures and Status (all of Gold) of Elephants, Nine Millions in Statues,
etc.
Camels, Horses, and other Creatures, to the value of nineteen Millions, six
thousand seven hundred eighty five Ropias, or nine Millions, five hundred and
three thousand, three hundred seventy Crowns and a half.

In Household Stuff, Six millions in Plate*
and gold Plate, as Dishes, drinking Cups, Basins, Ewers, etc. to the value of
eleven Millions, seven hundred thirty three thousand, seven hundred and ninety
Ropias, and a third part of a Ropia, which amounts to five Millions, eight
hundred sixty six thousand, eight hundred ninety five Crowns and five Pence.

In Household Stuff, 25000. Crowns in Copper Vessels.
consisting of Brass and Copper, fifty one thousand, two hundred twenty five
Ropias, or twenty five thousand, six hundred twelve Crowns and a half.

In Purcelane, 1200000. Crowns in Purcelane.
and Vessels of sealed Earth, and others, to the value of two Millions, five
hundred and seven thousand, seven hundred forty seven Ropias, or, one Million,
two hundred fifty three thousand, eight hundred seventy three Crowns and a half.

In Brocadoes, Neor eight Millions in Stuffes.
and other Stuffes of Gold and Silver, as also in those of Silk and Cottons,
and such as come from Persia, Turkey and Europe, and those made in Guzuratta,
fifteen Millions, five hundred and nine thousand, nine hundred seventy nine
Ropias, which amount to seven Millions, seven hundred fifty four thousand, nine
hundred eighty nine Crowns and a half.

In Woollen-clothes that came from Europe, In woollen Clothes 50000. Crowns.
Persia and Tartary, five hundred and three thousand, two hundred fifty two
Ropias, or two hundred fifty one thousand, six hundred twenty six Crowns.

In Tents, 5000000. in Tents, etc.
Hangings, Tapistry, and other Household Stuff of that kind, as well for the
City as the Country, nine Millions, nine hundred twenty five thousand, five
hundred forty five Ropias, which amount to four Millions, nine hundred sixty
two thousand, seven hundred seventy two Crowns and a half.

Four and twenty thousand Manuscripts, Above 3000000. in Books.
so richly bound, that they were valued at six Millions, four hundred sixty
three thousand, seven hundred thirty one Ropias; that is, three Millions, two
hundred thirty one thousand, eight hundred sixty five Crowns and a half.

In Artillery, Powder, Bullets, and other Ammunition, to the value of eight
Millions, five hundred seventy five thousand, Four Millions in Artillery.
nine hundred seventy one Ropias, that is, four Millions, two hundred eighty
seven thousand, nine hundred eighty five Crowns and a half.

In defensive and offensive Arms, Near four millions of Crowns in Arms.
as Swords, Bucklers, Pikes, Bows, Arrows, etc. to the value of seven Millions,
five hundred fifty five thousand, five hundred twenty five Ropias, which amount
to three Millions, seven hundred seventy seven thousand, seven hundred fifty
two Crowns and a half.

In Saddles, In Saddles and Harness 1200000. Crowns.
Bridles and Stirrups, and other Harness belonging to Horses, of Gold and
Silver, to the value of two Millions, five hundred twenty five thousand, six
hundred forty eight Ropias, or one Millions two hundred sixty two thousand,
eight hundred twenty four Crowns.

In Covering-clothes for Horses and Elephants, In Coverings for Horses,
2500000. Crowns. Amount in all to 174113793 Crowns.
embroidered with Gold, Silver and Pearls, five Millions of Ropias, which
amount to two Millions, and five hundred thousand Crowns.

All these sums cast up together, come to three hundred forty eight Millions,
two hundred twenty six thousand, three hundred eighty six Ropias; that is, one
hundred seventy four Millions, a hundred and thirteen thousand, seven hundred
ninety three Crowns.

But this came not any thing near the Treasure which Scach Choram was possessed
of, at the time of my Travels in those Parts. This Wealth is more and more
augmented every day, not so much out of the ordinary Revenue coming in from the
great Kingdoms he has, (in regard that as his ordinary Expense abates not any
thing of his Treasure; so is it seldom seen that he increases it, by ought
remaining at the years end of his Revenue) as by the Presents which are made
him, and the Escheats falling to him at the death of great Lords and
Favorites, who make the Mogul Heir to what they had gotten by his Favor,
insomuch that the Children have no hope to enjoy ought of their Fathers
Estates, either Real or Personal. For the Mogul's Authority is such, and his
Power so Absolute, that the Estates of all his Subjects are at his disposal;
and thence it comes, that only his will decides all differences arising among
them, they having no other Law, then implicitly to submit to what he ordians.
He has the absolute disposal of their Lives and Fortunes, and thence it is,
that upon his mere Order and Command, the greatest Lords are dragged to
Execution, and their Estates, Charges, and Governments taken away from them.

There is no hereditary Dignity in all his Country. No hereditary charge or
dignity in the Mogul's Country.
That of Rasgi, or Raja, which he bestows rather upon the account of Merit then
Birth, is Personal, as that of Chan in Persia, and is not derived to Posterity,
but by the recommendation of Virtue. Not that it is to be inferred hence, that
the Mogul does exclude from Charges the Children of such as have done him good
service; but he gives them lesser charges, by which they may advance themselves
to the chiefest in the Kingdom, if either an extraordinary Virtue, or the
Princes Favor call them thereto.

The chiefest Offices of the Kingdom are those of principal Visir, The chief
Officers.
which is somewhat like that of Chancellourship elsewhere; Chief of the
Eunuchs, who is as it were Lord High Steward; the Treasurer, the principal
Secretary of State; the General of the Elephants, and the Overseer of the
Household Stuff, Tents and precious Stones. These are of the Princes Privy
Council, whereto is sometimes also called the Couteval, who is as it were the
chief Judge, and commands the Mogul's Guard. The Council sits in the night,
from seven of the clock till nine, in a Hall, which they call Gasalean. No day
almost passes, but the Mogul is to be seen, in the morning, at Sunrising, at
which time the Lords of the Court salute him with their Patschach Salammet; as
also about Noon, when he comes to see the Beasts fight, and in the Evening,
when he comes to a certain Window to behold the Sunsetting; with whom he
retires himself with the noise of a great number of Drums and Timbrels, and the
Acclamations of the people, who wish him a long and happy life.

It is to be found among the Registers of the Kingdom, The Mogul's Revenue.
that only the Provinces of Candahar, Cabul, Guzuratta, Cassimer, Barampour,
Dely, Bengala, Agra, Orixa, and some others, bring in of yearly Revenue, one
hundred seventy four Millions, and five hundred thousand Ropias, which amount
to fourscore and seven Millions, and two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns; and
that the Province of Guzuratta alone is able to raise fourscore and ten
thousand Horse; Cambaya twelve thousand; Kabul as many; Orixa fourscore
thousand; and Dely one hundred and fifty thousand; besides those which may be
raised out of the other Provinces, whereof I could get no certain Account. All
this Militia is divided into several Regiments, whereof some are of fifteen or
twelve thousand Horse, which are for the Kings Sons, and the principal Persons
of the Kingdom, who have also the Command of these Bodies, which consist of but
two, three, or four thousand Horse.

The Mogul, Scach Choram, when he went in Person, in the year 1630. against
Chan Chaan, had an Army of one hundred forty four thousand and five hundred
Horse, besides Elephants, Camels, Mules, and Horses for the Train. That Army
was divided into four Brigades, which yet kept all together, that only excepted
which was about the Kings Person at Barampour. The first was commanded by
Schaaft-Chan, the Son of Assaph-Chan, and consisted of several Regiments, to
wit, that of Schaaft-Chan, which was of five thousand Horse.

5000 That of his Father consisting also of five thousand Horse, all Rasboutes:
5000 Sadoch Chan. 3000 Myrsa Yedt Madaffer. 3000 Giasar Chan. 2500 Godia Sabes,
2000 Seid Iaffer. 2100 Iaster Chan. 1000 Mahmud Chan. 1000 Alawerdi Chan. 2000
Safdel-Chan Badary. 700 Myrsa-Scer-Seid. 500 Baaker-Chan. 500 Whereto were
added besides, four thousand six hundred Mansebdars, in several loose
Companies. 4600
The second Body, under the Command of Eradet-Chan, consisted of the following
Regiments.

That of Eradet-Chan, of 4000 Rau-Donda. 1000 Dorcadas. 1200 Kerous. 1200 Ram
Tscheud Harran. 1200 Mustapha-Chan. 1000 Iakout-Chan. 2000 Killously. 3000 Sidi
Fakir. 1000 Ecka Berkendas. 1000 Iogi-Rasgi, the Son of Lala Berting. 7000
Teluk-Tschaud. 400 Iakoet-Beg. 400 Three other Lords commanded each two hundred
Horse. 600 Aganour, Chabonecan, Babouchan, Seid-Camel, Sidiali, and
Sadaed-Chan, each five hundred Horse. 3000 So that this Body consisted of 28000
The third Body, under the Command of Raja Gedsing, consisted of the following
Regiments,

Raja-Gedsing. 3000 Raja-Bideldas. 3000 Oderam. 3000 Raja-Biemsor. 2000
Madosing, Son of Ram Rattung. 1000 Raja-Ros-Assou 1000 Badouria Raja-Bhozo.
1000 Raja-Kristensing. 1000 Raja Sour. 1000 Raja-T'Chettersing. 500 Wauroup.
500 Raja-Odasing. 5000 And under several other Rajas. 4500
That Brigade, which was about the Kings Person at Barampour, and to be as it
were a Reserve, consisted of one and forty thousand Horse; to wit,

Haddis and Be^ken-Dasse. 15000 Asaph-Chan. 5000 Rauratti. 4000 Wasir-Chan.
3000 Mabot-Chan. 3000 Godia Abdul Hessen. 3000 Aftel-Chan. 2000 Serdar-Chan.
2005 Raja Iessing. 2000 Feddey-Chan. 1000 Ieffer. 1000 Mockly-Chan. 1000
Serif-Chan. 1000 Seid Allem. 1000 Amiral. 1000 Raja Ramdas. 1000 Tork
Taes-Chan. 1000 Mier Iemla. 1000 Myrsa Abdulac. 500 Mahmud-Chan. 500 Myrsa
Maant Cher. 500 Ghawaes-Chan. 1000 Moried-Chan. 1000 And under the Command of
several other Lords, of their quality, whom they call Ommeraudes. 10000 The
total of the Horse 62500
The offensive Arms of the Horse are, The Arms of the Cavalry
the Bow, the Quiver, having in it forty or fifty Arrows, the Javeline, of a
kind of long-headed-Pike, which they dart with great exactness, the Cymitar on
one side, and the Poniard on the other: and the defensive is the Buckler, which
they have always hanging about their necks.

They have no Firearms with Wheels, nor yet Firelocks, but their Infantry are
expert enough at the Musket. Those among the Foot, who have no Muskets, have
besides their Bows and Arrows, a Pike ten or twelve foot long, with which they
begin the fight, by darting it at the Enemy; instead of using it in opposition
to the Horse, as is done in Europe. Some among them have Coats of Mail about
them, which come down to their knees: but there are very few make use of
Head-pieces, in regard they would be very troublesome, by reason of the
excessive heats in those parts. Observe no order in fighting.
They know nothing of the distinction of Vanguard, main Battle, and
Rear-guard, and understand neither Front nor File, nor make any Battalion, but
fight confusedly without any Order.

Their greatest strength consists in the Elephants, which carry on their backs
certain Towers of Wood, wherein there are three or four Harquebuses hanging by
hooks, and as many Men to order that Artillery. The Elephants serve them for a
Trench, to oppose the first attempt of the Enemy, but it often comes to pass,
that the Artificial Fires, which are made use of to frighten these Creatures,
put them into such a disorder, that they do much more mischief among those who
brought them to the Field, then they do among the Enemies. They have abundance
of Artillery, Their Artillery.
and some considerable great Pieces, and such as whereof it may be said, the
invention of them is as ancient as that of ours. They also make Gunpowder, but
it is not fully so good as what is made in Europe. Their Timbrels and Trumpets
are of Copper, and the noise they make, in order to some Military Action, is
not undelightful. Their Armies do not march above five Cos, or Leagues,
according to the measure of the Country, in a day; and when they encamp, they
take up so great a quantity of ground, that they exceed the compass of our
greatest Cities.

In this they observe an admirable Order, The order of their Armies.
inasmuch as there is no Officer nor Soldier, but knows where he is to take up
his Quarters; nor can there be any City more regularly divided into Streets,
Markets and other public places, for the greater communication and convenience
of the Quarters, and for the distribution of Provisions.

The Mogul, and the General of the Army, have their Tents pitched at a certain
distance from those of the rest, nay, as far as a Musket will carry, from those
of their own Guards.

The Mogul's ordinary Guard consists of twelve thousand men, The Mogul's Guard.
besides the six hundred, who are the particular Guard of the body, the Company
whereof consists of so many young men, whom he buys, and causes to be
exercised in Arms, that they may be perpetually about his Person.

The Rasgi, Rajas, The dignity of the Rajas.
or Radias, are never advanced to that Dignity, but upon the score of Merit.
The Mogul bestows it also on the Chancellor, or principal Visir, who is the
President of his Privy Council, and as it were Viceroy of all his Dominions,
inasmuch as he it is who sends Orders into all the Provinces of the Kingdom;
and it is to him that all are to make their Addresses in all Affairs of
importance. The King permits him not to receive any Presents; yet does he not
forbear taking them underhand, and his Secretaries and other Officers under him
take them so openly, that there is no, ever so secret, transaction, but a man
may have the particulars thereof, if he has money to bestow among those who
have the transcription and dispatch of them. These Rasgi have so great a
Veneration for their King, that it were impossible for a man to approach things
most sacred with more submission, then they express when they speak to him. The
discourses they entertain him with are intermingled and interrupted with
continual Reverences; and when they take their leave of him, they bow down
their heads, put their hands over their eyes, thence afterward upon their
breasts, and at last touch the ground therewith, to show they are but dust and
athes in comparison of him, wishing him all prosperity, and coming out of his
presence backwards.

When the Mogul marches in Person in the head of his Army, The Mogul^ ordinary
retinue.
or when he comes out of the City to go a hunting, or to take the Air, he is
attended by above ten thousand men. In the head of this little Army, there
march above a hundred Elephants, with their covering Clothes of Scarlet,
Velvet, or Brocadoe. Every Elephant carries two Men, one whereof governs and
guides the Creature, by touching his forehead with an Iron-hook, the other
carries a large Banner of Silk, embroidered with Gold and Silver; excepting
only the seven or eight foremost, which carry each of them one that plays on
the Timbrel. The King himself is mounted on an excellent Persian Horse, or goes
in a Coach, drawn by two white Oxen, the Horns whereof, which are very large,
are adorned with Gold; or some times he is carried by several men in a
Palanquin, or kind of Sedan. The Rasgi and the Officers of the Court march
after him, and have coming behind them five or six hundred Elephants, He
changes the place of his abode according to the seasons.
Camels or Wagons loaded with baggage. For the most part he takes up his
Quarters in the Fields, where he causes his Tents to be pitched; which is done
upon this account, that as on the one side there are but few Cities, where he
might find necessary accommodations for the quarters and entertainment of the
Court, so on the other, he takes a particular pleasure in encamping, in the
Summer time, in cool places; in the Winter, in hot places; insomuch that he is
in some sort the Master of the Seasons, as well as of all the other things
which are subject to him. He commonly leaves Agra toward the end of April, and
retires near Labor, or some other more Northerly Province, where he passes over
the months of May, June, July and August; and then he returns again to the
place of his ordinary residence.

The City of Agra is of such extent and so populous, The City of Agra described.
that were there a necessity, there might be raised out of it two hundred
thousand men able to bear Arms. There is no Nation in all the East, but has
some Commerce or other at this place; but most of the Inhabitants are
Mahumetans, and all the Merchandises that are imported into it, or exported out
of it, pay ten in the hundred.

There are above forty small Cities, and above three thousand five hundred
Villages that depend on the jurisdiction of Agra, which extends it self above
sixscore Leagues about. The Country is delightful and very fertile, producing
abundance of Indico, Cotton, Saltpeter and other things, wherewith the
Inhabitants drive a vast Trade. There are two Festivals which are celebrated in
this place, with extraordinary Ceremonies; one whereof is that of the first day
of the year, which, with the Persians, they call Naurus, Nauros, or Norose,
which signifies nine days, though now it last eighteen at least, and it falls
at the moment that the Sun enters Aries.

In order to the celebration of this Festival, How the Mogul celebrates the
first day of the year.
before the Derbar, or Kings Palace, there is erected a Theater, fourteen foot
high, fifty six in length, and forty in breadth; having all about it a row of
Pillars after the manner of a Balcony, covered with rich Tapistry. Near this
Theater there is erected another building of painted wood, and embellished with
Mother of Pearl, into which go some of the principal Lords about the Court, who
nevertheless have their Tents pitched in the first Court of the Palace, filled
with all they have that is rich and magnificent, whereof they make the greatest
Ostentation they can that day: The Predecessors of this Prince, who now reigns,
were wont to go into all these Tents, and to take thence any thing they liked;
but now the Ceremony is otherwise. For the King accompanied by the seven
Ministers of State, go up into the Theater, where he sits upon Velvet Cushions,
enbroidered with Gold and Pearls, and stays for the Presents which are to be
made to him. The Queen is in a certain Gallery, whence she sees all the
Ceremony, yet is not seen her self. Departing thence, he sits upon his Ordinary
Throne, where he receives the Presents of the people, which he continues to do
for eighteen days together. Toward the end of the Festival, the King in his
turn makes his Presents to the Lords, which consists in Charges, Employments,
and new Honors, which he distributes among those that have given him most.

The Mogul's birthday is celebrated with the Ceremonies following. The
Festival of the Mogul's birthday.
He begins the day with all manner of divertisements; which over, he goes to
the Palace of the Queen his Mother, if she be living, and causes many Presents
to be made her by the Grandees of his Kingdom. After dinner he puts on the
richest clothes he has, and covers himself all over with Gold and precious
Stones, and being thus rather laden then adorned with inestimable wealth, he
goes into a Tent, where he is expected by the Lords of the Court, in which
finding a pair of Scales, he weighs himself. These Scales are of massy Gold, as
are also the Chains by which they hang, and are all beset with precious Stones.
He puts himself into one of the Scales, and into the other there are put
several bags of Silver, one bag of Gold, some precious Stones, some pieces of
Silk-stuffs, Linen cloth, Pepper, Cloves, Nutmeg and Cinnamon, Wheat, Pulse
and Herbs, and there is an exact account kept of the difference of weight there
may be between one year and another. The King gives away with his own hands,
all the money among the poor, and the rest are bestowed on the Benjans. That
done, the King seats himself in his Throne, and causes to be cast among the
Grandees, Nuts, Pistachoes, Almonds, and several other Fruits of Gold, but so
finely wrought, that a thousand of them weighed not thirty Crowns. This some
would boggle much to admit for a Truth; yet certain it is that it has been
seen, that the value of ten Crowns bestowed in these trifles, filled a great
Basin of them; so that all the liberality of this powerful Monarch could not
amount to a hundred Crowns. The Festival is concluded with a great Feast, at
which the Mogul entertains the Lords of his Court, with whom he passes away the
night in drinking.

They celebrate also another Festival, Another Mahumetan Feast.
which they begin ten days after the new Moon of the month of July, much
after the same manner as the Persians celebrate their Aschur. The Indians
observe this Festival in honor of two Brethren, named Ianze, and Iawze,
servants to Haly, who being gone in Pilgrimage to a particular place of
Devotion, upon the Coast of Coromandel, the Bramans, and other Pagans of those
parts set upon them, and forced them to retreat into a Castle, where they
besieged them: These holy Persons maintained the Siege a long time; but being
resolved not to drink of the Water which the Pagans had profaned by casting a
Lizard into it, a Creature for which the Mahumetans have an aversion, because
of its uncleanness, they took a resolution to make a sally upon the besiegers,
and killed many of them, but at last they were overcome by the great number of
their enemies, who left them dead upon the place. There are carried about the
City, Coffins covered with Bows and Arrows, Turbants, Cymitars, and Garments of
Silk, which the people accompany with sobbings and lamentations, in
commemoration of the death of those holy Persons. Some among them dance at the
Ceremony, others strike their Swords one against another; nay, there are those
who cut and slash themselves, so as that the blood comes out in several places,
wherewith they rub their clothes, and by that means represent a very strange
procession. Toward night they set up several Figures of men, made of Straw, to
personate the Murderers of those Saints; and having shot a great many Arrows
at them, they set them on fire, and reduce them to ashes. And this they do with
so much fury and animosity, that should there be any of the Pagans in the
Streets at that time, they would run the hazard of their lives; whence it
comes, that during these Ceremonies, they stir not out of their houses.

The Mahumetans of those parts celebrate also another Feast in the month of
June, in memory of the sacrifice of Abraham, at which they kill He-Goats, which
they eat at the Entertainments they make among themselves that day.

Certain it is, The Mogul comes from Tamerlan.
that the Mogul stands very much upon his descent, in a direct and masculine I
ne, from Temirlanque, that is to say, Temir, the lame, who is commonly called
Tamerlan, who was of the Family of Chinguis-Chan, King of Tartary. Scach
Choram, who was living at my being in those parts, was a younger Son of Scach
Iahan's, and had usurped the Crown from Prince Polagi, his Nephew, whom we
found at Caswin at our coming into Persia. He might be then about sixty years
of Age, and had three Sons, whereof the Elder was about 25. years of age; but
he had not the affection he should have had for him, since it was his intention
to have the youngest declared Heir of the Crown of Indosthan, and to leave the
two elder Brethren the command of certain Provinces. The initials of his
Government had been cruel and bloody, The initials of his Government cruel.
but he was very much reclaimed from those courses, though he yet ever and anon
betrayed his inclinations to severity, in the torments he put those persons to
who were guilty of High Treason, whom he caused to be flead alive, or torn in
pieces by wild Beasts. In other things he was of an humor good enough, being a
great lover of Entertainments, Music and Dancing, especially that of common
Prostitutes, who often danced stark naked in his presence, and diverted him by
all manner of extravagant postures.

The English told me a Story, which I think so pleasant, that I shall not think
it much to digress so far as to insert it here. A pleasant story of the Mogul.
This King had a particular affection for a certain Rasgi, who upon the account
of his courage, and the pleasantness of his coversation, was grown so
considerable about the Court, that there hardly passed a day, but the King sent
for him. One day the King asking some that were about him, why that Lord was
not come to the Court; and answer being made him, that he had taken Physic, he
sent to him a company of those Women-dancers, and commanded them to strip
themselves stark naked, and to ease their Natures before him. The Rasgi having
notice brought him of their arrival, ordered them to be conducted to his
Chamber, imagining the Mogul had sent them purposely to give him some
divertisement; but understanding what they were ordered to do, and perceiving
thereby that the King was in a good humor, and desirous to make himself sport,
he resolved to put a trick upon him, and so to laugh at those who would have
laughed at him.

Having asked the Women-dancers what commands the King had laid upon them, and
heard their answer, he afterward asked them whether they were ordered to do
any thing else, and being informed they had order to do nothing but what they
had told him before, he bid them put the Kings Command in execution with all
the exactness they could, but that they should have a special care not to
exceed it by doing any thing more, telling them, that if they pissed the least
drop while they did their other business, he would have them whipped till the
blood came. Not one of them would expose her self to that danger; so that they
thereupon returned to the Court, where they gave the King an account how they
had been entertained by the Rasgi. The Mogul was so taken with the pleasant
trick which the Rasgi had put upon him, that it put him into the best humor in
the world.

His ordinary divertisement every day was to see the combats of Lions, Bulls,
Elephants, Tigers, The Mogul^ divertisement.
Leopards, and other wild Beasts, an argument of his cruel Nature, and bloody
Disposition, which his perpetual seeing of this kind of combats did much
heighten. He also took a delight in seeing Men engaged with Beasts, but this
was not but with their own consent; and such as would venture their lives, out
of a hope to gain that reputation of Courage as should prove the raising of
their Fortunes, were to make use of no Arms but Sword and Buckler. This puts me
in mind of a Combat which Scach Choram ordered to be had, at the conclusion of
a great Entertainment which he had made on the Birthday of his Son, who was
King of Bengala, in a Caravansera without the City, at which place were kept to
this purpose all sorts of wild Beasts. This Caravansera had adjoining to it a
spacious Garden encompassed with a wall, upon which the people were come to see
that divertisement. The first engagement was that of a wild Bull and a Lion;
and the next, that of a Lion and a Tiger.

As soon as the Tiger perceived the Lion, A combat between a Lion and a Tiger.
he went straight toward him, and closing with him with all his strength, got
him down. 'Twas generally believed, it would be no hard matter for the Tiger to
make an end of the Lion; but the Lion immediately recovered himself, and took
the Tiger so fast by the throat that he was thought dead: yet he made a shift
to disingage himself, and the combat was renewed with greater fury then before,
till at last weariness made both give over. They were both very much hurt, but
the wounds were not mortal on either side. Upon this, Allaemerdi-Chan,
Governor of Chisemar, who stood near the King, came forth and said, that
Schach Choram was desirous to see, whether there were among his Subjects, any
one that had so much courage, as to engage with any of those Beasts, and that
only with a Sword and Buckler, and that he who durst attempt it should appear,
that the Mogul, having been an ocular witness of his worth, might accordingly
requite it, and honor him, not only with his favor, but also with the quality
of Chan. Upon which Proposition, three Indosthans proffering to undertake the
engagement, Allaemerdy-Chan told them further, that the Kings meaning was, that
whoever should undertake the Combat, should do it only with Sword and Buckler;
and that it was his pleasure, that those who had any Coats of Mail about them,
should put them off, that the Combat might be without any advantage.

Upon these terms a furious Lion was let forth, who perceiving his Adversary
coming into the place, made immediately toward him. The Indosthan made his
party good very stoutly, till at last, no longer able to bear the weight of the
Beast, which lay very heavy upon him on the left hand, he began to let fall his
Buckler, which the Lion endeavored all he could to force from him, while with
his left paw, he would have fastened on his enemies right arm, and so have
seized him by the throat, when the Man, putting his hand to his Girdle, pulled
out a Dagger, and thrust it so far into the Lions jaws, that he was forced to
let go his hold, and get away. The Man followed him, and giving him a blow over
the mouth laid him all along, and afterward killed him. The people made
acclamations for his happy victory over the Lion; but as soon as the noise was
over, the Mogul called the Indosthan to him, and with an angry smile said to
him, It must needs be confessed thou art a valiant man, and that thou have
fought very gallantly. But had I not forbidden thee to engage against this
Beast with any advantage? And had I not appointed what Arms thou should make
use of? And yet thou have done contrary to my Order, and have not overcome my
Lion as a Person of Honor, but have surpised him with forbidden Arms, and so
have killed him as a murderer, and not as a declared enemy. Whereupon he
commanded two men to go down into the Garden, and to rip up his belly; which
was immediately put in execution, and the Corpse was set upon an Elephant to be
carried through the City, to serve for an example to others.

He who, A Combat between a Man and a Tiger.
upon this Tragedy, came next into play, went with an undaunted courage toward
a Tiger, which he was to engage with, in so much that his deportment was such
as raised in the minds of the Spectators a certain confidence of his obtaining
the Victory. But the Tigre, who it seems was too cunning for his Adversary,
fastened on his throat, killed him, and tore his body in pieces.

The third Champion that came upon the Stage, A third Combat.
instead of being any way frightened at the misfortune of his two Camrades, came
very cheerfully and courageously into the Garden, and went straight toward the
Tiger, who fleshed with the precedent success, run at his Adversary, with a
design to make quick work with him; but the Indosthan, though a man of low
stature, and a wretched countenance, struck off at one blow the two fore-paws
of the Beast, and having by that means got him down, he soon dispatched him.

The King immediately asked him his name; Courage rewarded.
whereto he made answer that it was Geily; whereupon there came in a Gentleman,
who presenting him from the Mogul with a Garment of Brocadoe, said to him,
Geily, receive this Garment from my hands, as an assurance of the Kings favor,
who sends it thee as a pledge thereof. Geily, having made several low
reverences, putting the Garment to his eyes and breast, and afterward holding
it in the Air, and having made a short Prayer to himself, he at last pronounced
aloud to this effect; My Prayers to God are, that the Mogul 's glory may be
equal to that of Tamerlan, from whom he is descended; may his Arms prosper; may
his Wealth be increased; may he live seven hundred years, and may his House be
established for ever. Upon this there came to him two Eunuchs, who conducted
him to the Kings Chamber, at the entrance whereof, two Chans took him between
them, and so brought him to the Kings feet. After he had kissed them, and was
rising up, the Mogul said to him; It must be confessed, Geily-Chan, that thou
have done a very great and glorious Action. I bestow on thee that name and
quality which thou shall enjoy for ever. I will be thy Friend, and thou shall
be my servant. Thus was the doing of a single Action the Foundation of a man's
Fortune, who was not so much as known before, but grew famous afterward, by
the Charges he had in the Mogul's Armies.

It was my design to make a little longer stay at Agra; Mandelslo discovered to
have killed on Indosthan at Ispahan.
but there happened an accident which obliged me to change my Resolution, nay,
forced me to leave a place where I thought my life in danger. For being one day
fallen into discourse with the Persian servant, who ran away from me at Surat,
I perceived coming toward me an Indosthan, a person of a goodly presence, and
as far as I could judge, of quality, who immediately asked me whence I came,
and what business I had in those parts. I made him answer, that I was an
Europaean, that I came from Germany, and that the desire I had to see the Court
of the most powerful Monarch in all the East, had brought me thither. He told
me, that if he were not much mistaken, he had seen me at Ispaban, and that
questionless I was the person that had killed a Kinsman of his at the
Engagement which had happened between the Indians and the Germans. This
discourse had almost put me out of countenance; but upon a little recollection
I told him, that I had never been in Persia, and that I came from England by
Sea to Surat, which the two English Merchants, who were then in my company,
affirmed to be true. But he who did me the greatest kindness in this extremity,
was my old Persian servant, who swore by his Mahomed, and by his Hossein, that
what I had told him was nothing but the truth. Whereupon the Indosthan went
away, but discovered by his deportment, that he gave not overmuch credit to
what we had said: and for my part, I conceived it but prudence to be
distrustful of a man who had expressed his good will, had there been occasion,
to do me a mischief, and would no doubt have revenged his Kinsmans death, of
which my conscience told me I was guilty.

Upon these reflections I left Agra, Leaver Agra.
with a Caffila, or Caravan, that was going to the City of Lahor, which lies
sixty Leagues further into the Country. I had the company of two Dutch
Merchants, and our traveling was so much the more pleasant, in that our way
was but one continued Alley, drawn in a straight line, and planted on both
sides with Date-trees, Palm Trees, Cocos-trees, and other kind of Fruit Trees,
which gave us a continual refreshing shade against the heat of the Sun. The
sumptuous Houses which were to be seen up and down the Country, the Apes,
Peacocks, Parrats and other Birds found us very much sport. One day with a
Pistol-shot I killed a great Serpent, which I met with in the way, and
afterward a Leopard and a Roe-buck: but the Benjans, of whom there were many
in our company, took it very ill at my hands, and reproached me with my
cruelty, in that I deprived those Creatures of a life which it was not in my
power to give them, and which God had not bestowed on them, but that he might
be thereby glorified: in so much that when ever I handled my Pistol, they
either expressed their trouble to see me take a pleasure in violating, in their
presence, the Laws of their Religion; or they entreated me, for their sakes,
not to kill them, and when I had made them understand, that I would in any
thing comply with their desires, they, on the other side, had all the kindness
imaginable for me.

The Country about Lahor is very fertile, Lahor described.
and brings forth all sorts of Fruits, as also Wheat and Rice in abundance,
much beyond any other Province of that great Kingdom. The City is situated at
32. degrees, 30. minutes elevation, upon the little River Ravy, or Ravee,
which, with four other Rivers, falls into the Indus, which upon that occasion
is called Pangab, or five-waters, as we have said elsewhere. It is very
delightfully seated, especially toward the River, on which side it has many
fair Gardens. The Kings Palace is within the City, from which it is divided by
a high Wall, and has many spacious Appartments. There are also many other
Palaces and great Houses, for the reception of those Lords who ordinarily
follow the Court. And in regard most of the Inhabitants are Mahumetans, there
is in this City also a great number of Metzids, or Mosqueys, and bathing
places, for their ordinary Purifications. The Baths of the Mahumetans.
I had the curiosity to go into one of their Baths, to observe their way of
bathing. I took along with me my Interpreter, who was by Profession a Broker,
and went into one of their Baths, which was built according to the Persian
manner, with a flat Roof, and had several Partitions, which were made all half
round, very narrow at the entrance, and broad at the bottom, having each of
them a door by it self, and two Receptacles or Tankes of Freestone, into which
the Water was let in by brazen Cocks, to such height as those who came to bathe
themselves desired it. After bathing, I was ordered to sit down a while, and
then I was laid down upon a Stone seven or eight foot in length, and four in
breadth, in which posture the Master of the Bath rubbed me all over with a
Hair-cloth. He would also have rubbed the soles of my feet with a handful of
Sand; but perceiving I was not able to endure it, he asked me whether I were a
Christian, and having understood that I was, he gave me the Hair-cloath, that I
might rub my feet my self, though he had made no difficulty to rub all the rest
of my body. This done, there came into the Bath a little short Fellow, who laid
me all along on the belly upon the same stone, and rubbed my back with his
hands from the backbone down to the sides, telling me, that bathing would do
me but little good, if I suffered not the blood, which might happily lie
corrupted in that place, to be by that rubbing dispersed through all the other
members.

I found not any thing remarkable about Lahor, but one of the Kings Gardens,
which lies two days journey distant from it. I had, as a further diversion in
this short piece of my Travels, this, that in two days I rode on four several
Creatures: For at first I had a Mule; then a Camel, then an Elephant, and at
last an Ox, whose troting was the hardest of any beast that ever I bestrid,
lifting up his hoofs as high as the stirrup, and carrying me between six and
seven Leagues in less then four hours. I should have made some longer stay at
Lahor, but receiving Letters from Agra, I was forced to come away upon this
account, that the English President intended very suddenly to embark in order
to his return for England, whereupon I put my self into the company of certain
Indian Merchants, who were then upon their return to Amadabath.

At my coming to Amadabath, Returns to Amadabath.
the Director of the English Commerce told me, that he had received Orders from
the President to make as strong a Caffila as he could possibly, and to come
with all expedition to Surat. I there met also with Letters from the President,
whereby I understood, that he only expected the Caffila's of Agra and
Amadabath, and that he would depart as soon as they were come. He writ to me
further, that being within a few days after to resign his Presidentship to
another, whom his Superior had appointed to receive it; and there being to be
a great entertainment and feasting at that Ceremony, he should be glad I were
present thereat.

During my stay at Amadabath, Fire works.
the Mahumetans celebrated a Feast, which was concluded at night with very
noble Fireworks. The Windows of all the Houses that stand in the Meidan were
beset with Lamps, before which were placed Vessels of Glass, filled with Waters
of several colors, which made a very delightful prospect. Upon the same
Meidan, before the Kings Palace, there are two low Houses, of which there is
little use made but at this Feast, it being the place whither the Sulthan and
the Lords of the Court retire themselves, while fire is set to the Works, which
consisted of Squibs, Crackers, and other ingenious inventions. Some had
fastened Lamps to certain Wheels, which hung on, though the Wheels turned about
perpetually with great violence.

As soon as the Caffila of Agra was come to Amadabath, Returns to Surat.
I took leave of my friends, and went along with a Caravan of a hundred Wagons.

The first day we traveled twelve Cos, or six Leagues, to the City of
Mamadabath. The next day, I went before with the Director of the Commerce at
Amadabath, who, with his Second, was desirous to be present at the Resignation
which the President was to make of his place. We were four in company, and we
took along with us four Wagons, two Horses, and twenty foot Soldiers for our
Guard, leaving Order that the Caffila should follow us with all expedition.

The foot Soldiers, Persons of quality have Banners carried before them.
who carried our Arms and Banners, made a shift nevertheless to keep pace with
us. What I say concerning the Banners, relates to the custom of the Indies,
where there are no persons of any quality but have a Banner, or a kind of
Colors, such as Cornets use, carried before them. That day we crossed the
River Wasser, and took up our Quarters at night in the Fort of Saselpour. There
we met with the Factor of Brodra, whose name was Mr. Pansfield, who treated us
very magnificently the next day at the place of his residence. We went thence
in the evening, and lodged the night following in a great Garden, and the next
day we prosecuted our journey. In the evening we encamped hard by a Tanque,
called Sambord; and in regard we had not met with any fair Water all that day,
we endeavored to get some out of the Tanque. But the Country people fearing we
might consume all the Water, there coming in at the same time a Dutch Caffila
of two hundred Wagons, An Engagement with the Country people.
would not suffer us to come near it. Whereupon we commanded out fifteen of our
foot Soldiers, with express order to bring some Water, if not by fair means,
by force. But coming to the Tanque, they found it guarded by thirty armed Men,
and such as were resolved to maintain it, and to hinder any from taking of the
Water. However our Men went very resolutely toward them with their Swords
drawn, upon which, without any dispute at all, the Country people ran away; but
while ours were drawing Water, the Indians shot a certain number of Arrows, and
discharged three Muskets among them, and wounded five persons. Ours exasperated
at that, killed three of the Country people, whom we saw afterward carried to
the Village.

While we were at Supper, there came in to us one of the Dutch Merchants, who
told us, that there had been seen two hundred Rasboutes upon our way, An
Engagement with the Rasboutes.
who had committed several robberies for some days before, and that the very
day before they had killed six men within a League of the Village, near which
we were then lodged. The Dutch Caffila went away about midnight, and we
followed it immediately after. But we had not gone far beyond it, ere we
discovered one of those Holacueurs, who are wont to march in the head of the
Caffilas, and before Troops of Horse, and serve instead of Trumpeters, by
sounding a certain Instrument of Brass, much longer then our ordinary Trumpets.
As soon as he perceived us, he slipped into the Wood, where he fell a sounding
as loud as ever he could, which we took for an assured Alarm that it would not
be long ere they set upon us. Accordingly, almost ere we could resolve how to
make our party good against them, we saw coming out of all sides of the Wood, a
great number of Rasboutes, armed with short Pikes, Bucklers, Bows and Arrows,
but without any Firearms. We had the time to charge those we had, which were
four Firelocks and three pair of Pistols. The Merchant and I got on horseback,
and bestowed the Firelocks among those who were in the Coach, with express
order not to fire till they were sure to do execution. Our Firearms were
charged with square pieces of Steel, and the Rasboutes came on in so close a
body, that at the first firing we saw three fall. They shot certain Arrows at
us, wherewith they hurt an Ox and two foot Soldiers. One was shot into the
Pommel of my Saddle, and the English Merchant had another shot into his
Turbant. The Dutch Caffila hearing the noise, commanded out ten Soldiers; but
ere they could come in to our relief, we run a great hazard of our lives. For I
was set upon on all sides, and was thrust twice with a Pike into my
Buff-collar, which certainly saved my life that day. There came two of the
Rasboutes so near as to lay hold on my bridle, after they had killed two of my
foot Soldiers, and were going to carry me away prisoner. But I dispatched one
of them with a Pistol-shot, which I gave him in the shoulder, and the English
Merchant came in to my relief, and behaved himself with as much gallantry as it
was possible man could do. The ten foot Soldiers belonging to the Dutch
Caffila being come in, and the Caffila it self not much behind them, the
Rasboutes got into the Wood, leaving six men killed upon the place, and
carrying along with them many hurt. On our side we had two foot Soldiers
killed, and eight wounded, besides whom, the English Merchant had also received
a slight wound. From that time we kept along with the Caffila, marching in very
good order, out of an imagination we had that the Rasboutes would be sure to
set on us a second time: but we heard no more of them, and came about noon to
Broitschia, where we stayed till the evening. We departed thence about four of
the clock that same day, in order to our crossing the River, and that we might
get five Cos further to the Village of Onclasser, where we lodged that night;
and the next day, being the 26. of DECEMBER, we got to Surat.

At my return to Surat, Comes to Surat.
I found in the English Lodge above fifty Merchants, whom the President had
summoned out of all the other Factories, to give an account of their
Administration, and to be present at the change of Government. This Assembly
consisted of the persons following, viz. Mr. Metwold, the then President, Mr.
Fremling, who was to succeed him in that charge, five Consuls from several
places of the Indies, three Ministers, two Physicians, and twenty five
Merchants.

Being all met together, The English President resigns his charge.
the President made an excellent Speech, to give the Assembly then present his
hearty thanks, for the many expressions he had received of their fidelity and
affection during his Government, as also for the honor and respects they had
rendered the East India Company in his person, and to entreat them to continue
the same toward Mr. Fremling, to whom he had received Order to resign up his
charge, exhorting them in all things to do that which conduced most to the
reputation and advantage of the Company. Having ended his Speech, he delivered
Mr. Fremling the Letters Patents, by virtue whereof he was to assume that new
Charge, and made him a short Complement upon that occasion.

This Ceremony ended, they went to their Garden without the City, where Mr.
Metwold had prepared a magnificent entertainment, consisting of whatever the
Country afforded that was excellent and rare, as also a set of English Music,
Violins, another of Mahumetan, and a third of Benjan, which for our further
divertisement, was accompanied by the Women-dancers of the Country. All which
being over, Order was immediately given, that those Ships which were fully
laden, should make all necessary Provisions for their return, and we began to
make all things ready for our Voyage.

December 28. There came to Surat a Sultan, The Sulthan's entrance into Surat.
sent thither by the Mogul, to succeed him whom I had found there at my
Arrival. The new President went half a League out of the City to meet him,
accompanied by five of the chiefest Merchants, who entreated me to go along
with them. The Sultan had marching before him several foot Soldiers, and a
certain number of Palanquins, and after them an Elephant, upon which a Man
carried a Banner of red Taffata. After the Elephant came above a hundred foot
Soldiers, and after them twenty other Soldiers, carrying every one a little
Banner, much like those of our Cornets, of several Colors. These marched
immediately before the Sultan, who was mounted upon a gallant Persian Horse,
and attended by several Persons of quality, and a great number of Men on
horseback. On one side of him went a Page with a great Plume of Feathers, which
served for a Fan to keep off the heat of the Sun, and he had carried behind him
his own Palanquin, which was all gilt. His name was Myrsa Mahmuda, one with
whom the new President had been acquainted long before. Having accompanied him
to his Palace, amidst the Acclamations of the people, which thronged in the
Streets to congratulate his Arrival, he returned to his own house.

Immediately upon the establishment of the new President, all the other
Officers and Merchants departed one after another to the places of their
ordinary Residence, and the Ships were ordered to make all things ready to set
sail. They were the Mary and the Swan; but there were to go along with them two
other Vessels, one whereof, being too old to get home into England, was to be
sold at Goa, where the President was to touch in his way; and the other was
bound for the same place, to receive fifty thousand Ryals, which the Portuguez
were to pay, in execution of the Treaty of Peace they had made with the
English, to be employed in the Indies, according as the President of Surat
should dispose thereof.

The Swan had Orders to set sail ten days before us, and to stay for us at the
Cape of good hope. But ere we leave Surat, it will not be amiss to give that
account of the Kingdom of Guzuratta, wherein that famous City of Trade lies,
which we promised elsewhere.

We call it the Kingdom of Guzuaratta, How the Mogul come to unite the Kingdom
of Guzuratta to ^uCrown
in regard it is not above 120. years since the Mogul united it to his Crown,
upon occasion of the King of Guzuratta's minority, who then reigned. For then
Sulthan Mamo^t, who died about the year 1545. left only one Son, named
Madofher, who being but about eleven or twelve years of age, was put under the
Guardianship of Ehamet-Chan, his Fathers Favorite. This Guardian perceiving,
that his young Master was not in a condition to protect him from the envy of
those Grandees, who had highly expressed their dissatisfaction with his
Administration of the Government, and considering with himself, that he stood
in need of a more powerful Protection, made his Applications to Achobar the
Mogul, or King of Indosthan, and entreated him to come in to the relief of his
Ward, promising to deliver up Amadabath, the chief City of the Kingdom, into
his hands. Achobar thought it no prudence to neglect so favorable an occasion,
and so immediately entered Guzuratta with a powerful Army; but instead of
contenting himself with the City of Amadabath, he became absolute Master of the
whole Kingdom, and carried away Madofher and his Guardian Prisoners to Agra.
Madofher being come to thirty years of age, and beginning to reflect on the
misfortune of his Captivity, which he saw must be perpetual, combined with one
of the most considerable Lords of Guzuratta, who put him into possession of
certain Cities of his Kingdom, such as lay at the greatest distance from the
Frontiers of the Mogul; but they gave him not the time to settle himself
therein. For Achobar immediately sent an Army thither, under the command of
Chan-Channa, who recovered the whole Kingdom in less then a year, prevented
Madofher from making his escape, and took him prisoner. This unfortunate
Prince, reflecting on the Affronts which would be put upon him at his coming to
Agra, and fearing that Achobar would put him to death, chose rather to prevent
him, and being got to a certain place alone, under pretense of doing some
necessities of Nature, cut his own throat.

The Mogul governs the Kingdom of Guzuratta by a Viceroy, The Governor of
Amadabath is Viceroy of all Guzuratta.
or Governor General, who has his ordinary Residence at Amadabath, in such
manner, as that all the other Governors are obliged to give him an account of
their Administration, and to receive Orders from him. His power is in a manner
absolute: For, though in the judgment of Civil Causes, as also when he consults
about affairs of Importance, he advises with some of the principal Lords of the
Country, and of his Court; yet can it not be said, that he has any settled
Council, but takes their Proposals, rather to discover their Sentiments, then
to follow them: Insomuch, that if his employment were settled for a certain
number of years, he would have no cause to envy the greatness of the Mogul
himself. But this Government depends merely on the Kings pleasure, who takes
occasion often to change the Governors; as on the other side, they knowing
that the least Order from the Court may dispossess them, let slip no occasion
of making their advantages, and* receiving from all hands, especially near the
time they expect to be recalled. For then they make it their business to get
excessive sums of money out of the richest Merchants in the Country; especially
those of the City of Amadabath, who are forced to clear themselves of false
Accusations, which they had not been charged withal, but to squeeze them of
some part of their Estates, inasmuch as the Governor being supreme Judge of
all Causes, as well Civil as Criminal, they must either expect certain
destruction, or satisfy the Governors avarice.

There is no King in Europe has so noble a Court as the Governor of
Guzuratta, His magnificence.
nor any that appears in public with greater magnificence. He never comes
abroad, but he is attended by a great number of the Nobility, and his Guards
both Horse and Foot, having marching before him a great many Elephants, with
their covering Clothes of Brocadoe, or Velvet embroidered, Banners, Drums,
Trumpets and Timbrels. In his Palace he is served as a King, and permits not
any to come within his Lodgings, till they have demanded audience. Has the
dis^o^al of all the Revenue of the Kingdom.
He makes his advantages of all the Levies and Impositions which are made in
his Government, so that in a short time he becomes Master of incredible wealth,
especially by means of the third part of all the Arable Lands which belong to
the King; and are assigned to the Governor for the maintenance of a body of
Horse, which he is obliged to defray, but com^s much short of the number it
should be of.

The Revenue of the Kingdom of Guzuratta amounted heretofore to eighteen
Millions of Gold, What the Revenue of G^zuratta amounts to.
not accounting the Customs of Brodra and Broitschia, which brought in yearly
near eight hundred thousand Crowns. This Country has no Enemy it need stand in
fe^r of; but the Mountains of those parts are the retyring places of certain
Radias, or petty Princes, who live only upon rapine, and the incursions their
Subjects make upon the Mogul's Territories, who with all his great power is not
able to force them out of those inaccessible places. Besides these, there are
also certain companies of Robbers, or Tories, who sometimes makes up a body of
three or four hundred Men, to rob upon the Highway, insomuch that traveling
cannot be without danger, unless so many travel together as can in some measure
make their party good against the attempts of those Villains, who are so much
the more easily defeated, by reason of their having no fire-Armes.

The Couteval is he who judges of Affairs of lesser Consequence; The
Administration of Justice.
but the administration of Justice amongst them is very pleasant, in as much as
he who complains first most commonly gets the better of it, so that it may be
truly said among them, according to the Proverb, that who bears away the blows,
pays for the bloud-whip. Capital crimes are judged by the Governors of the
several Cities, who cause their Sentences to be put in execution by the
Couteval. There is in a manner no crime, whereof a Man may not avoid the
punishment by Money, so that it may be said of those parts with greater reason
then of any other, that Gibbets are set (...) only for the unfortunate. The
Crimes punished with greatest severity are, Murder and Adultery, especially
when it happens to have been committed with a Gentlewoman of any Quality. Upon
which account it is that they permit Brothel-houses, all which pay a certain
Tribute to the Couteval, who in requital protects them so well, that it is not
only safe, but also honorable for any man to frequent them.

We have already given a Catalogue of the principal Cities of Guzuratta, The
other Cities of Guzuratta.
as Amadabath, Cambaya, Surat, Brodra, Broitschia, etc. All which we passed
through in our Travels, so that it remains only, that we give a short account
of the other more inconsiderable places of the Kingdom.

Goga Goga.
is a small City, or rather a great Village, thirty Leagues distant from
Cambay^, at a place where the Gulf is so narrow, that it seems to be a kind of
a River. This place is sufficiently well peopled, and most of the Inhabitants
are Benjans, and live either by their Relation to the Sea, or by Weaving. It
has neither Gates nor Bulwarks, but only a Freestone Wall toward the
Seaside, where the Portuguez Frigates have their Rendezvous, in order to the
conveying of their Merchantmen to Goa.

Pattepatane and Mangerol, Pattepatane and Mangerol.
are two great Towns, nine Leagues distant from Goga, and there are made in
them great quantities of Cottons and Linnen-cloath.

The City of Diu, Diu.
where the Portuguez have three strong Castles, is seated upon the Frontiers of
the Kingdom, on the South Side. They call it Diue, pronouncing the^e so gently,
that a man can hardly hear it. The word Diue signifies an Island, and thence
comes the word, Agrediue, five Isles, and that of Nalediue, four Isles, which
the Portuguez corruptly call Maldiua; and Diue, Noulaka, the Isle of fourscore
and ten thousand, which has that name given it, upon this account, that the
Daughter of a certain Lord of the said place, having begged of her Father the
Revenue of it for one day, it brought her in fourscore and ten thousand pieces
of Silver.

The City of Bisantagan Bisantagan.
is one of the greatest of all the Kingdom of Guzuratta, as containing near
twenty thousand Houses. It lies almost in the midst of the Kingdom, and till of
late was but a simple Village. The fertility of the adjacent Country has
raised it to the greatness wherein it now is; for thereabouts they keep
abundance of Cattle, and there grow also great quantities of Rice, Wheat and
Cotton, which is made into Yarn and Clothes.

The City of Pettan Pettan.
was heretofore six Leagues about, and encompassed with a strong Wall of
Freestone, which is now broken down in several places, since its Commerce
began to diminish. The Inhabitants are for the most part Benjans, and their
Profession, making of Stuffs of Silk for the wearing of the Country, as also
some Cotton-cloaths, but they are very course, and are of those kinds which are
commonly called Dosternals, Sgarderberal, Longis, Allegiens, etc. This City
has a fair Castle within it, where the Sulthan of the place lives. In the
midst of the City there is a Mosquey, which was built by the Pagans* and may
pass for one of the most sumptuous Temples in all the East. Its Roof is
sustained by a thousand and fifty Pillars, most whereof are of Marble. Those
who have contributed most to the destruction of that Cities Trading, are a sort
of People called the Coulses, who having taken any of the Inhabitants abroad in
the Country, force them to ransom themselves, and do so pester the Highways,
that the Merchants dare not travel that way.

Cheytepour Cheytepour.
lies six Leagues from Pettan, and twenty two from Amadabath, upon a small
Rivers side. All the Inhabitants are Benjans, who are Weavers, and make great
quantities of Cott^n-yarn. There is in the City a Garrison of 150. men, for the
securing of the Caffilas, which pass that way for Agra and Amadabath.

Messana Messana.
is an open Town, having within it an old ruined Castle, the Governor whereof
is obliged to maintain two hundred Horse, for the safe passage of the Caffilas.
The Country all about produces much Cotton, and some Clothes are made there,
but no great quantities.

Nassary, or Nausary, Gaudui, and Balsara, Nassary, Gaudui, and Balsara.
are three small Cities, under the jurisdiction of Surat, from which the first
is six, the second nine, and the third fourteen Leagues distant. They lie all
three about two Leagues distant from the Sea. There are made in them great
quantities of course Cottons; and it is in these parts that they ^ell the Wood,
which is spent all over the Kingdom in the building of Houses and Ships.

The old Inhabitants of the Country are Pagans, The Inhabitants of Guzuratta
and are those whom they properly call Hindoy, or Indou. The Mahumetans
Religion came in with the Arms of Tamerlan, and those other Foreigners, who
have settled themselves there, by the Conquests they have in those parts. The
Kingdom is peopled with Persians, Arabians, Armenians, and several other
Nations; but you shall seldom meet there with either Chinese or Iaponeses;
for they are so warm and well provided at home, that they seldom settle
themselves elsewhere.

The Mahumetans of the Country, professing, at least by name, the same Religion
with the Persians, occasions the Persian Language to be as common among them as
the Indosthan, though in the Explication of the Alchoran, they follow the
sentiments of Hembili, and Maleki, whereas the Persians accept only of the
Exposition of Aly and Tzafersaduck; but they both condemn that of Hanifa, which
is approved by the Turks.

It is not our design in this place to run into any discourse of the Mahumetan
Religion; but, having premised a short account of the Inhabitants of the
Country, we shall afterward treat more at large of their Religion, and the
Sects whereof it consists. They are all of an Olive or Duskish color, but more
or less such, according to the Climate in which they live. Those who are more
toward the South, are without comparison of a much higher color, then those
who live more toward the North. The Men are strong, and well proportioned,
having large Faces and black Eyes, and cause their Heads and Beards to be
shaven clear off, excepting only the Mustachoes, as the Persians do also. The
Mahumetans cloth themselves much after the Persian Mode, only they fold their
Turbants after another way. There is also this difference observed between
them, that the Indosthans have the opening of their Garments under the left
Arm, Their Clothes.
whereas the Persians have it under the right Arm; and that the former tie
their Girdles before, and let the ends hang down, whereas the Persians do only
fold it several times about the body, and hide the ends within the Girdle it
self. It is within these Girdles that they carry their Ponyards, which they
call Limber, and are about a foot long, having the Blade much broader toward
the Handle then it is toward the Point. There are some have Swords of that
making, but the Soldiers commonly wear Cymitars. Good Horses are very scarce
in those parts, whence it comes that they often make use of Oxen, which are
altogether as swift as our Horses, and I have seen whole Troops consisting of
this kind of Cavalry. Their Women.
The Women are very well proportioned, though of low stature. They have very
handsome bodies, and are very sumptuous in their Attire. Their Hair hangs down
over their Shoulders, and on their Heads they have only a thin Cap, or cover
them with a Crepine of Lawn, wrought with Gold, the ends whereof hang down on
both sides as low as their Knees. Those who are of ability wear in their Ears
Pendants of Diamonds, Pearls, or other precious Stones, and about their Necks
Neck-laces of a kind of great round Pearl, which makes no undelightful show on
the brown complexion of the Ladies of those parts, who sometimes also wear
Rings in their Nostrils, which is so much the less incommodious to them, in
that they never almost have any occasion to wipe their Noses. They wear
Breeches as well as the Men, which are of Taffata, or some kind of
Cotton-stuffe; and those of such length, that were they let out, they would
reach over their Heads. They lie close and even till they come down below the
Ham, where they are folded like Men's Boots into many folds, in regard there is
a String of Silver and Silk runs through them, wherewith they are tied and
fastened above the Navil, the ends of which String hang down to their Feet.
These Drawers, or Breeches, they wear under their Smocks, which are so short,
that they reach not much below their Waste; and upon the Breeches they wear a
Petticoat of Taffata, or Cotton, but so thin, that its easy to see all under
it. Their Shoes are commonly of red Cordovant, or Spanish Leather, flat-sold,
and narrow toward the Toe. They go bare-breasted, and bare-arm'd up to the
Elbows, save that much of those parts is hid by the many Bracelets which they
wear about them. Those Women, who stand upon their Honor, appear not in
public with their Faces uncovered; nay those of any quality are very seldom
permitted to come abroad. But the Benjan Women are clad quite after another
manner.

There is no Province in the India, where there are not some Benjans; but in
Guzuratta they are more numerous then in any other place, and they are
distinguished from the Mahumetans by their habit. They do not shave their
Heads, yet do they not wear their Hair very long. They have every day a yellow
Mark made in their Foreheads, of about a fingers breadth, which is made with
Water and Sandal-wood, in which they beat four or five grains of Rice. They are
their Bramans who give them that Mark after they have done their Devotions
before the Pagodes. The Women do not cover their Faces, as those of the
Mahumetans do; yet do they not make any difficulty to adorn themselves with
Pendants and Neck-laces, especially their Ears, which they in a manner cover
with Pearls. The blacker their Teeth are, Black Teeth beautiful.
the greater beauty they think it. During my stay at Amadabath, some of the
Women there told me, that it was an ugly thing to have white Teeth, as Dogs and
Monkeys have; and thence it came that they called us Bondra, that is, Apes.
They wear no Breeches, but only a piece of thin Silk-stuff, which they call
Cabay, and reaches down to their Hams, The Cloth of the Benjan women.
and upon that they put their Smocks, and on them their upper Garment, which
they tie with a String at the Waste. Some among them wear a kind of narrow
Wastcoats, the Sleeves whereof reach but to the Elbow, being naked down from
the Breasts to the Navil. In Summer they wear wooden Shoes, which they fasten
to their Feet with Straps; but in Winter, their Shoes are of Velvet of several
colors, or of Brocadoe, covered with gilt Leather. The quarters of their
Shoes are very low, for this reason, that as well Men as Women put them off,
when they go into any Room, the Floor thereof being covered with Tapistry.
Children go naked, till they come to about four or five years of Age, the
Girls as well as the Boys. The Men are very civilly apparelled, and live
without any scandal among the Mahumetans, who being imperious and insolent,
treat the Benjans, as if they were their slaves, with great contempt, much
after the manner the Jews are treated in Europe, in those places where they are
permitted to live. Which yet hinders not but that the Benjans are as ingenious
as the Mahumetans, The Benjans are ingenious.
and, without comparison, more subtle, and more civil, then any of the other
Indians. There are not any of them can write and cast account better then they,
nor any whose conversation is more delightful then theirs: but they come short
of that sincerity which the others have, so that a Man must be very cautious
how he has to do with them, in as much as there is no Commodity which they do
not adulterate; and they never drive any bargain, but they endeavor to
surprise and circumvent those they are to deal with. The Dutch and English know
this by experience; whence it comes, that they make use of these people, as
their Brokers and Interpreters, that they may discover the Impostures and
cheats of others. There is no Trade which they apply not themselves to; and
there is no Commodity but they sell it, unless it be Flesh, Fish, or any other
thing that has had life. Their children are obliged to match among those of
the same Trade or Profession as the Father had been of; and they suffer not
those who do otherwise, to be of the same Cast, or Family: but they may be the
beginners of a new Trade, and yet continue in the same Religion.

They marry their Children at seven, eight, nine, or ten years of Age, and it
very seldom happens that they stay till twelve, especially if they be
Daughters: for, if they stay till that time, they are looked on as stale Maids,
it being their persuasion, that there must be some imperfection, either in the
Maids person, or those of her Parents, if there be not some Addresses made to
her before that time; in which particular they think themselves so much
concerned, that they make it a punctilio of Honor and Conscience.

The Wedding Day being come, Their Ceremonies of marriage.
the Parents of the betrothed parties sit down in a Hall, about a good Fire,
and cause the Bridegroom and the Bride to take three turns about it, during
which, the Braman pronounces certain words, which serve for a Benediction of
the Marriage. This Custom they the more punctually observe, in regard, that, if
the Bridegroom should chance to dye before he had taken his three turns about
the Fire, the Bride might take a second Husband, which the Benjan Widows are
not permitted to do, even though the Bridegroom died before the consummation of
the Marriage, but she is obliged to suffer all her Ornaments to be taken away
from her, and her Hair to be cut off. They are not forced to burn themselves
with the dead bodies of their Husbands, as the Wives of the Bramans or
Rasbo^tes are, neither are they hindered to do it, if they have an inclination
thereto. Those Widows, who cannot brook a single life, get in among the public
Dancers of that Sex; which must needs happen very frequently in a Climate,
which derives to the Bodies living in it no great disposition to Chastity.

The Benjan Law permits men, not only to marry a second or third time, in case
of death, but also to wed a second or third Wife, The men permitted to marry
twice or thrice.
if the first and second proves barren; the first retaining nevertheless a
certain pre-eminence, as being Mother of the Family. The Sons are Heirs of all
their Fathers Estate, but with this provision, that they are to maintain the
Mother, and marry the Sisters.

The Benjans are Pagans, The Religion of the Benjans.
as having among them neither Baptism nor Circumcision. They are indeed of a
belief, That there is but one God, Creator and Preserver of the Universe; yet
does not this persuasion hinder, but that they worship the Devil, and give for
their reason, They worship the Devil.
that God created him to govern the World, and to do mischief to Mankind.
Whence it comes, that all their Mosqueys are filled with representations of
him, in Statues of Gold, Silver, Ivory, Ebony, Marble, Wood, and ordinary
Stone. The Figure under which they represent him is dreadful to look on. The
Head, out of which grows four Horns, is adorned with a triple Crown, after the
fashion of a Tiara. The countenance is horridly deformed, having coming out of
the Mouth two great Teeth, like the Tusks of a Boar, and the Chin set out with
a great ugly Beard. The Breasts beat against the Belly, at which the Hands are
not absolutely joined together, but seem negligently to hang down. Under the
Navil, between the two Thighs, there comes out of the Belly another Head, much
more ghastly then the former, having two Horns upon it, and thrusting out of
the Mouth a filthy Tongue of extraordinary bigness. Instead of Feet it has
Paws, and behind, a Cows-tail: This Figure is placed on a Table of Stone, which
serves for an Altar, and receives the Offerings which are made to the Pagode.
On the right side of the Altar there stands a Trough, in which those who intend
to do their Devotions wash and purify themselves; and on the other side, there
is a Box; or Chest, for reception or the Offerings, which are made in Money;
and near the Trough there is placed, within the wall of a Vessel, out of which
the Bramans take the yellow stuff, wherewith they mark the foreheads of those
who have said their Prayers. The Braman, or Priest, belonging to the place,
sits at the foot of the Altar, whence he rises at certain times to say his
Prayers; and when he goes away, he concludes his Devotions with that kind of
purifying, which is performed by rubbing his hands in the flame of the Lamps,
which stand before and above the Altar, as we have described it elsewhere.

Nor is it only in great Cities that the Benjans have their many M^squeys,
Their Mosqueys.
but they have them also up and down the Country, upon the Highways, and in
the Mountains and Woods. They have no other light then what they have from the
Lamps, which are kept perpetually burning in them; having no other Ornament,
then that the Walls are beda^bed with the Figures of Beasts and Devils, and
look more like Caves, and the Recesses of unclean Spirits, which they are in
effect, then places designed for the exercise of Religion. Yet it is certain
nevertheless, that these poor ignorant people express as much Devotion for
these Monsters, as the most regenerate Christians can do for their God, and the
most sacred Mysteries of their Religion; though they at the same time
acknowledge, that it is not a Divinity they adore, but a Creature which has
some power derived from God, and is able to do good and ill to Men.

They have this common with the Mahumetans, Their Purification.
that they make the principal part of Religion to consist in corporeal
Purifications. Whence it comes, that there p^sses not a day but they wash
themselves, and many of them do it very betimes in the morning, before
Sunrising, going into the Water up to the waste, and holding in their hand a
Straw, which the Braman gives them, to chase away the evil Spirit, while the
Braman blesses and makes exhortations to those who purify themselves in that
manner.

These Bramans, Their God Brama.
or Bramanes, make it their boast, that they came out of the Head of their God
Brama, of whom, they say, there were many other Productions, which came but out
of his Arms, Thighs, Feet, and other more ignoble parts of his Body* but they
have this advantage, that they have their being from the Brains of that great
God.

Abraham Rogers, who lived ten years upon the Coasts of Coromandel, upon the
service of the Hollanders, in an Employment, by means whereof he might make
more certain Discoveries of the Religion of these people, Their opininion
concerning the Creation of the World.
relates, in the Treatise he has written of Paganism, that the Bramanes
affirm, that their great God, whom they sometimes call Wistul, sometimes
Etwara, and who, they say, is the greatest, and the God of all the Gods,
bethinking himself, before the Creation of the World, when there was in the
Universe but one God and Water, merely for his Diversion sake, to make a World,
had assumed the Figure of a little Child, and having cast himself upon a Leaf,
which he had found swimming upon the Water, and playing Childishly with his
great Toe in his mouth, there came out of his Navel a Flower, which they call
Tamara, of which Flower was produced the first of all Men, whom they call Brama.

That the first thing which Brama did, was to give God thanks that he had
bestowed on him a rational Soul, and that God was so well pleased with that
acknowledgment of his, that he gave him power, not only to create the World,
and whatsoever is contained therein, but also to take upon him the Government
thereof, which God was willing not to be troubled withal himself: So that
Brama, being as it were Gods Vicegerent and Deputy, in this vast and infinite
Administration, there happens not any good or evil to men but by his means,
since it is he who has limited the life of Man to a hundred years, and has
decreed and appointed the prosperity and adversity that shall befall him.

To this they add; that Brama had five Heads, and that, one day, rebelling
against the God Wistu, He commanded one of his Servants, named Bierewa, to cut
off the Head which stood in the midst, with his Nail: But that Brama having
humbled himself before God, and having made Verses in praise of him, Wistu was
so highly pleased to hear them sung, that he told Brama, it troubled him much,
that he had ordered one of his five Heads to be cut off; but however, bid him
be of good comfort, forasmuch as he should have the same power with the other
four, as he had before. And yet they have this belief withal, that this
imprudence of Brama will hinder him from enjoying, in the other World, that
measure of Glory which he might have hoped, had he continued in his original
Integrity.

They affirm, Brama's Lieutenants
that Brama governs the World by many Lieutenants, the chiefest of whom is he
whom they call Derwendre, who commands all those who govern the eight Worlds,
which are like this we inhabit, and go to the Composition of the Universe,
whereof, according to them, there are seven other parts like ours, all which
swim upon the water, like so many Eggs. They believe also, that the World,
which is now extant and in being, is not any effect of the first Creation, but
that there have been many before it, and that there will be others after it.
That that wherein we now live is to continue yet a Million of Ages longer,
since that in the year MDCXXXIX. there were but four thousand seven hundred
thirty nine years of the fourth Age of the World expired, and that the first
bad lasted a hundred and seven thousand two hundred and ninety Ages: That in
the said first Age of the World all Men were good and just, so as that the
Devil, who was created even in that time, had no power to do them any mischief:
That in the following Age, the fourth part of Mankind became depraved; and that
in the third, good and bad were equally divided; but that in these last times,
the World was so much corrupted, that the number of the just was reduced to the
fourth part.

But it is besides the Design of our Relation to digress into the Theology of
these people; whereof the Author we cited before has written a Treatise,
sufficient to satisfy the curiosity of the most Learned.

We shall therefore only say, The Authority of the Bramanes.
that these Bramanes are very highly respected among the other Pagans; not only
upon the account of their austerity of life, and their extraordinary
abstinence; (for there are some of them fast three or four days together, not
eating any thing at all;) but also in regard, that besides their
Superintendency in matter of Religion, they have the oversight of Schools,
where they teach Children to read and write. They expound the Mysteries of
their Religion to the ignorant, and by that means make what impressions they
please in the minds of superstitious people, in as much as they give what
Interpretation they fancy themselves, to the Auguries and other vanities, about
which they are perpetually consulted. They are believed as so many Oracles; aad
thence it comes, that the Benjans seldom engage themselves in any business of
consequence, without the advice and encouragement of the Braman. They are
distinguished from the other Benjans, only by what they wear upon their heads,
which is a Coiffure made of white Linnen-cloath, and comes several times about
the Head, to cover their Hair, which they never cut; as also by three pieces of
small Packthread, which they wear next their Skins, and come cross the Breast,
from the Shoulder to the Waste, which Packthread they never put off, nor would,
though it were to save their lives. They heighten and improve the popular
superstition, by the Relations they make of thousands of false Miracles, done
by their Pagodes and Saints, whom they persuade people to worship, as
Intercessors with God for them.

They hold the Immortality of the Soul, They believe the immortality and
transmigration of (...).
but believe withal, that, at its departure out of the first Body, it
transmigrates into that of some other Creature; and affirm, that the Soul of a
good natured and docible person, is translated into the body of a Pidgeon, or
Chicken; that of a cruel and wicked man, into that of a Crocodile, a Lion, or a
Tiger; that of a crafty man, into that of a Fox; that of a Glutton, into the
body of a Swine; that of a treacherous person, into that of a Serpent, etc.
before they are admitted to the enjoyment of a beatitude purely Spiritual. And
this is the only reason, why the Benjans abstain from the killing of living
Creatures, even to the Insects, how dangerous or troublesome soever they may
be. They also forbear keeping any Fire, and lighting Candles in the night time,
out of a fear that the Flies or Moths should burn themselves therein; nay, they
make some difficulty to make pits on the Ground, for fear of drowning the Fleas
and other Insects, which might lie in the way. What is yet more superstitious,
they do not only redeem the Birds, which the Mahumetans had taken, but they
also built Hospitals for Beasts that are hurt and wounded.

The Bramanes are very much respected all over the Indies, A strange employment
of the Bramans among the Malabares.
but more then any where else, among the Malabares, where they have a very odd
kind of Employment. For there is no marriage contracted among them, but the
first Fruits of the Bride are consecrated to the Braman, to whom she is brought
to be deflour'd. They believe that the marriage were not sufficiently blessed,
if the Braman have not the first trial of the Bride; whence it comes, that many
times he is earnestly entreated before he does it; and if the persons be of any
quality, he has a reward given him, as if he had been hired to do the work.
When the Men are to go any journey, they entreat the Braman to have a care of
their Wives while they are away, and to supply their places till they return.

The Benjans are divided among themselves, The Sects of the Benjans.
into fourscore and three principal Sects; not accounting the other less
considerable ones, which are multiplied almost to infinity, in regard there is
hardly any Family, but has its particular Superstitions and Ceremonies. The
four principal Sects, which comprehend all the rest, are those of Ceurawath,
Samarath, Bisnow, and Goeghy. Those of Ceurawath are so punctual in the
preservation of living Creatures and Insects, that their Bramanes have their
mouths covered with a piece of linnen-cloath, for fear any Fly should get into
it, and in their Houses they have always a little Broom in their hands, to
sweep the Room, least they should negligently tread upon any Insect; and they
will not sit, till they have first made clean the seat or place where they are
to sit down. They go bare-headed and barefoot, with a white Staff in their
hands, by which they are distinguished from the others. They keep no fire in
their Houses, nor light any Candles in them. They never drink any cold water,
for fear of meeting with any Insect in it, but they have it boiled at some ones
house of their Sect. Their Clothing.
They have no other clothing then a piece of course Linnen-cloath, which hangs
down from the Navel to the Knees, and cover not the rest of their body, but
with a small piece of Woollen-cloath, as much as could be made of one Fleece of
Wool.

The Opinions they have of God are in some things different from those of the
other Benjans, Their Belief.
inasmuch as they do not attribute to him an infinite being, which disposes of
the events of things, but they would have them to depend absolutely on good and
ill fortune. They have a Saint named Tiel Tencker, and acknowledge no other
good works then Fasting and Alms deeds: They believe that the Sun, the Moon,
and other Stars, the Earth, living Creatures, Trees, Metals, and in a word, all
things visible, have in themselves the first causes of their production and
motion. They hold, that there are two Suns, and as many Moons, which relieve
one the other alternately every day. They believe nothing of Heaven or
Paradise, and yet acknowledge the immortality of the Soul, but after a very
extraordinary manner. For they affirm, that the Soul, at its departure out of
the body it had first animated, enters into another, either of Man or Beast,
according to the good or ill life of the deceased: but that it ever makes
choice of the Female, that it may return again into the world, to live there in
another body.

Their Mosqueys, Their Mosqueys.
which they call Rales, are built four square with flat roofs, and toward the
East Side there is an open place, under which are the Chapels of their
Pagodes, built after a pyramidal form, and raised ten foot from the ground,
having upon the stairs leading up to them, several Figures of Wood, Stone, and
Paper, representing their deceased Kindred, whose lives had been remarkable for
some extraordinary good fortune. They do their greatest Devotions in the month
of August, during which, they mortify themselves by so great abstinencies, as
might pass elsewhere for no less then miraculous; it being certain, that there
are some, Their extraordinary ^bstinences.
who for the space of fifteen days, or three weeks, nay sometimes a month or
six weeks, live without taking any thing but water, into which they put the
scrapings or thavings of a certain bitter Wood, which is conceived to have
somewhat of nourishment in it. I must confess this will not easily be credited;
but it is so acknowledged a Truth in the Indies, that it is not disputed by
their greatest Enemies. They have also about that time many Assemblies in their
Mosqueys, where their discourse is concerning the lives of their departed
Saints, and there are read certain Legends, the people standing about the
Braman, who sits down in the midst of them, having his mouth covered with a
Linnen-cloath.

As they go into the Mosquey, Their public Assemblies.
they bestow their Charities, casting them into a great Copper basin, which
they place before the Pagode, and in requital, they receive a mark with the
Sandal-wood, which is made in their Foreheads, or upon their Clothes. While
they are discoursing about their Saints, which lasts for the most part four or
five hours, they are entertained with Music, which is paid for out of the
Charities that had been collected among them for the poor. They burn the bodies
of aged persons, but bury those of Children who dye under three years of age.
Their Widows are not obliged to burn themselves with their departed Husbands,
but they promise perpetual Widowhood. All that make profession of this Sect may
be admitted to Priesthood. Nay, Women are received into that Function, provided
they be above twenty years of age; but the Men are admitted into it, at seven,
eight and nine years of age. To become Priests, all they have to do, is to put
on the habit, to accustom themselves to the austerity of that kind of life, and
to make a vow of Chastity. Any one of the married couple has the privilege to
become a Priest, and by that means, to oblige the other to celibate, for the
remainder of his or her life. There are some make a Vow of Chastity in the
state of marriage; but this is seldom seen, and when it is, those who make such
Vows, are not overstrict in the observance of them.

All the other Castes, or Sects of the Benjanes, have an aversion and contempt
for this, and condemn it so much, that their Doctors continually exhort their
Auditors to shun the Conversation of those people; so that they will not only
not eat or drink with them, but they would not so much as set a foot in their
Houses, though it were to avoid an imminent and inevitable danger; and such as
are so unhappy as to touch them, are obliged to do a public and severe
penance.

The second Sect of the Benjans, The Sect of Samarath.
called Samarath, has this common with the former, that it permits not the
killing of any Creature or Insect that has life, nor the eating of any thing
that has had it. This Sect consists of Lock-makers, Smiths, Farriers,
Carpenters, Tailors, Shooe-makers, Furbishers, and all other Tradesmen,
admitting among them, even Soldiers, Their belief.
Clerks, and other Officers. Their Religion is different from that of the
former, in that they believe, that this World was created by a first cause,
which governs and preserves all, with a sovereign and unchangeable power.

They call him in their Language Permiseer, Their God and his Substitutes.
and assign him three Substitutes, who have their several Functions under his
Superintendency. The first, who is called Brama, has the disposal of all
Souls, which he sends into such Bodies as Permiseer appoints, either of Men or
Beasts. The second, whom they call Buffiuna, teaches the World to live
according to Gods Commandments, which they have disposed into four Books. He
has also the oversight of Provisions, and advances the growth of Wheat, Herbs
and Pulse, after Brama has endued them with Souls. The third, named Mais,
exercises his power over the dead. He is also Secretary to Permiseer, and takes
the good and bad works of the deceased into examination, that he may make a
report thereof to his Master, who having examined both the one and the other,
sends the Soul into a Body, where she does more or less penance,
proportionably to the good or ill she has done in the former. Those that are
sent into the body of a Cow, are accounted the most happy, in regard that that
Beast having something Divine in it, according to their opinion, they hope in a
short time to be purified of the sins which they had committed during their
continuance in the former body. But those which are forced to take up their
second habitations in the bodies of Elephants, Camels, wild Oxen, Goats, Asses,
Leopards, Swine, Serpents, or any other unclean Beast, are on the contrary
thought most unhappy, inasmuch as at their departure out of them, they pass
into the bodies of other Beasts, either tame, or less wild, where they complete
the expiation of the Crimes for which they were condemned to those punishments.
The same thing happens also to those souls which are in the bodies of some
Creatures that dye before they have completed their Purification; which being
absolutely consummated, Mais presents the Souls so purified to Permiseer, who
receives them into the number of his Servants.

They burn the bodies of the deceas^d, A particular Ceremony about the dead
save only those of Children under three years of age; but they have this
particular Ceremony, that these Obsequies are performed on the side of a River
or Brook, whither they carry the sick persons, when they are past hopes of
recovery, that they may expire there.

There is no Sect, The Women burn themselves at their Husbands death. The
reason of it.
in which the Women sacrifice themselves so cheerfully to the memory of their
Husbands, as in this Sect of Samarath. For they are persuaded, that the promise
which Buffiuna makes them, in the Law he gave them from Permiseer, is
infallible; to wit, that if a Woman has so great an affection for her Husband,
as to burn her self with him after his death, she shall live with him in the
other World seven times as long, and shall enjoy him with seven times as much
satisfaction as she had done in this: which hope makes them look on death, but
as a passage, through which they are to enter into a beatitude and bliss,
whereof they had in this world but a small earnest.

As soon as the Women are delivered, there is presented to the new born Child,
an Inkhorn, Paper and Pens, and if it be a Boy, they add a Bow and Arrows; to
signify that Buffiuha will write his Law in his understanding, and that one
day he shall raise his Fortunes by the Wars. For as we said before, this Sect
admits of Soldiers: but those among them, whose Profession it is to bear Arms,
make a distinct Sect, which they call that of the Rasboutes, of whom we shall
give an account anon.

Those of the Sect of Bisnow have this common with the two precedent, The Sect
of Bisnow.
that they abstain from feeding on any thing that has had life. They fast
also, and in the month of August have their Assemblies in their Agoges; so
they call their Mosqueys. Their principal Devotion consists in singing of Hymns
to the honor of their God, Their God.
whom they call Ram-ram, and pray, to bless them and their Families with a
supply of what they think necessary, that they may live without discontent and
inconvenience. Their singing is accompanied with dancing, and Music,
consisting of Drums, Pipes, Copper-basins, and other Instruments, upon which
they play before their Idols. They represent their Ram-ram, with his Wife, in
several manners, and adorn both their Statues on Holy Days, with many Gold
Chains, Collars of Pearl, and all sorts of precious Stones, and set up many
Lamps, and Wax-candles before them. This God has no Substitutes, as that of
the Sect of Samarath, but does all himself.

The ordinary sustenance of the Bisnow is only Herbs and Pulse, fresh Butter,
Milk and Curds. Their manner of life.
They are great lovers of the Atschia, which is a certain Composition made of
Ginger, Mangas, Citrons, Garlic, and Mustard Seed pickled with Salt, and drink
only Water, or Baratte. They are either Women or Priests that dress their meat;
and instead of Wood, which they forbear burning, because there are sometimes
Worms in it, which might by that means be destroyed, Their ^iring
they use Cow Dung dried in the Sun, and mixed with Straw, which they cut in
square pieces, as they do the Turfs in Holland, and so expose it to sale.

Those of this Sect are for the most part addicted to Merchandise, either upon
their own account, or as Agents and Factors under others. They understand the
business of Commerce extremely well, and their Conversation is not unpleasant;
whence it comes that both Christians and Mahumetans employ them as Brokers and
Interpreters, in their way of Trading.

They have this particular Custom in this Sect, Their Wives are not burnt.
that they permit not the Women to burn themselves with their Husbands; but
they oblige them to perpetual widowhood, even though the Husband died before
the consummation of the marriage. It is not long since, that among them, the
younger Brother was obliged to marry his elder Brothers Widow, to raise up seed
to him; but this custom is abolished by an express Law which condemns the
Women to celibate.

In the morning they all wash themselves in a Tanque, or rather in a River, if
there be any near the place where they live, and they think it not enough to go
into it up to the Waste, but they tumble, wallow, and swim in it, muttering
certain words between their Teeth, while the Braman, who sits on the Riverside
and looks to their Clothes, gives them his Benediction, and prays God that
they may be as clean from their sins, as their bodies are clear of filth. At
their coming out of the water he rubs their Foreheads, Noses and Ears, with a
certain Composition made of Sandal, or some other Odoriferous wood, and they
give him for his pains a small quantity of Wheat, Rice or Pulse.

Those of the Sect of G^eghy intermeddle not with either Trade or Traffic, The
Sect of the Goeghy.
but live a very solitary life, in the Country, in obscure Villages, or the
ruins of Houses, where they worship their God Bruin, and his Servant Mecis.
They have neither Mosqueys, nor any other public places, Their God.
wherein to assemble to do their Devotions; nay will not go into the Mosqueys
of the other Benjans, unless it be into those of the Sect of Samarath; but it
is only to take up their Lodging in them for want of other accommodation. For
they are forbidden by their Law to be proprietors of any thing. They shun the
conversation of Men, and live in Woods and Deserts, like the Hermits and
ancient A^chorites. They have nothing about them, but a piece of Linnen-cloath,
to cover that part which Nature is unwilling should be exposed to the view of
all. They rub their Bodies all over with Ashes, and whenever they sit down,
they have a little heap of Ashes near them, which they are perpetually handing,
and scatter of it upon their moist Hair, which disfigures them after a strange
manner. They never speak to such as pass by them, nor give them the time of the
day; nay, they will not answer those that speak to them, out of this
persuasion, that being consecrated to their God Bruin, they believe they should
defile themselves by speaking to other men. Whence it happens, that when they
come into any City, they make no stay therein, and will not turn out of that
Street which leads them to the Gate they would go out at. Wherein they are so
scrupulous, that they will not ask for any thing, though they were ready to
starve. They will indeed receive what is give^ them, but if there be naught
given them they live on Herbs and Roots, which they find in the fields. There
are some among them that have three or four servants, who put themselves
voluntarily into their service, that they may participate of their sanctity:
but all the service they do them is what they list themselves. For the Masters
never command them to do any thing, nay not what is most necessary to life. All
the other Benjans have a certain veneration for the Goeghys, except it be those
of the Cast, or Sect of Ceurawath, who have a horror for them, and shun their
conversation.

There are some among them have a greater reputation of knowledge and sanctity
then others, but they make no advantage thereof, in as much as their condition
is equal. They never marry, but live in so great observance of Chastity, that
they would not suffer a Woman to touch them. The common people has a great
devotion for these Goeghys, saluting them with much respect, and receiving
their Benediction with great submission.

The Goeghys believe, Their belief.
that their God Bruin has created all things, and that he continues them in
being, by his infinite power, by which he is able to destroy and reduce them to
nothing.

They affirm, that he is not to be represented by any Figure of either Man or
Beast, but that he is a light, which cannot be the Object of our sight,
inasmuch as, having created that of the Sun, it is not to be admired, that we
cannot contemplate the principle of so transcendent a brightness.

They believe not the Transmigration of Souls, Hold not the transmigration of
Souls.
as the other Benjans do; but affirm, that the Souls at their departure out of
the body, are immediately transferred to their God Bruin, to live with him
eternally, and to be united to that infinite Light.

Certain it is, that Charcoal-men and Chimney-sweepers among us are not so
besmutted as these people, who take a pleasure in disfiguring their bodies and
countenances, not only by the Ashes wherewith they continually rub them, but
also by their abstinences, which as they are greater, so are they withal much
more frequent then those of the Benjans of the Sect of Ceurawath. There are
some Women become Goeghys, but in regard that Sex is too tender and delicate,
to accustom themselves to so great austerity, their number is not very great.

The Benjans oblige their Proselytes, A strange manner of living.
that is, the Mahumetans, who embrace their Religion, to a very extravagant
manner of life. For, to renew their whole body, which, according to their
Opinion, is defiled by the flesh they had eaten, they oblige them for the space
of six months together, to mix amongst what they are to eat, a pound of
Cow Dung; out of this reason, that that Creature having, as they hold, some
thing divine in it, here is nothing can purify the body so well as that kind
of nourishment, which their Proselytes are permitted to diminish by degrees,
after the three first months of their conversion. They also condemn to that
kind of Diet, those of their own Sect, who having been prisoners among the
Mahumetans, or Christians, or conversing ordinarily among them, have been
persuaded to eat flesh, or drink wine; and receive them not into their
communication, till such time as they have been purified in that manner.

All the Benjans are extremely superstitious. The superstition of the Benjans.
For they never go out of their houses, till they have said their Prayers; and
if at their going out they meet with any ill presage, they return into their
houses, and do not any business of importance that day. They take to presage
ill Fortune, the meeting of an empty Cart, a wild Ox, an Ass, a Dog, if he be
not eating somewhat, a Goat, an Ape, a Deer, a Goldsmith, a Carpenter, a
Lock-smith, a Barber, a Tailor, a beater of Cotton, a Widow, a company of
People going to the enterment of a dead Body, or a Man returning from the same
Ceremony; as also, that of a Man or Woman carrying Butter, Oil, Milk,
brown-Sugar, Citrons, or any other sharp things, Apples, Iron, or any thing
relating to War. They are on the contrary, well pleased with the meeting of an
Elephant, or Camel, whether they be laden or not, as also of a Horse, a Cow,
an Ox, a wild Ox laden with water, a He-Goat, a Dog eating, a Cat coming on
the right hand of them, and Persons laden with Provisions, Curds and
white-Sugar; but above all, that of a Cock, or a Hare, and then they cheerfully
go about what they have to do, as being prepossessed with the opinion they
have, that the success of their Affairs will be answerable to their
expectations.

There are some who put the Rasboutes into the number of the Benjans, Rasboutes
their belief.
and affirm, that they are a branch of the Sect of Samarath, with which they
believe the transmigration of Souls, and several other things. But they believe
this in particular, that the Souls of Men go into Birds, who afterward give
their Friends notice of the good and evil which is to befall them: upon which
account it is, that they so superstitiously observe the flight and singing of
those Creatures. Their Widows burn themselves with the bodies of their deceased
Husbands, unless it be, that, at the contract of Marriage, there was some
promise made that they should not be forced thereto. But whereas all the other
Benjans are of a mild and reserved disposition, abhorring the effusion of
blood, even that of Beasts; these on the contrary, are a sort of violent and
daring people, who eat flesh, and live only by murder and rapine, and never
mind any other profession then that of Arms. The Mogul makes use of these Men,
as do also most of the other Princes of the Indies, because they are undaunted,
and entertain not the least fear of death. To this purpose, there is a Story of
five Rasboutes, A Story of five Rasboutes.
who forced by weariness to rest themselves in a Country man's house, there
happened to be a Fire in the Village, which by reason of the wretchedness of
the houses, soon came to that where they were. They had notice of it, but one
of them said to the rest, that having never turned their backs from danger, it
would be the greatest shame in the world to them, to shun death, which they had
never feared: That it were baseness in them to stir thence, but that they were
to make the Fire as much afraid of them, as others were of it, and force it to
stop its progress when it came near them; and they were so earnestly engaged in
these temerarious and extravagant discourses, that the Fire getting into the
Room where they were, one only had the time to get out, and to drag along with
him one of his Camerades, who could never afterward be recovered out of the
melancholy regret he had conceived, at his not having followed the example of
the others.

It is related also of another Rasboute, who going into the Country, in the
company of two others, came in his way to a Pit, at the sight whereof his Horse
stood still; but the Rasboute condemning the caution of the Beast, as if it had
proceeded from fearfulness, told him, that he was very much to blame to
entertain any fear, having on his back a Man that never knew any; and thereupon
beating him, he would have made him leap over the Pit; but, both Horse and Man
falling, they were both drowned, the Man acquiring among them, by this
inconsiderable and brutish action, the reputation of a Man heroically
courageous.

They have no compassion but what they have toward irrational Creatures,
especially Birds, Their Charity toward Bi^ds.
which they take the pains to keep and feed, out of a persuasion, that one day,
when their Souls shall be lodged in Creatures of that kind, some or other will
have the same charity toward them. And this is their employment particularly
on Holy Days, as also for ten or twelve days after the decease of their
nearest Kindred, and upon the anniversary days of their death.

They have this common with the other Benjans, that they marry their Children
very young, They marry their Children very young.
which is the less to be wondered at, inasmuch as it is very certain, that the
Indians of both Sexes are capable of engendring much sooner then any other
Nation: so that there are not any but are fit for the work of generation at ten
or twelve years of age. To this purpose I have a Story, which may seem
fabulous, but I have it from such grave persons, that I shall make no
difficulty to communicate it upon their credit.

Not many years since, A remarkable Story.
even in the reign of Scach Choram, who is yet living, a certain Rasboutes
Wife, who lived at Agra, was brought to bed of a Daughter, which at two years
of age had Breasts as big as those of any Nurse. A Lock-smith, neighbor to the
Rasboute, advised the Father and Mother to permit, that the hot Iron might be
applied thereto, which is the ordinary remedy they make use of against
superfluous humors. They consented thereto; but as soon as they had applied
the foresaid Remedy, the Lock-smith died, and soon after, the Father and
Mother, and all those that had been present at the said cure. The child had at
three years of age, what those of her Sex are not wont to have till twelve or
thirteen. The year after she had nothing of that kind, but her Belly was so
swollen as if she had been with child. That swelling was little abated the year
following, and at six years of age she was brought to bed of a Boy. But this
was thought a thing so extraordinary all over the Country, though they marry
very young, as I said before, that Sch^ch Choram sent for both Mother and
Child, and ordered them to be brought up at the Court.

Besides the Benjans, there is yet another sort of Pagans in the Kingdom of
Guzuratta, whom they call the Parsis. The Parsis.
These are the Persians of Fars and Chorasan, who fled into those parts, to
avoid the persecution of the Mahumetans in the seventh Age. For Abubeker,
having undertaken to establish the Mahumetan Religion in Persia by force of
Arms, the King perceiving it was impossible for him to oppose it, took shipping
with eighteen thousand men at Ormus, and landed in Indosthan. The King of
Cambaya, who was a Hindou, or Indian, that is, a Pagan, as himself, received
him to dwell in his Country, into which that liberty drew several other
Persians, who, with their Religion, have preserved and continued their ancient
manner of life. Their manner of life.
Their habitations are for the most part along the Seacoast, and they live
very peaceably, sustaining themselves by the advantage they make out of the
Tobacco they plant, and the Terry they get out of the Palms of those parts, and
whereof they make Arak, in regard they are permitted to drink Wine. They
intermeddle also with Merchandise, and the exchange of Money, and keep Shops,
and are of all Trades, except those of Farriers, Black-smiths, and Lock-smiths;
in regard it is an unpardonable sin among them to put out the fire.

The Parsis believe that there is but one God, Preserver of the Universe: That
he acts alone, and immediately, in all things; and that the seven Servants of
God, for whom they have also a great Veneration, have only an inferior
administration, whereof they are obliged to give an account.

The first of these Servants is called Hamasda, The seven Servants of God.
and has the Government of Men, and his charge is, to induce them to the
exercise of good Works.

The second, whom they call Bahman, has the oversight of Cattle, and presides
over all the living Creatures that are upon Earth.

The third, named Ardybesh, preserves Fire, and hinders it from being put out.

The fourth is called Sarywar, and is entrusted with the charge of Metals,
about which they are very curious; and accuses those who neglect the making of
them clean; which negligence is a mortal sin among them.

The fifth, whom they call Espander, has a care of the Earth, and keeps it
from being pollut^d, and hinders it from being otherwise used then it ought.

A^waerdath, who is the sixth, has the same charge over the Water, as Espander
has over the Earth, and keeps it from being defiled with filth.

The seventh, whom they call Ammadath, looks to the preservation of Fruits,
Trees, Herbs and Pulse, but without any power either to advance or retard their
production. For these seven subalternate Spirits are appointed by God, only to
take cognizance of the abuses committed in this World, and to make their report
thereof to him.

Besides these seven Servants, Twenty six other Servants of God.
whose dignity is very great, God has twenty six other Servants, who have all
their particular Functions.

The first, whom they call Saroch, takes possession of the Soul immediately
upon its departure out of the Body, and conducts it before two Judges, whom
they call Mere Resus, and S^ros, to be examined, and to receive according to
their Sentence, either its condemnation or absolution from its sins. Their
manner of proceeding in judgment, is, to put the good and evil Works into two
Scales, that they may judge of them according to their weight. The good and
evil Angels stand about the Scales, and carry away the Souls adjudged to them,
either into Paradise, where they enjoy eternal bliss, or into Hell, there to be
tormented to the end of the World, which they believe will be renewed at the
expiration of a thousand years; and then, they shall enter into other Bodies,
to lead a better life then they had done in the former.

The fourth of these Servants is called Beram, and has the oversight of all
Military affairs; upon which account it is that they address themselves to him,
that they may obtain of God Victory, by his Intercession.

The fifth is Carraseda, that is to say, the Sun.

The sixth Auva, that is, the Water.

The seventh is called Ader, and governs the Fire, under Ardy besth.

The eighth is Moho, or the Moon.

The ninth is Tiera, that is, Rain.

The tenth, called Gos, has the oversight of Cattle.

The eleventh, who is called Farwardy, has the custody of the Souls which are
in Paradise.

The twelfth, named Aram, is he that gives Joy or Sadness to Mankind.

The thirteenth, named Goada, governs the Winds, and makes them blow as he
pleases.

Dien, who is the fourteenth, teaches Men the Law of God, and inspires them
with good motions to observe it.

Apirsanich, who is the fifteenth, is he who bestows Wealth on Men.

Astaet, who is the sixteenth, is he that gives Men Understanding and Memory.

The seventeenth, whom they call Assaman, is Superintendent over Commerce.

The eighteenth, called Gamigat, has the Government of the Earth.

Marispan, who is the nineteenth, is Goodness it self, who is communicated to
those that invocate him.

They call the twentieth Amiera, and his Presidentship is over Money, whereof
he has the disposal.

The one and twentieth is called Hoem, and is he, without whose concurrence
there happens no Generation of Men, or Beasts, or Production of Fruits.

Dimma and Berse, are indifferently designed to attend all Men: and the three
remaining, whom they call Dephader, Dephemer, and Dephdin, are engaged upon the
particular Service of God, who imployes them about all Affairs indifferently.

The Parsis, who call these twenty six Servants by one general name, Geshoo,
that is to say, Lords, believe, that they have an absolute power over the
things whereof God has entrusted them with the Administration. Whence it
comes, that they make no difficulty to worship them, and to invocate them in
their extremities, out of a persuasion, that God will not deny them any thing
they desire upon their Intercession.

They have a very great respect for their Doctors and Teachers, and allow them
a very plentiful subsistence, with their Wives and Children, though some among
them intermeddle also with Merchandise, which they are permitted to do
according to their Law; but these are not so highly esteemed, as those others
who spend all their time in teaching Children to read and write, They have no
Mosqueys.
and explicating their Law to the people. They have no M^squeys, nor other
public places, for the Exercise of their Religion: but they make use, to that
purpose, of some room in their houses, where they do their devotions sitting,
and without any inclination of the body.

Nor have they any particular day in the week designed for that end, but they
observe the first, and twentieth day of the Moon. Though their Months consist
of thirty days a piece, yet does their Year consist of 365. days, for they
add five days to the last Month. Their Priests are not known by their habit,
in regard it is common to them, not only with all the rest of the Parsis, The
bodge of their Religion*
but also with all the other Inhabitants of the Country; from whom they are
distinguished by a String or Wreath of Wooller Camels Hair, wherewith they make
them a Girdle, which comes twice about the body, and is tied with two knots
behind, which is the only distinctive mark of their Religion, and so
inseparable from their Profession, that if it happen to be lost, he who is so
unfortunate as to have lost it, may neither eat, nor drink, nor speak, nay not
stir from the place where he is till another be brought him from the Priest who
sells them. The Women wear of them as well as the Men, after they are come to
twelve years of age, at which time they are thought capable of comprehending
the Mysteries of Religion.

Their houses are little and dark, Their Houses.
very poorly furnished, and they have a great affection to live in the same
quarter. They have no particular Magistrate among them, yet do they not think
much to accept of the employments which the Mahumetans give them, and create
among themselves two of the most considerable of the Nation, who decide such
differences as may arise, and for which they never plead before any other
Judges.

There is nothing so precious among them as Fire, Fire is accounted sacred
among them.
which they keep in very carefully, upon this account, as they affirm, that
there is not any thing affords so lively a representation of the Divinity as
Fire does. Whence it comes, that they never put out a Candle, or a Lamp, and
never make use of Water to quench the Fire, though the House were in danger of
being burnt; but they endeavor to smother it with Earth. For it is the
greatest misfortune can happen to them, to find the Fire so far out in their
Houses, as that they must be forced to go out among their Neighbors to get
some.

They also marry their Children while they are very young, but they suffer the
Parents to bring them up at their own Houses, till they are come to fifteen or
sixteen years of age, and then they consummate the marriage. Their Widows are
permitted to marry the second time; whence it comes that there are not so many
disorders committed among them, as there are among the other Nations. They
severely punish Adultory.
But Adultery and Fornication are the greatest sins they can commit, and which,
no doubt, they would punish with death, if they had the administration of
Justice in their own hands.

When any one is so sick, as that there is little hopes of his recovery, he is
taken out of his bed, Their manner of burial.
to be laid on a little bed of green Turfs upon the ground, where he lies till
he give up the ghost, and immediately after, five or six Men, whose employment
it is to make the Graves, take him from the said Pallat of Turfs, put a Shroud
about him, and lay him upon an Iron-grate, made after the form of a Biere, upon
which they carry the body to the place of burial, which is above a League from
the City. These places, or, if we may call them so, Churchyards, are divided
into three parts, all enclosed with a Wall of twelve or fifteen foot high, one
whereof is for the Men, another for the Women, and the third for Children. Over
the Graves there are Bars laid cross like a Grate, upon which they lay the
body, there to remain till the Crows and other devouring Birds have consumed
them, so as that the Bones fall into the Grave. The Kindred and Friends
accompany the Corpse with horrid cries and lamentations, and make a halt when
they are come within 500. paces of the Grave, till such time as the
Grave-makers have laid it upon the Grate, and made certain Prayers for the
Sonl. About a month or six weeks after, they carry the Turfs upon which the
deceased party died, to the Churchyard, as a thing polluted, which they would
not so much as touch; and every month they make a Feast for the nearest of the
Kindred, in memory of the departed. If it happens that they touch a dead
Carcass, or the Bones of a dead Beast, they are obliged to cast off their
clothes, to cleanse their bodies, and to do penance for nine days together,
during which, neither Women nor Children dare come near them. They are of this
particular persuasion, that they whose Bones chance to fall into the Water, are
irrecoverably damned.

Their Law forbids the eating of ought that has had life; yet are not these
prohibitions so rigorous, but that in case of necessity, nay even in the time
of war, they kill Sheep, Goats, tame Fowl and Fish, and eat thereof: But they
religiously abstain from the Ox and Cow, nor do they kill Elephants, Camels,
Horses or Hares; but as to the Ox and Cow, they forbear them so strictly, that
they commonly say, they had rather feed on their Fathers and Mothers then eat
of an Ox or Cow.

They are permitted to drink Wine and Terry, Drun^enness.
but are forbidden the drinking of Aquavitae, and above all things, being
overcome with drunkenness: This is a sin among them, which cannot be expiated
without undergoing a very severe penance, which a man must either submit to,
or be content to quit their communion.

Their stature is none of the greatest, but they are of a clearer Complexion
then any of the other Indosthans, and their Women are beyond comparison whiter
and fairer then those of the Country, or those of the Mahumetans. The Men wear
great bushy Beards, cut round or somewhat Spade-wise. Some cut off their Hair,
others let it grow to the full length. Those who cut their Hair, leave growing
on their Crowns a Lock or Tust about an inch in compass.

They are the most self-ended and covetous sort of people in the World, using
all possible industry to overreach and circumvent those they trade withal,
though otherwise they have an aversion for theft. They are of a better Nature
then the Mahumetans, at least if it may be said there is any good Nature
consistent with a self-seeking mind, when it is once possessed with the basest
and most infamous of all Vices, Avarice.

There are in the Kingdom of Guzuratta two other sorts of Pagans, The Indous.
one whereof are the Indous, who come out of the Province of Multhan, and the
parts about Asmeern, and are not Benjans, inasmuch as they kill all sorts of
Beasts, and eat thereof, excepting only the Ox and Cow. They eat their Meals
within a Ring or Circle, within which they permit not the Benjans to enter.
They are for the most part Soldiers, and the Mogul makes use of them for the
keeping of the most considerable places of his Kingdom. The other sort comes
out of the Kingdom of Baghenal, which is commonly called the Kingdom of
Gol^anda, Jentives.
and they are called the Ientives.

These are a sort of very ignorant people, who refer themselves, as to matter
of Religion, to their Bramans. Their belief.
They believe, that in the beginning there was but one God, who took others
into a participation of his power, according as Men came to deserve that honor
by their heroic Actions; and it is to this kind of Saints that they build
Masqueys.

They believe the Immortality and Transmigration of Souls, upon which
persuasion they abhor the effusion of blood. Accordingly are there not to be
found any Robbers or Murderers among them; but on the other side, they are
generally Liars and Cheats, in which good qualities they exceed all the other
Indians. They severely punish Adultery, but they so openly permit Fornication,
that there are whole Families among them, whom they call Bagawaro, who
prostitute themselves publicly.

Besides all these, they have yet among them another sort of people, whom they
call Theers, Theers.
who are neither Pagans nor Mahumetans, for they have no Religion at all. They
are altogether employed about the scouring of Wells, Sinks, Common-Shores, and
Privies, as also the fleaing of dead Beasts, whose flesh they eat.

They also conduct condemned persons to punishment, and are sometimes the
Executioners of them. Whence it comes that they are an abomination to all the
other Indians, who are obliged to purify themselves from head to foot, if any
of these people, whom, upon that occasion, they call Alchores, should touch
them. Which is the reason that they suffer them not to live within Cities, but
assign them Habitations in the extremities of the Suburbs, that they may be as
far as may be conveniently from the conversation of other men.

We shall not make it our business here to speak of the Religion of the
Mahumetans, wherewith the Kingdom Guzuratta is peopled, in regard that, some
few points only ex^epted, it is common to them with the Turks and Persians,
whereof there has been an account given in the precedent Travels of the
Ambassadors. But we shall continue a little further the digression wherein we
are engaged, and treat of the manner of life of the Mahumetans of the Indies,
which is much different from that of the Turks and Persians.

We will begin with their Ceremonies of Marriage. The marriage Ceremonies of
the Indian Mahumetans.
The Friends on both sides being agreed, and the Wedding Day appointed, there
is brought to the Bridegrooms door a Horse, whose Mane and Crupper are beset
with all sorts of Flowers, as is also the piece of Network, wherewith they
cover the Bridegrooms face, who gets on horseback, accompanied by his Kindred
and Friends, having on each side two Pages carrying Umbrelloes of painted
Paper, and before him Music, and certain Men, who cast into the Air, Squibs,
Crackers, and other Fireworks. In this Equipage he passes through the
principal Streets of the City, and at last comes to the Brides door, where he
entertains her with his Music and Fireworks, for the space of half an hour.
Then he goes into the house, where he sits down on pieces of Tapistry,
purposely set there for that Ceremony; and whither the Bride comes to him
accompanied by her Kindred, and the Molla and Kasi, or Judge of the place. The
Molla reads certain passages of the Alchoran; and after he has taken the
Bridegrooms Oath, that in case of Divorce, he will provide for the subsistence
of his Wife, he blesses the marriage, and goes his way. The rest of the company
stay in the room to eat Bettele, and some other Drugs, but they drink no Wine,
instead whereof, they take Pills of Amsion or Opium, The effects of Opium.
which works the same effect, and intoxicates them as Wine does. The Kindred
and Friends continue their Assemblies, five or six, sometimes eight or ten
days together, especially when the marks of the Consummation of marriage are
apparent upon the sheets of the new married couple. But if the Bridegroom find
it more beaten and common then he expected, he uses it as a highway, and
without any more ado abandons it to the public; as on the contrary, if he be
not able to force himself a passage, and that in the three or four first days
of his marriage, he gives not visible assurances of his abilities in the work
he has undertaken, one of the Brides nearest Kinswomen sends him a Distaffe,
with this message; That since he is incapable of doing man's work, it is but fit
he should be put to woman's.

Their marriages are not indissoluble, They may be divorced.
as they are among Christians, nay indeed among the other Mahumetans, among
whom there is no Divorce made, till the grievances of the parties be first
examined, and after that, not without the authority of the Judge. But here the
men make it an express Article in their Contracts of marriage, that they may be
divorced, not only in case of Adultery or sterility, but also in case of ever
so little aversion they may conceive against their Wives; provided some course
be taken by them for their subsistence, during their lives.

Not a word of any restitution of Dower, in regard the Women there do not bring
their Husbands any thing besides their Clothes and Jewels: Nor indeed is there
any but have their Pendants, Rings and Bracelets, of each good store.

The Women go seldom abroad, and those that are of any quality go in close
Coaches, or are carried in Palanquins, or Litters, according to the Indian
mode. There are indeed those who ride on horseback, but they have their faces
covered with a Skarf; so that they are only the meaner sort, or the common
ones, that go a foot, or are seen with their faces uncovered. They are
delivered without any pain almost, in so much that it is seldom seen there that
Women are above two or three hours in labor.

The Mahumetans bring up their Children with much care and tenderness, They
bring up their Children well.
send them to School as soon as they are capable of learning any thing; and
there they are taught to read and write. Those who are not of ability to
maintain their Children at School, bestow them on some person of quality, or
send them to the Wars, as soon as they are able to bear Arms. They who put
themselves into the service of others, enter into a very unhappy condition;
inasmuch as they are allowed but three or four Ropias a month, toward meat,
drink and cloth.

It is observed, that the Children of the Mahumetans have a particular
tenderness of those that brought them into the world; nay, that it is sometimes
so great, that they would rather starve themselves, then suffer those from whom
they derive their life, should want any thing requisite for the preservation of
their own.

There is hardly any person of quality, but makes him a handsome Garden, within
which he builds a fair house, having a great number of little windows of all
sides, which is to serve for a place of Sepul^^^^ for them, and all their
Family after them; in these kinds of Structures they lay out vast sums of money.

The Ceremonies of their Interments are these. Their Interments.
Immediately upon the Departure, the Kindred bewail the deceased, and ask him,
why he would dye? and whether he wanted those conveniences which he should have
had? etc. Then they dine, and there is a Feast made, in memory of the deccased.
In the mean time, the Body is well washed, there is a clean perfumed Sheet
wrapped about it, and it is put into an open Coffin, from which three or four
Mollas never stir, but continue near the Body, reading and praying for the Soul
of the deceased, till it be carried to the ground. The Coffin is covered with
Cotton, Velvet, or some other more precious Stuff, according to the abilities
of the deceased, and the Kindred and Friends accompany the Body, which is
carried by ten or twelve Men to the place of burial, the Mollas singing in the
mean time certain Hymns, of thanksgiving Songs, to the glory of God. The Body
is laid down upon the right side, with the Face turned toward the West, the
Feet toward the South, and the Head toward the North; and the Coffin is
covered with a board, to keep the Earth from touching the Body, and defiling
it. While the Body is let down into the Grave, the Kindred mutter certain
Prayers between their teeth; and that done, all the company returns to the
house of the deceased, where the Mollas continue their Prayers for his Soul,
for the space of two or three days: and during all this time, there is no fire
made within the house, but the meat is dressed elsewhere.

They assume the quality of Mussulmans, They are called Mansulmans or
Mussulmans.
and believe that there is no salvation out of their Communion, treating as
Heretics and Infidels, not only the Christians, but also all such as profess
any other Religion then theirs. Nay, they would not eat of what a Christian or
Pagan had dressed, unless it be Bread, Butter, Cheese, Preserves, or any thing
of that kind. They have a far greater aversion for the Roman Catholics then
they have for the Protestants, upon this account, that they cannot endure the
worshipping of Images, nor the Adoration of things visible.

They are for the most part of a good stature, Their stature and complexion.
and there are few hunch-back'd or lame among them. They among them who are
called Mogolies, are of a clearer Complexion then the others, but they have all
their Hair black, and without curling.

They love not flaxen or fair hair'd people, and have an aversion for such as
are red hair'd, out of an opinion they have, that they are Leprous. For that
Disease is very common in those parts; nay the more in this regard, that the
Pox, which is no less common, is never so well cured, but that it leaves some
corruption in the blood, which by insensible degrees infects the whole body,
and, in time, degenerates into Leprosy. The Mollas suffer their Beards to
grow, but all the rest shave, not only their Beards, but also their Heads,
excepting only a little tuft, or lock, which they leave upon the Crown; upon
this persuasion, that by the said lock, Mahumet is to take them and lift them
up to Heaven.

Both Men and Women are clothed much after the same manner. Their Habit.
Their Garments, which are of Cotton, Silk, or Brocadoe, according to the
several qualities of the persons, are close above, like our close Coats, but
from the waste downwards they grow wider and wider, till they come to the small
of the leg, where their breeches, which come down to the feet, are gathered
into many folds. Their Shoes are of Spanish Leather, or some Silk-stuffe, or
Brocadoe, the quarters very low, in regard they put them off ever and anon,
when they go into their Chambers, the Floors whereof are covered with Tapistry.
As to what they wear about their Heads, it is rather like that of the Turks
then that of the Persians, and is made of a very thin Stuff, of Cotton or Silk,
and wrought with Gold or Silver Thread. They call it She Is, and never put it
off, but when they go to bed. Upon their ordinary Garment, they wear a kind of
Cloak, which they call Pomer^eis, against the Cold and Rain. They tie their
Garment about with a Girdle, which they call Commerbant, which is made of a
Silk-stuffe, wrought with Gold Thread, upon which they have another, which is a
larger, of a very fine Cotton. Persons of Quality wear in their Girdles a kind
of Arms or Ponyards, short and broad, which they call Ginda, or Catarre, the
handle and sheath whereof are of Gold, and many times set with precious Stones.

The Houses of Persons of Quality are spacious enough, Their Houses.
and consist of several Appartments, Halls, Chambers and Closets. The Roofs of
their Houses are flat, so as that a Man may go upon them, to take the fresh
Air, and lie there in the night. There is no House almost, but has its Garden
and Tanque; but their Buildings are poor, for their Walls are but of Earth,
plaistered over with a Composition, made of Freestone beaten small, Lime, Gum
and Sugar, which makes a dazzling white, and is as smooth as Glass. Their Houses
are but poorly (...), even the Kitchen it self, where you see only a few Dishes
and Stoves: but the Women in their own Lodgings take no small pride in setting
out their Gold and Silver Plate.

The Men receive their Visits in a Hall, The Ceremonies of their Visits.
where they sit on several pieces of Tapistry: At their entrance into the Room
they mutually salute one another with their Salom, which they accompany with a
low inclination; and if the Person whom they salute be of Quality, they put the
right hand to their heads, to show the power they are willing he should have
over them. When there is no submission due on either side, the Visitants think
it enough to salute one the other only with an inclination of the body, and
sometimes they take one another by the lock, saying Grab anemcas, that is, be
it to you according to the prayers of the poor. He who receives visits keeps
his place, and causes those who come to see him, to sit on both sides of him.
They are very civil and very reserved in their conversation, insomuch that they
are never seen contesting or loud in their discourse, and never use any
gestures of either the hand or the head. When they would whisper to any one,
they cover their mouth with a Skarf or Napkin, lest their breath should offend
the person whom they speak to. They who make Visits about business, take leave
as soon as they have done; but intimate Friends continue their Visits, till the
Master of the house be called to dinner.

They are very expensive in Clothes, Their expense.
Feasting and Women; for their Law allowing them to take all pleasures
imaginable, provided they do not injure their Neighbors, they are willing
enough to make their advantage of that permission, and so pursue all the
delight their hearts can wish. When they eat, they sit upon Tapistry, and are
served by a Carver. They have no Napkin, nor need any, for they never touch the
Meat with their hands.

They keep as many Servants as they can maintain, Their Domestics.
assigning every person his particular Employment, wherein the others are so
exact, that they who are appointed to do one thing, will not do the least
service for another. For a Selvidar, whose place it is to look to the Horses,
will not meddle with an Ox, or do any thing about the Cart, because that is
the duty of the Belluwan. The Serriewan has the oversight of the Camels, and
the Mahout that of the Elephants.

The Frassy looks to the Tents and Tapistry; and the Santeles are Lacqueys.
These have a great Plume of Feathers on their Heads, and two little Bells upon
their Breasts, and will easily travel fifteen or sixteen Leagues a day. They
are not kept in the House, but have their Wages, on which they live, though it
amounts not to above three or four Ropias a Month. But they have withal
certain Vails, calied Testury; yet with all the Advantages they can make of
their services, it is as much as they can do to subsist.

Their greatest expense is that which they are at about their Wives. For being
permitted to have three or four, if they please, they are obliged to maintain
them, with their Eunuchs and Slaves, according to their quality, by allowing
them a certain sum monthly, as also by finding them Clothes, Pearls, and
Household Stuff. Their Polygamy has this convenience in it, that there is no
Woman, but uses all Industry and Artifice imaginable to gain her Husbands
affection, and defeat her Rivals. All the caresses, all the kindnesses she can
think of, she makes use of to ingratiate her self.

There is no Drug eminent for its veneral Virtues, but she will find out some
means or other to give him, to excite him to Voluptuousness; and she thinks no
compliance too great, to purchase his more frequent enjoyments. They have also
a great kindness for the Eunuchs, in whose custody they are, to engage them to
afford them more liberty in their restraint, which they brook so ill, that in
those parts a man would think Polygamy should rather be permitted the Women
then the Men.

But of all, The condition of Tradesmen.
Tradesmen are in the saddest condition, in as much as the Children cannot be
put to any other Trades then what their Fathers are of, and there is this
incouvenience withal, that a piece of work must pass through three or four
hands before it be finished; so that all they can do is to get five or six
pence a day. They must accordingly fare very poorly, their ordinary Diet being
only Kitsery, which they make of Beans pounded, and Rice, which they boil
together in water till the water be consumed. Then they put thereto a little
Butter melted, and this is their Supper, for all day they eat only Rice and
Wheat in the grain.

Their Houses are low, Their Houses.
the Walls of Earth, and covered with green Turfs. They make no fire in their
Houses; for having nothing that is combustible but Cow Dung, the stink of that
would be insupportable; whence it comes that they burn it before their Doors.
They also rub the walls with the same dung, out of an imagination, that it
keeps away Fleas and other Insects.

Merchants Merchants.
are infinitely more happy then Tradesmen; but they also have this
inconvenience, that as soon as they have gotten any wealth together, they are
exposed to the envy of the Grandees, who find out ways to flecce them, as soon
as they make any show of it. And whereas they cannot do it with Justice, they
many times make use of such pretenses as cost those their lives who have
acquired excessive riches.

All the Mahumetans of these parts may be said to profess the same Religion;
but they have among them certain Superstitions, and particular manners of life,
whereby they are distinguished into several Sects, though it may be also
alleged, that they are to be accounted rather so many Nations, then different
Sects. For when they are distinguished into Patans, Moguls, or Mogollies, and
Indosthans, who are subdivided into many other more considerable Fractions, as
Sayet, Seegh, and Leet, it must be confessed, that if there be any difference
in their humors, and manner of life, they brought it out of the Countries
whence they came, and that it is not to be attributed to their Religion. For it
is certain that the Patans Patans.
are those, who in the precedent Travels of the Ambassadors, are called
Padars, a sort of self-conceited, insolent, cruel, and barbarous people. They
slight others, for no other reason, then that they are not so rash as
themselves in hazarding their lives without any necessity.

The Moguls, Moguls,
on the contrary, who came out of great Tartary, are good natured, mild,
discreet, civil, obliging, and full of compliance; whence it comes, that they
are more respected then the others.

The Indosthans, Indosthan^
or Hindusthans, are the ancient Inhabitants of the Country, and distinguished
from the rest by their color, which is much blacker then that of the two
former. These are a Rustical sort of people, and covetous, and not so ingenious
and crafty as the Patans and Moguls.

In the Province of Haca-chan, there lives a certain people, whom they call
Blotious, Blotious.
who are of a strong constitution, and courageous, as the Patans. They are for
the most part employed about the carriage of Merchandises, they let out Camels,
and undertake the Conduct of the Caffilas, and this they do with so much
fidelity, that they would rather lose their lives, then endure the reproach of
having lost any thing committed to their charge.

There are no common Inns in all the Kingdom of Guzuratta, No Inn in Guzuratta*
nor indeed in all the Mogul's Country; but instead thereof, in Cities, as
also in some Villages, there are certain public Buildings, called Sarai, built
by some persons out of Charity, for the convenience of Strangers and
Travelers, who, were it not for those, would be forced to lie in the open Air.
These are the Caravanseras, which have only the four walls, and a covering over
head; so that to be accommodated therein, a Man must bring along with him what
is not to be had there.

In traveling through the Country, they make use of Camels, Mules, Horses and
Oxen. They have also a kind of Coaches, for two or three persons, which are
drawn by Oxen, whereto they are so accustomed, that they easily go ten or
twelve leagues a day. The upper part or covering of these Coaches is of Cloth
or Velvet; but those which carry Women are close of all sides.

Persons of all quality make use also of Elephants, and are sometimes carried
in Palanquines, which are a kind of Litter or Sedans, carried by two men upon
their Shoulders with a bar. They bring up their Elephants with much care, and
are at great charge about them. They delight much in Hawking and Hunting. Their
Greyhounds are somewhat less then ours, but they tame Tigers and Leopards,
whereof they make use in hunting, and these surprise their prey at a sudden
leap, but they never pursue it.

They are particularly industrious at the catching of River-fowl, by means of
the Skin of a tame Duck, which being filled with Hay, they swim even with the
Water, and drawing the Decoy-duck after them, they insensibly get among the
others, and take them by the feet, without ever frighting them.

They are very expert at the Bow, Their expertness at the Bow.
which they make of a wild Oxes horn, and the Arrows of a very light kind of
Cane; nay, they are so excellent at it, that sometimes they will take a Bird
flying.

They delight much in Chess, and have also a kind of Game at Cards. They are
lovers of Music, though there be no great Harmony in their own. But above all
things they are beso^^ed with judiciary Astrology, in so much that they never
undertake any business of consequence, but they first consult the Minatzim.

They have some of Aristotle's Works translated into the Arabian tongue, They
have some of Aristotle's, and Avicenna's Works.
which they call Aplis, as also some Treatises of Avicennas, for whom they have
a very high respect, because he was born at Smarcanda, under the jurisdiction
of Tamerlam. Their Writings are not ill, and their Productions are not void of
Eloquence. They keep a Register of all the remarkable Actions that are done
among them, and have such an exact account thereof, as might serve to write a
History of the Country.

Of their Language there are many Dialects, Their Language.
but it is easy enough to be learnt, and they write as we do, from the left
hand to the right. Most of any quality about the Mogul's Court speak the
Persian tongue; nay some, but very few, speak also the Arabian.

The most common Diseases of those parts are the bloody Flux, The Diseases of
the Country.
and burning Fevers; and the Remedy they ordinarily make use of against them
is Abstinence. They have good store of Physicians, but no Surgeons. Barbers, of
which Profession there is a great number, are they who let blood, and apply
Leeches.

In the Kingdom of Guzuratta, Winter begins in June.
Winter begins toward the end of June, and lasts till September: but there are
not such continual Rains there as at Goa, for it rains only in certain
Intervals, and particularly at new and full Moon. The North Wind blows
constantly for six months together, and the South Wind for as many. The
hottest months in the year are April, May, and the beginning of June, during
which the sultriness of the weather is such, that it were insupportable, were
it not that some Winds rise ever and anon, which moderate the excessive heats;
but with that convenience they bring along with them an inconvenience, which
is, their raising such an extraordinary Dust, that it deprives a Man of the
sight of the Sun.

There is a vast Trade driven in many Commodities all over the Kingdom of
Guzuratta, The Commerce of Guzuratta.
but particularly in Cotton and Linen Clothes, which are in fairness and
fineness equal to those of Holland; as also in several Silk-stuffes, as
Contoms, which are of several colors, Satins, Taffatas, Petolas, Commerbands,
Ornis, of Gold and Silk, which Women commonly make use of to cover their Faces
withal, Brocadoes, Tapistry, or Alcatifs, Chitrenges, or streaked Carpets, to
lay over Chests and Cabinets, quilted Coverlets of Silk or Cotton, which they
call Geodris, or Nalis, Tents, Perintos, or Neuhar, which they make use of
instead of Couches, Cadels, or Bed-steads, Cabinets of Lacque, Chess-boards of
Tortoise-shell, Seals, Beads, Chains, Buttons, and Rings of Ivory, Amber,
Rock-Crystal, and Agat,

The best Indico in the world comes from about Amadabath, from a Village called
Chrichees, The manner of making Indico.
whence it derives the name. The Herb of which they make it is like that of
yellow Parsnip, but shorter, and more bitter, sprouting forth into branches
like a Reed, and growing, in kind years, six or seven foot high: the Flower is
like that of a Thistle, and the Seed like that of Fenu-greek. It is sown in
June, and cut in November, and December. It is sown but once in three years,
and the first year the leaves are cut off within a foot of the ground. The
stalks are taken away, and the leaves are set a drying in the Sun, and that
done, they are set a soaking, for four or five days, in a Stones^trough,
containing about six or seven foot water, which is ever and anon stirred, till
such time as the Water has sucked out the color and virtue of the Herb. That
done, they let out the Water into another Trough, where they suffer it to
settle for one night. The next day, all the Water is taken away, and what is
left in the bottom of the Trough is strained through a course Cloth, and is
set a drying in the Sun. And this is the best Indico; but the Country people
adulterate it, by mixing therewith a certain Earth of the same color. And
whereas the goodness of this Drug is discovered by its lightness, they have the
cunning to put a little Oil into it, to make it swim upon the water.

The second year, the stalk which was left the year before shoots forth other
leaves, but they are not so good as those of the first. Yet is this preferred
before Gyngey, that is, wild ^udico. It is also the second year that they
suffer some part of it to grow up to seed. That of the third year is not good,
and consequently not sought after by foreign Merchants, but is employed by the
Inhabitants of the Country in the dying of their Clothes. The best Indico is
almost of a violet color, and has somewhat of its smell, when it is burned.
The Ind^sthans call it Anil; and after it has been in the ground three years,
they suffer the Land to lie fallow for one year ere they sow it again.

Most of the Saltpeter which is sold in Guzuratta comes from Asmer, Saltpeter.
sixty Leagues from Agra, and they get it out of Land that has lain long
fallow. The blackest and fattest ground yields most of it, though other Lands
afford some, and it is made thus. They make certain Trenches which they fill
with their Saltpetrous Earth, and let into them small Rivulets, as much water
as will serve for its soaking, which may (...) the more effectually done, they
make use of their feet, treading it till it become a Broth. When the Water
has drawn out all the Saltpeter which was in the Earth, they take the clearest
part of it, and dispose it into another Trench, where it grows thick, and then
they boil it like Salt, continually scumming it, and then they put it into
earthen pots, wherein the remainder of the Dregs goes to the bottom; and when
the Water begins to thicken, they take it out of these pots, to set it a drying
in the Sun, where it grows hard, and is reduced into that form wherein it is
brought into Europe.

Borax, Borax.
or the green Earth which the Goldsmiths make use of in the refining of Gold
and Silver, is found in a Mountain, in the Province of Purbet, under the
jurisdiction of the Raja, Biberom, toward great Tartary; whence there is
brought also good store of Spikenard, Quicksilver, Musk, and Copper, as also a
certain color, which dies a very beautiful brown. The Borax grows in the River
Iankenckar, which at his coming out of the Mountain falls into the River
Maseroor, which crosses the whole Province, and produces that Drug, which grows
in the bottom of the River, as Coral does: The Inhabitants of Guzuratta call it
Iankenckhar, and keep it in Pouches of Sheep-skin, which, for its better
preservation, they fill with Oil.

The Hingh, Assa foetida.
which our Drugsters and Apotheciries call Assa foetida, comes for the most
part from Persia, but that which the Province of Vtrad produces in the Indies
is the best, and there is a great Traffic driven in it all over Indosthan. The
Plant which produces it is of two kinds; one grows like a Bush, and has small
leaves, like Rice, and the other resembles a Turnip-leaf, and its greenness is
like that of Fig Tree leaves. It thrives best in stony and dry places, and its
Gum begins to come forth toward the latter end of Summer, so that it must be
gathered in Autumn. The traffic of it is so much the greater in those parts,
upon this account, that the Benjans of Guzuratta make use of it in all their
Sawces, and rub their Pots and drinking Vessels therewith, by which means they
insensibly accustom themselves to that strong Scent, which we in Europe are
hardly able to endure.

The Amphion, Offion, or Opium, Opium.
which is spent in Europe, comes from Aden, or Cayro; but that which is sold in
the Indies comes out of the Province of Gualor, in Indosthan, and is nothing
but the juice which is got out of Poppy, by an incision made therein, when it
begins to grow ripe. All the Eastern Nations are great Lovers of it, in so much
that the young people, who are not permitted the use of it, and the meaner
sort, who are not able to buy it, will boil the Poppy it self, and eat of the
broth which is made thereof. And whereas the Poppy among them is called Pust,
they thence call those Pusty, who make use of that broth, instead of Opium.
The Persians affirm, that they were the first who made use of it, and that all
other Nations did it in imitation of their Grandees, who took it, at first, to
provoke sleeping. They take every day a small pill of it, about the bigness of
a Pea; not so much in order to sleeping, as that it should work the same effect
as Wine does, which infuses courage and great hopes into those, who otherwise
would not discover much of either. The Caffees, or Messengers, who travel into
the Country, take of it to hearten themselves; but the Indians make use of it
for the most part, that they may be the better fitted for the enjoyments of
Women. No doubt but it is a poison, which kills, if a Man do not accustom
himself thereto by little and little; and when he has so accustomed himself,
he must continue the frequent use of it, or he dies, on the other side. It so
weakens their Brains who take it continually, that they run the hazard of
losing the use of their Reason, and the principal functions of their
Understanding, and become in a manner stupid, if they recover not themselves by
the same Remedy.

We have spoken already of Lacque, and shall have occasion to say somewhat of
it elsewhere.

We shall therefore here only add, that in Guzuratta The Drugs of Guzuratta.
there grows abundance of Cummin, Ginger, and Mirobalans, which they traffic
much in, both dried and preserved with brown Sugar. There are also several
other Drugs, which have their use in Physic.

There are found in the same Kingdom Diamonds, Their precious Stones.
but not many, Pearls, Emeralds, Granats, or Garnets, Agats, etc. Alablaster,
red Marble, Jasper-stone, which the Inhabitants have the Art to polish above
all others.

There is but one kind of weight all over the Kingdom of Guzuratta, Their
Weights.
which they call Maon, that is to say, a hand, which weighs forty Ceers, and
makes thirty pounds and a half, each pound containing sixteen ounces; and a
Ceer weighs eighteen Peyses, which is a kind of brass money that makes about
twelve ounces.

They have two kinds of Else; Their Measures.
the lesser makes but half an Ell, and a sixteenth part of the measure of
France; and nineteen of the greater sort make thirteen Else three quarters of
the same measure.

They have also two sorts of Money, Their Money.
to wit, the Mamoudies, and the Ropias. The Mamodies are made at Surat, of
Silver of a very base alloy, and are worth about twelve pence steel. and they
go only at Surat, Brodra, Broitschia, Cambaya, and those parts. Over all the
Kingdom besides, as at Amadabath elsewhere, they have Ropias Chagam, which are
very good Silver, and worth half a Crown French money. Their small money is of
Copper, and these are the Peyses we spoke of, and whereof twenty six make a
Mamoudy, and fifty four a Ropia. They also make use of Almonds, whereof thirty
six make a Peyse, as also of certain Shells, which they call Kaurets, and are
gathered on the Seaside, eighty whereof amount to a Peyse. Spanish Ryals and
Rixdollars, are worth there five Mamoudies, in regard they covert them into
their own Coins with much advantage, by the change they make either to weight
or alloy, and many times as to both. They esteem the Larris of Persia, the
Silver whereof is very good. They have also a certain Coin of Gold, which they
call Xeraphins, and is worth about thirteen Ropias and a half; but there are
very few of them. The Chequines, and Ducats of Venice, are more common there,
and are worth eight and a half, and sometimes nine Ropias, Surat money,
according to the change, and the rate set on the money, which rises or falls
according to the plenty or scarcity of money, upon the place where it is paid.

There is abundance of counterfeit Money coined in the Indies, Much counterfeit
money in the Indies.
whence it comes that there is no payment made, but it is done before these
Changers, whom they call Xaraffes, who have their Shops at the corners of the
principal Streets, and for a small matter, secure the goodness of the Money,
which they are so well acquainted with, that they immediately discover whether
it be counterfeit or not.

Their ordinary way of accounting is by Lacs, each of which is worth a hundred
thousand Ropias; and a hundred Lacs make a Crou, or Carroa, and ten Carroas
make an Areb. A Theil of Silver makes eleven, twelve, or thirteen Ropias,
current money. A Massas and a half make a Theil of Silver, ten whereof make a
Theil of Gold. They call their Brass or Copper money Tacques; and it is
prohibited, upon pain of death, that any should transport either Gold, Silver,
or coined Brass out of the Country.

Speaking before casually of the fertility of this Country, The fertility of
Guzuratta.
we said, it wanted not any thing requisite for the life of Man. It produces
Wheat, Rice, Pease, Beans, Barley, Millet Turkish Wheat, Flax, Mustard Seed,
etc. Oil, Butter, Cheese, though somewhat dry, and over-salted, to please the
palats of Foreigners; and all these it is better stored with then any Province
of Europe. Their Wheat is much bigger and whiter then ours, and they make bread
of it, Their way of baking bread.
not to be baked in an Oven, as we do, but upon Iron plates. The poorer sort,
and particularly the Benjans, make a kind of Flawns of it in Frying-pans over
their fire of Cow Dung, which they make use of instead of Wood. Their Pease and
Benas are somewhat less then ours, but much more delicate, especially their red
Chices, wherewith in some places they feed their Horses, No Oats in the Indies.
Oxen and Buffles, instead of Oats, which is a kind of Grain not used in the
Indies. They do not make any Hay at all, nor ever cut any Grass, but what is
eaten while it is green. Their seed-time and harvest.
Their Sowing time is in May, and their Harvest in November and December.

There is not any person in the Mogul's Country, possessed of any real Estate
in Land. But when Seed-time is coming on, The Mogul is really possessed of the
whole Country.
the Peasants apply themselves to the Governor, or him who is next under the
King in the several Provinces, and acquaint him how much ground they intend to
cultivate that year, upon condition to allow the King a third part, nay
sometimes half the profits, in so much that it often happens, that the Peasants
hardly get in the charges they had been at in the manuring of it. On the
contrary, the Mogul leaves all the Meadow-ground to be Common, and makes little
or no advantage thereof; whence it comes, that most Grounds lie fallow, and
bring forth only Grass.

They sow in their Gardens all sorts of Pot Herbs, The Gardens.
as Lettice, Succory, Sorrel, Parsley, etc, Radishes, Navew, Cabbages,
Cowcumbers, Citruls, Garlic, Onions, Parsnips of several kinds; but above all,
Melons, which in delicacy exceed those of all other parts. The Rose only
excepted, there is almost no Flower but is sought after more for its color
then scent: for though those they call Mogera and ceampi have a good smell, yet
are the Women more in love with them for their color then scent. The former
are white, the latter yellow, and both are to be had all the year long, as also
the Grass wherewith all the Fields are covered, unless it be when the excessive
heat of the Summer dries it up.

Besides the Trees known to us, Trees.
and which bring forth Lemmons, Citrons of several kinds, and Pomegranats;
there are also those called Ananas, Banasses, Iaccas, Cocos, and Fig Trees, of
which they most cultivate the Cocos-trees, out of which they get the Terry.
There is also near Surat a kind of Grapes, but much less then those of Persia,
and much dearer then any other Fruit of the Country. We shall have occasion to
speak of it elsewhere, and shall therefore only add here, that their Forests,
which are full of these sorts of Trees, are stored, besides the Creatures we
have spoken of heretofore, with a kind of wild Dogs, which they call Iakals;
but it is death for any to hurt them, or any of the other Beasts, that are
yellow or black, because that sport is reserved for the King, and the Governor
of the Province.

Their Horses are not comparable to those of Persia and Arabia; Their Horses.
yet are they at great charge in keeping them, allowing a Groom for every
Horse, and feeding them after a particular manner. When they give them of that
kind of Pease called Ciches, whereof we spoke before, called by them Donna,
they cause them to be beaten and boiled. Besides which, they give them, twice a
day, morning and evening, two pounds of Barly-meal, which they make up into a
Paste with half a pound of Butter, and a pound of Sugar.

The Oxen of this Country are of the same making with ours, Their Beef and
Mutton.
save that they have a great bunch or rising between the Shoulders. The
Mahumetans are the only people that eat of them, as they do also of Mutton; but
they are only the poorer sort that do so. Persons of quality feed on Kid, which
they either roast whole, making a Pudding of Rice, Almonds, and Raisins of the
Sun, in the belly, or they stew them with Butter and Pepper, which they call
Brenghie, and is very good meat. They eat also of those Persian Sheep that have
such fat tails; but this is a very scarce dish, and consequently reserved for
great Men's Tables, and extraordinary Entertainments.

They have also Fowl, Their Fowl.
as Capons, Peacocks, Geese, wild-Ducks, Teal, Partridges, Pigeons, Herons,
Sparrows; as also all sorts of Birds of prey, as Faulcons, Tassels, Hawks,
Eagles, etc.

They want no River-fish, Fish,
as Carps, Breams, Eels, etc. and Salt-fish is extraordinary good, and very
cheap, proceeding hence, that the Pagans eat not of it at all, and the
Mahumetans love Flesh better then Fish. They have also all sorts of Shellfish,
as Oysters and Crabs, and particularly a certain Fish (which in the Maritime
Towns of Picardy is called Cheurette, and is a kind of great Prawn) so big,
that a dozen of them makes a good dish. It is very remarkable, that whereas,
upon all the Coasts of Europe, this Fish is best at the Full-moon, in those
parts it is so at the New; and at the Full, Shellfish are in a manner empty.
The Fish called Tubarons, which devour Men, are often seen in those parts, and
that is one reason why all persons ordinarily bathe and wash themselves in
Tankes.

Their Ships are but poorly built, Their Ships
in so much that they have no other way to dispose of their Artillery but upon
the deck, and consequently in the open Air. The greatest Voyages they make are
those of Iava and Sumatra, Eastward; and to Aden and Meca upon the Red Sea.
They sometimes carry above a thousand persons together, who for the most part
go upon Pilgrimage to Meca, that at their return they may be put into the
number of their Hoggoi, or Saints. They set sail at the beginning of the
March-Moon, and return in September, for the tempests, which reign from June
till that time upon those Coasts, makes them spend six months in a Voyage
which might be performed in two.

The Commodities they transport to the Coasts of Aden, Their trading to the
Red Sea.
are Cotton, Linnen-cloath, Indico, Camphire, Tobacco, Alum, Sulphur,
Benjamin, Pepper, and other Spices, Mirobalans, and several other sorts of
Preserves, and they bring back very little in Commodities, to wit, Coral,
Amber, Misseit, wherewith they dye red, Kahwa or Coffee-berries, and Opium,
which is accounted the best of all the East; but their best returns consist in
Gold and Silver coined.

The other Vessels, To the Persian Gulf.
which are less, and go from Surat, Cambaia and Broitschia upon the Coasts of
Persia, bring home Brocadoes, Silk-stuffes, Velvets, Chamlets, Pearls, dry
Fruits, as Almonds, Raisms of the Sun, Nuts, and Dates, and above all
Rose Water, wherewith they drive a great Trade. These go away in the months of
January and February, and return in April, or the beginning of May. There are
other Ships of a hundred, two hundred, and three hundred tuns burden, which
carry to Acim, in the Island of Sumatra, all sorts of the Commodities of the
Country, To Achim,
and bring home Sulphur, Benjamin, Camphire, Percelain, Tin and Pepper. These
last set sail in May, for this reason, that the Portuguez, who forbid the
selling of Pepper any where but in the Cities where they have established their
Commerce, upon pain of death and confiscation of Goods, and guard the Coast
against the Pirates of the Malabares, draw not into their Havens till that time;
and therefore they must so order their Affairs, that they may be at home again
in October, before the Portuguez set out their Fleets to Sea.

The Malabares, The Commerce of the Malabares in Guzuratta.
who inhabit that part of the Indian Coast, which reaches from Cap di Rama, ten
Leagues from Goa Southward, as far as Cap di Comori, about a hundred and seven,
or a hundred and eight Leagues in length, and comprehends the Cities of
Calicut, Onor, Bacalir, Bacanor, Mangalor, Cananor, and Granganot, have also
very great trade at Surat, Cambaya and Broitschia, and bring thither Cayro,
which is the bark of the Cocos-trees, whereof they make Cordage for Ships:
Copera, or the pith of the same: Trees, brown Sugar, which they call Sigaga,
Areca and Bettele, which they call in their Language, Dimang; a certain kind of
Wood which dies red, called Patang and Harpus, wherewith Ships are calked, as
also Rice and other provisions. They carry home Opium, Saffron, Coral, Cotton,
Thread, Linnen-cloaths and other Stuffes. They come to Surat and upon the
Coasts, in the month of December, and go away in April.

The Portuguez, The Commerce of the Portaguez.
who for a long time had all the advantages of the Trade of Guzuratta, and were
become Masters thereof, by means of the Forts they had built at Daman, Diu, and
Goa, to make their party good against the Malabares, their irreconcilable
Enemies, brought thither Lead, Tin, Vermilion, Quicksilver, all sorts of
Woollen-clothes, Ivory, Sandal-wood, Pepper, Cardomomum, or grains of Paradise,
Cloves, Porcelane, China-Stuffes, Cinnamon, Cocos, Cayro, Vessels of Gold,
Vermilion-gilt, made in Europe; and bought there all sorts of Stuffes,
Cotton-clothes, Indico, Saltpeter, Lacque, Sugar, Mirobalans, Preserves,
Bed-steads, Cabinets, and other pieces made of Lacque, which they brought to
Goa, and disposed into their great Ships or Carracks, which set thence for
Portugal in January and February. They bought there also, Butter, Assa foetida,
Opium, Cummin, Cotton and Thread, to be transported to Malacca, China, and
Sapan, where they traded many times at two hundred upon one hundred profit. But
since the English and Dutch settled themselves in the Kingdom of Guzuratta, they
have been forced to quit some part of that Trade, and to content themselves
with what they still carry on at Goa, whereof we shall give some account in the
second Book of this Relation.

MANDELSLO's TRAVELS INTO THE INDIES.
The Second Book.
THe English President, IANVARY.
Mr. Metwold, who had resigned his charge in the Indies to his Successor, Mr.
Fremling, having taken all requisite order for our Voyage, went the first day
of January, 1639. to take his leave of the Sulthan, 1639.
who received him very kindly, Mandelslo leaves Surat.
and presented him with a Vestment of Brocadoe, the Collar whereof was made of
two Martins Skins with Sables, which he then had about him; as also many other
rare things, which he entreated him to keep for his sake. At our coming out of
the Sulthans Palace, we were received into a Shallop, which brought us aboard
the Mary, then lying in the Road, two Leagues from the mouth of the River. The
new President, and the chiefest of the English Officers, accompanied us into
the Ship, where they stayed three days, entertaining and treating one another,
and drowning in good Wine the affliction which was to ensue upon so long a
separation.

We set sail the fifth, Comes to Daman.
two hours before day, and got at night in sight of the City of Daman, where we
found one of our Ships which was gone before us, to take up a Portuguez Vessel
that was to go along with us to Goa. The Governor sent us a Vessel of Wine,
about the bigness of a Barrel, and some other refreshments, notwithstanding the
siege which the King of Decam, his Neighbor, then maintained against the
place, but with little good success, in regard the Haven being not blocked up,
the Indians could not prevent the sending in of relief into the City, even in
the day time.

The Kingdom of Decam, or rather Cuncam, for so it is more commonly called,
though from its Metropolis it sometimes gets the name of Visiapour, reaches all
along that Coast, from Ingediva, which lies within twelve leagues of Goa,
toward the South, to a place named Siffarde. The Neighboring Princes are, on
the North-side, the King Nisamsa, who is possessed of the Country which lies
between the Province of Dolte babth, within the Kingdom of Decam, and the
Kingdom of Bailama on Daman side; and on the East, the King of Benghenal, whose
residence is in the City of Golcanda, which is corruptly called Golconda.

The chief Maritime Cities of the Kingdom of Decam, are Geytapour, Rasapour,
Carapatan, and Dabul; but the Metropolis of the Kingdom is Visiapour, eighty
Leagues from Dabul, and eighty four from Goa.

The way from Goa to Visiapour lies according to the following direction, which
we thought fit to insert here, purposely to take occasion by that means to
discover a good part of the Country.

As soon as you come out of Goa, The way from Goa to Visiapour, Ditcauly.
you cross the River Madre de dios, to get into the Country of the King of
Visiapour, in which the first place you come to is the City of Ditcauly, three
Leagues from Goa. The Governor of this City is Governor also of the Fort of
Ponda, which is upon the same River. From Ditcauly to Danda are counted six
Leagues.

This City is of a competent largeness, Danda.
and has very fair Streets. It is seated upon the River Dery, which falls into
the Sea near those Isles, which the Portuguez call Islas quemadas. Its
Inhabitants are Decanins and Benjans, who traffic very much at Goa.

From Danda to the Mountain of Balagatta, The Mountain of Balagatta.
are nine Leagues, and you pass through the Villages of Amby and Herpoli, and
at the foot of the Mountain, through that of Amboly. This Mountain reaches
along the Kingdom of Cuncam, as far as the Coasts of Coromandel; and there on
the top of it Plains, whose fertility is equal to that of the most pleasant
Valleys.

From Amboly, to the Village of Herenekassi, Herenekassi.
upon the River of the same name, there are eleven Leagues, and within Cannon
shot of it, you pass through the Village of Berouly, Berouly.
which lies in a Valley between the Mountains of Balagatta. Two Leagues thence,
you come to the Village of Werseree; Werseree.
three Leagues thence, to that of Outor; Outor.
and six Leagues and a half further, to that of Berapour; Berapour.
half a League thence, to that of Matoura, Matoura.
and a League thence, to that of Calingra. Calingra.
About five hundred paces from Calingra, you come to the Village of Kangir, and
ere you get much further, to a Hamlet, which has no other name then that of
Bary, which is given to all those places that have no particular name.

About a League thence is the Village of Worry, Worry.
and half a League further that of Attrowad, Attrowad.
near which, upon an eminent place, there is a very magnificent Pagode, of the
Country, or Mosquey, which may be seen at a very great distance. About two
Leagues and a half from this Pagode, you turn upon the left hand, and go
through the Village of Badaraly Badaraly.
to Kerwes, Kerwes.
which is also two Leagues and a half from Badaraly. From Kerwes to Skeokory
are accounted two Leagues; Skeokory.
and from Skeokory, to a very sumptuous Benjane Pagode, five Leagues.

From this Pagode may be discovered, at a great distance, the Castle of Mirsis,
two leagues thence, upon the left hand, and you go thence to Rajebag, Rajebag.
which is about a league distant from the said Pagode. Rajebag is a very great
City, and drives a great trade in Pepper, which the Inhabitants transport to
Bisnager, and elsewhere.

It is part of the Dowry of the Queen of Visepour, who has there a Governor
under her.

About a League from Rajebag, you come to a very noble Well; about two Leagues
thence, you cross the River Cugny; and about half a League further you come to
the City of Gotteuy. Getteuy.
You leave it on the left hand, yet go through one Gate of it, to pass through
the Villages of Goetesi and Omgar, which are but about five hundred paces
thence; and about half a League further, you come to the great River Corstena,
which runs through the whole Kingdom of Decam, as far as Masulypatan. About a
League and a half from the River, you go through the Village of Eynatour, and
not far thence, through that of Katerna, and thence to those of Tangly and
Erary, and so to the River Agery, which is distant thence about a League and a
half. About three Leagues further you come to the City of Atteny, which is so
considerable as to be a common Market to all the adjacent Country, whence are
daily brought to it abundance of all sorts of provisions. About four Leagues
thence, you come to the Village of Bardgie, and at three and a half further,
pass through the Village of Agger, which is within three Leagues of the City of
Talsengbe, which is distant from that of Homoware three other Leagues, and
thence there are as many to the City of Ticota, which is within six Leagues of
Visapour.

Before you come to the chief City, you pass through the Villages of Nouraspour
and Sirrapour, which are in a manner its Suburbs, and whereof the former was
heretofore the ordinary residence of the King Ibrahim Schach, who reigned at
the beginning of this last Age: but now it is wholly ruined, and the Materials
of its Palace and great Houses are conveyed thence for the carrying on of those
which are building at Visiapour.

The City of Visiapour is of such largeness, that it is above five Leagues in
compass. The Walls, which are very high, are of Freestone, encompassed with a
great Ditch, and several Fortifications, mounted with above a thousand great
Pieces, of all sorts, Iron and Brass. The Kings Palace is in the midst of the
City, from which it is divided by a double Wall, and two Ditches, being above
3500. paces in compass. He who commanded there in the time of Sulthan Mamedh
Idelshach, the Son of Ibrahim, was called Nammouth-chan, by Country an
Italian, born at Rome. His command extended also over the City, and the 5000.
men who kept Garrison therein, besides the 2000. who were the constant Garrison
of the Castle. The City has five distinct Suburbs, where the principal
Merchants have their habitations, and particularly in that of Schanpour, where
live most of the Jewellers. The other Suburbs are called Gurapour, Ibrahimpour,
Alapour and Bomnenaly. The Inhabitants are Decanins, that is, of the Kingdom of
Decam, or Benjans, Moguls, and Ientives, of whom an account has been given
before.

To go from Visiapour to Dabul, you return the same way as far as the City of
Atteny, whence you go to the Village of Agelle, which is two Leagues distant
from it, and thence to the City of Arecq, which is six Leagues and a half from
Agelle. From Arecq to the City of Berce are three Leagues, and thence to Mirsie
three Leagues. This City, which is called also Mirdsi, and Mirisgie, is large,
but not very populous, having, on the North-side, a Castle, so well fortified,
that the Mogul, who sometime besieged it with all the Forces of his Kingdom,
was forced to raise the Siege. In this place are also to be seen the Tombs of
two Kings of Delly, who were enterr'd there above five hundred years since. The
Inhabitants of the City, as also those of the Country thereabouts, have a great
veneration for that place. From Mirdsi to the Village of Epour are two Leagues,
and thence to the City of Graeen three. Graeen two Cities.
It is not easily decided, whether it be one City or two, inasmuch as it is
divided only by the great River Corsena, the distance between both parts being
about 800. paces; and there are so many houses on either side of the River,
that they may be taken for two considerable Cities, though one be much less
then the other From the River to the Village of Toncq, are counted two Leagues
and a half; thence to that of Astava one, and thence to the City of Asta two
Leagues. Between this last Village and the City, there is a Hamlet, which is
called Barry; ^ but it is to be observed, that this name is given to all those
places which have not any in particular, as we said before. The City of Asta is
very considerable for its trading, and has a noble Market, where may be had
all sorts of provisions. The Mogul, who sometime came as far as this place with
his Army, has left behind him sufficient marks of the devastation which
attends the marches of such numerous Armies.

Having left Asta, you come to the great City of Ballouwa, Ba^^ouw^*
which is distant from it three Leagues; and three more thence to those O^ren
and Isselampour, O^ren and Isselampour.
which lie distant one from the other not above a Cannon-shot. You leave the
former on the right hand, and the other, which has a strong Castle, and its
particular Governor, on the left. Two Leagues from Isselampour, lies the
Village of Taffet, Taffet.
and three thence, that of Cassegam, Cassegam.
whence there are above two Leagues to the City of Calliar, Calliar.
which is wholly destroyed. Two Leagues thence, there is a little Village
called Galoure, Galoure,
whence you pass through the Village of Winge, Winge.
and afterward by the City of Qualampour, Qualampour.
where much Linen is made, and by that of Domo, Domo.
to the City of Tamba, Tamba.
which is six Leagues from Galoure. The City of Tamba is considerable both for
its largeness, and its being very populous. It lies on the other side of a
River, the name whereof I could not learn; for that of Coyna, which they give
it, is a general name, and signifies only a great River. The Inhabitants are
Benjans and Ientives, who live by Commerce and Tillage.

From the City of Tamba to the Village of Morel are two Leagues, and thence to
that of Suppero two Leagues; to Belour four; and thence to the Town of Werad
two Leagues. Werad*
This Town lies nine Leagues from the Mountains of Balagatta, and there is not
far from it a Village, called Patan, which was sometime the retreat of a famous
Robber named Hiewogby, who made all he took pay a certain Ransom: and when
ever notice was brought him of any design against his person, he got into the
Mountain, whither it was impossible to pursue him. From Werad to the Village of
Helewacko, and the River which runs by it, are counted above three Leagues.
This River, which comes down from the City of Chaury, which is thirty six
L^agues distant from this Village, has no other name then that of the Village,
though they give it also that of Coyna, as being indeed the greatest of any in
the Kingdom of Cuncam. From the River to the Village of Gattamatta, which is
within the Mountains of Balagatta, are three Leagues; and thence to the Village
of Pory three more. This Village is seated at the foot of the Mountain, which
is at that place very rough and craggy. Thence to the Village of Camburley are
two Leagues, and thence to that of Chipolone two more: this last Village lies
upon the River Ghoyhbeer, which falls into that which runs by Hel^wacko; whence
it comes, that those who go to Dabul by water embark at that place, Dabul being
sixteen Leagues from it. At the same place they also embark all the
Merchandises which are transported to all parts of the Kingdom, paying a Larin
and a half upon a Candy, which comes to four Quintals, or four hundred weight
and a half carriage.

The City of Dabul is seated upon the River Kalewacko, The City of Dabul
described.
at seventeen degrees, forty five minutes, on this side the Line, though
Linschoten puts it at eighteen degrees. It is without doubt one of the most
ancient Cities of the whole Kingdom; but now it has neither Gates nor Walls,
and all its Fortifications consists in two Batteries, on the Rive-side, upon
which there are four Iron Guns. The Wood, which lies on the left hand as you go
into the River, represents a great Castle; and at the foot of the same Wood may
be discovered a white Tower, which serves for a Pagode or Mosquey, and is an
infallible direction to Pilots. The entrance into the River is somewhat
difficult, there being at the mouth of it a Sand-bank, which at low water is
dry; so that as you go in, you must always keep toward the South, in regard
that, even at low water, you have on that side between five and six fathom
water, unless it be at the very mouth of the River, where you have not above
twelve or fourteen foot water at most. The Road is good within a League of the
River, but it is incomparably better four Leagues thence, in the Bay of
Zanquizara. Twelve Leagues thence lies the Haven or Road of Ceitapour, which is
within twenty Leagues of Goa, at seventeen degrees, ten minutes, and is no
doubt the best on all the Coast; for casting Anchor behind the Island, which
shelters it, you need not fear being exposed to any wind. Three Leagues thence
lies the City of Rasapour, Rasapour.
which is one of the chiefest maritime Cities of the Kingdom of Cuncam. The Bay
of Wingurla, nineteen Leagues from Rasapour, and three from Islas quemadas, is
a convenient Haven, but we shall forbear any further description thereof, in
regard it is not our design at present to afford materials for a Maritime Map
of those parts.

The Inhabitants of Dabul are either Pagans or Mahumetans, whose principal
trading is in Salt, which is brought thither from Oranubammara, as also in
Pepper. Heretofore there were set forth thence several Vessels for the Gulf of
Persia, and the Red Sea; but now their Commerce that way is so inconsiderable,
that they hardly send out three or four wretched bottoms for Gamron. The Custom
paid there is three and a half upon the hundred; but the English pay only a
moiety thereof.

The Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Cuncam or Decam, though they are for the
most part Benjans, eat any kind of flesh, unless it be that of an Ox, Cow,
Buffle, or wild Ox, and a Swine. They have a certain veneration for the Ox
and the Cow; but Swinesflesh is an abomination to them. As to their manner of
life, their Marriages, Entertainments, Purifications and other Ceremonies, they
imitate therein the Benjans of Guzuratta. Their Houses are of Straw, and the
Doors so low, that a Man cannot get in without stooping. All that is to be seen
within them is only a Mat, on which they lie in the night, and a pit in the
ground, wherein they beat their Rice. Their habit is the same with that of the
other Benjans, save that their Shoes, which they call Alparcas, are of wood,
tied up over the Instep with straps of Leather. Their Children go naked till
they come to seven or eight years of age, and they are for the most part by
profession Goldsmiths: There are also among them some who work in Brass: they
have Physicians, Barbers, Surgeons, Carpenters and Masons, who work for the
Mahumetans, the other Benjans, and the Parsis, whereof there is a greater
number in those parts, then there is of Decanins and Canarius. They make use of
the same Arms as the Indosthans do, and they have this common with them, that
they are not so good as either those of Turkey or Europe.

Their principal Commerce consists in Pepper, which is transported by Sea into
Persia, to Surat, and into Europe; as also in provisions, wherewith all the
neighboring Provinces are thence supply'd^ There are made also in those parts
great quantities of Linnencloath, which is transported by Sea out of the
Kingdom; and they traffic much by land with the Inhabitants of Indosthan,
Golcanda, and the Coasts of Coromandel, whither they carry Cotton-clothes, and
Silk-stuffes. There are abundance of Jewellers at Visiapour, and there is found
thereabouts great quantity of Pearls; but it is not there they are to behad
cheapest, since they are brought thither from other places. There is also
abundance of Lacque made in the Mountains of Balagatta; but it is not so good
as that of Guzuratta.

The Portuguez drive a great trade there, especially with the Merchants of
Ditcauly and Bauda, which lie but three or four Leagues from Goa, buying Pepper
at seven Ryals the Quintal, or hundred weight, and at eight, when they pay for
it in Stuffes, or some slight Commodities made of Iron, as Snuffers, Hinges,
etc. made in Europe.

There is in the Kingdom of Cuncam a certain people called Venesars, Venesars a
people of Decam.
who buy the Wheat and Rice, which is brought to the Market, in Cities, once a
week, and sell it again in the Country of Indosthan, and the other neighboring
Provinces, into which they go with Caffilas, or Caravans, of five or six, and
sometimes nine hundred or a thousand Beasts laden; with which they carry their
Families, especially their Wives, who are as expert at their Bows and Arrows as
the Men, and by that means becomes dreadful to the Rasboutes, who never durst
set upon them, nor yet the Couliers, who exercise their robberies on all
without any distinction, upon this encouragement, that the Rajas, who should
punish them, protect and connive at them.

There are two sorts of money in the Kingdom of Cuncam, The money of Decam.
to wit, the Larims, or Laris, which come from Persia, and the Pagodes. Eight
Persian Laris make a Pagode, which is worth ten Laris of Dabul, They have also
a certain small brass Coin, which they call Basaruiques, nine whereof make a
P^ise, and eighteen Peyses a Laris. But in regard there is no City, nay indeed
no Village, which has not some Coin or other peeuliar thereto, it is
impossible to assign the just value thereof. Besides, there is such abundance
of counterfeit money, that though there be no payment made, but in the presence
of the Xaraf, or Money Changers, yet it is a very difficult matter to shun it;
for the Changers themselves thrust in what is not current among that which is,
notwithstanding the penalties appointed by the Laws to be inflicted on those,
who either make or put off counterfeit money, which are very rigorously put in
execution.

They make use of the same weights as they do in the Kingdom of Guzuratta, The
weights.
save that twenty Maons of Surat weight makes twenty seven of Cuncam; and the
ordinary Maon, which consists of forty Ceeres, and sixteen Peyses, makes twenty
seven pounds; each pound making two marks. They have a particular weight for
the Pepper, which they call Goemy, and weighs twelve Maons, four Maons make a
Quintal or hundred weight, and twenty make a Candy.

The King of Cuncam, or Visiapour, is a Tributary of the great Mogul's, The
King of Decam tributary to the Mogul.
especially ever since the disorders, which happened under the King Idal-Scach:
which were occasioned as you shall find in the ensuing relation.

In the time of Sulthan Ibrahim Schach, the Father of Idal-Schach, there was
belonging to the service of the Master of the Chapel, The History of
Chauas-Chan*
or the Kings Music, a certain Slave, named Chauas, a person of understanding
and courage, of a pleasant humor, and so taking a Conversation, that the King,
who had particular notice of him, begged him of his Master, and preferred him,
after several other employments, to the oversight of that apartment, where his
Wives and Concubines were lodged, But it proved his misfortune one day, that
the King calling to him for drink, they gave him of a bottle that smelt of Oil;
upon which the King commanded him to leave his presence. Yet was not his
disgrace so great, but that the King had yet somewhat of the ancient kindness
for him, for he made him Captain of the Castle-gate, and bestowed on him the
Government of the City; which he managed with so much conduct, that the King
being upon his deathbed, and Mustapha-Chan, his Favorite, refusing to
undertake the Regency during the Princes Minority, who was then but ten years
of age, that great and important charge was conferred on Chauas, who had the
Dignity of Chan long before. He (...) Regent of the Kingdom.
His Regency, for the space of ten years, had the approbation of all the
people, but Idal-scach, being come to the twentieth year of his age, began to
think it irksome to be under the tuition of a revolted Slave, and openly to
condemn the familiarity of his conversation with the Queen his Mother. He had
also engaged the State into a very unjust and extremely destructive War; upon
this account, that he paid yearly to the Mogul's Deputies, the tribute of
thirty Millions of Pagodes, which the King owed him, yet afterward he caused
them to be robbed at their return, by persons set on purpose to do it, Engages
the State (...) war.
who brought him back again all the money. The Mogul Scach Iahan, who was then
living, made his complaints thereof at first, as of a disorder, which
Idal-schach was obliged in justice to take some course to prevent: but finding
himself abused and laughed at, he entered Cuncam with an Army of two hundred
thousand fighting men, where he laid siege to the Castle of Perinda, which
certain Hollanders, who had been sent prisoners thither, helped to maintain for
the space of two years, till such time as a peace was concluded with the Mogul,
after the death of Chauas-chan, who was killed as follows.

Idal-schach, not able any longer to suffer the extraordinary and unjust power
of his Guardian to be exercised over him, The King implores the assistance of
his Grandees against him.
as we said before, made his complaints against him to the Governors of
Provinces and places of trust, entreating them to advise and assist him against
the usurpation of Chauas-chan. They met together, and sent a Message to the
Regent; that their King having attained an age fit to govern the Kingdom
himself, it was time he returned into his hands the administration of Affairs;
to which end it were fit he came out of the Castle, and lived in the City as
the other Grandees of the Kingdom did; giving him withal to understand, that
if he slighted these Remonstrances of theirs, they should be forced to employ
some part of the Kingdoms Forces to oblige him thereto. But Chauas-chan being
very unwilling to divest himself of an Authority which he had been possessed of
for so many years, and over-confident of the affection of his Creatures, as
also of that of the people, which he had made it his main business to acquire,
during the Regency, by a liberality truly Royal, made no reflection on these
Remonstrances, till he found some of the great Ones, with an Army of thirty
thousand men at the City Gates. Being reduced to this extremity, he took a
resolution which proved his ruin.

For, He attempts the life of his Prince.
imagining that the people had so great an affection for him, as to proclaim
him King, in case there were no other, he resolved to make away the Prince, and
to kill him with his own hands. To that end, and full of this design, he goes
out of his Chamber one night, while the Army was not yet come within five
Leagues of the City, and being come to the door of the Kings Lodgings, the
Guards having made no difficulty to let him pass, and finding it locked,
contrary to the custom, he would have forced it: but the King awakened at the
noise, asked who was there. He made answer that it was he, and that he had some
Letters of great consequence to communicate to him, which he had just then
received from some of the chief Commanders of his Army. The King made answer,
that it was an unseasonable time of the night for the reading of Letters, and
bid him come again the next morning, and thereupon immediately getting up, he
went to the Mahael, or Queens Lodgings, to whom he gave an account of the
presumptuous demeanor of Chauas-chan, in coming to his Chamber door ar such an
hour. The Queen, who was a Woman of a solid judgment, made such reflections on
his procedure, that it was presently resolved, that they should, with the
soonest, make away that pernicious Minister. They employed to effect their
design a Meldar, or Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, and one named Chideram,
Grand Faulconer, and Overseer of the Rams and wild Oxen, which the King keeps
for fighting. But is prevented.
As soon as it was day, the King presented himself upon his Throne, accompanied
by those two persons who were to be employed in the foresaid execution; and
having sent for Chauas-Chan, he delivered him a sealed Letter, and said to him;
There Chauas-Chan, look into that Letter, which I have just now received from
the Genera^s of my Army, give me an account of the Contents of it. But while
Chauas was opening it, in order to the reading of it, the Meldar run him into
the Breast with a Poniard, but with so much precipitation, that, not staying to
see what effect the Wound he had given him would have, he went presently along
with the King into the Women's Lodgings. Another Gentleman, who was present at
the blow, perceiving the Wound was not mortal, and pretending a kindness to
Chauas, run immediately to him, embraced him, asked him what might be the
occasion of his disgrace, and making as if he would have taken the Poniard out
of the Wound, wherein it still stuck, thrust it so much the further in, that he
fell to the ground. The Eunuch, who was with him, got him conveyed to his own
house. But the Queen having notice of what had past, as also of the disorder,
wherein the King and the Meldar had drawn off, commanded Chideram to go and
make an end of him. Chauas-Chan seeing Chideram coming into his Chamber, and
imagining he came out of civility to give him a visit, said to him; Woe is me,
Chideram, who is it that has thus murdered me? But Chideram, not suffering
him to fall into further discourse, And killed.
made answer, Traitor, it is I; with which word he run upon him and cut off his
head. There were present at this daring action Chauas-chan's Brother, who was
Captain of the Castle-gate, three Surgeons, two Captains, friends of Chauas,
and some other of his Kindred who were present, yet they not only made not the
least opposition, but suffered themselves to be all tamely killed, not one
profferring to avoid that fatal destiny.

Chauas-Chan had among his Domestics a certain Caffre, who coming to hear of
his Masters death, run immediately to the Castle, with an intention to dispatch
the King; but he met by the way with about thirty Soldiers, who stopped him. He
made a shift to kill ten of them with his own hands, and had dispatched the
rest, had he not been overpowered by number, which increased as the noise of
the attempt spread more and more into the City. They cat off his head, and hung
it up as a Trophey, upon one of the Towers of the Castle.

One of Chauas-chans Creatures, His Friends would revenge his death.
whose name was Morary, was advanced with ten thousand Horse, within five
Leagues of the City of Vis^apour; in so much that the King fearing that General
might assemble all the Friends of the deceased, caused him to be proclaimed a
Traitor against his Prince, and set his Head at a certain price. His own Army
seized his person, and receiving intelligence, that another Lord, named
Rundelo, was coming up to the relief of Chauas-chan, and intended to join with
Morary, they sent him a byway to the City, whither he came about eight at
night. He sent a Message to the King, proposing, that if his Majesty would
pardon him, and bestow on him the Government of the Brammenes, he would pay him
yearly twenty thousand Pagodes; but those Propositions were rejected, and the
King ordered him to have his hands cut off, and his tongue cut out, and that in
that posture he should be led all about the City; but he died by the way.

The only Action that had eclipsed the Ministry of Chauas-chan, Chauas's
ingratitude toward his Benefactor.
was the disgrace of Mustafa-chan. This Mustafa was he, who of all the Lords
about the Court, was most in credit with Ibrahim Schach, as being the person
upon whom he had cast his eye for the Guardianship of the Prince his Son. But
he, unwilling to accept of it, excused himself, and recommended the merit of
Chauas-chan, who requited him with the greatest ingratitude that ever was heard
of. Chauas would needs have that Lord to countenance by his Authority whatever
had been done during the time of the Regency, and finding it impossible to
corrupt him, he resolved to dispatch him out of the way, by persuading the
King, that the honest old Man had some design upon his life. The young Prince
implicitly crediting what was told him by his Favorite, resolved to secure
his person, which obliged Mustafa-chan, who had notice thereof, to stand upon
his guard, and to fortify himself in his house, having about him 700. Horse,
and 2000. Foot. The place was regularly besieged with ten Guns; and after he
had held out six days, he was forced to render it and himself up at mercy; for
most of his people, nay his very menial servants fell off from him. Idal-Schach
hearing that Chauas-chan intended either to put Mustafa-chan to death, or at
least to have his eyes out, prevented both, by representing to him, that the
Mogul, to whom he was allied, would concern himself in the Fortunes of
Mustafa-chan; and upon these considerations, he was sent prisoner to the Castle
of Bellagam-Chapour, being allowed of all his vast Revenues, but five Pagodes
to live upon.

Accordingly the Mogul, The Mogul concerns himself in Mustafa's Fortunes.
Schach-Iahan had no sooner intelligence brought him of the disgrace of
Mustafa-chan, but he sent an Envoy to Idal-Schach, to require, that he might be
set at liberty, and put into possession of all his estate, or that he should be
obliged to declare a War against him. Idal-Schach promised to do both, but
Chaurs-chan eluded the performance of that promise, so that Mustafa got not out
of prison, till after Chauas his death: upon which, he was restored to his
former dignity, enjoying near ten millions of Pagodes of yearly revenue. He
kept ordinarily a thousand Domestics, and three thousand Horse at his own
charge abroad, besides those he maintained at his own Palace. Chideram-chan,
who had been very instrumental in the death of Chauas-chan, was next in credit
to Mustafa; and next to him, Agu-rasa, who was Governor General of the Castles
of Ponda, Perinda, Salpour and Bellegam-chapour. He was one of Chauas-chan's
Creatures: whence it came, that upon the death of his Patron, he was not so
much in favor as he had been, but was continued in his employments, though he
desired to be disburthen'd of the care of public Affairs by reason of his age.

They say, The King of Decam able to raise 200000. men.
the King of Cuncam is able in a short time to raise two hundred thousand Men;
yet, as we said before, he is a Tributary to the Mogul. Adelham-Schach, great
Grandfather of Idal-Schach, in the year 1586. took the City of Goa twice from
the Portuguez: but considering at last, that War destroyed his Country, he
treated with them, and by the Treaty concluded between them, he lest them the
Country of Salsette, with 67. Villages, that of Bardes, with 12. and that of
Tisuary with 30. Villages, provided that the Inhabitants of Cuncam should enjoy
freedom of Commerce all over the Indies; yet with this further proviso, that
they should be obliged to sell all their Pepper to the Merchants of Goa, who
had made a general Treaty to that purpose, upon pain of Confiscation. But this
Treaty has not been so well observed, but that there were, on both sides, from
time to time great dissatisfactions, which by an unhappy accident broke forth
into something of Hostility in the year 1635. For, upon intelligence brought to
the Portuguez, that four of the Kings Ships, bound for Meca, and some parts of
Persia, were partly laden with Pepper, they sent four Frigots to Sea after
them, which set upon the Kings Ships, and after a vigorous resistance, wherein
a Portuguez Captain was killed, took them, and having brought them to Goa,
killed in cold blood all the Indians that were aboard; so that it was not
questioned, but that the King of Cuncam would declare War against the City of
Goa.

There is not any Prince in all those parts so well stored with Artillery as
the King of Cuncam. His Artillery.
Among others, he had one Brass piece, which required a Bullet weighing eight
hundred weight, with five hundred and forty pound of fine Powder; which did
such execution, as was reported, that at the siege of the Castle of Salapour,
at the first firing, it made a breach in the wall of forty five foot in length.
The Caster of it was a Roman born, and the most wicked of mankind; since he had
the inhumanity in cold blood, to kill his own Son, to consecrate that monstrous
Piece with his blood, and to cast into the Fire, wherein he had melted his
Metal, one of the Kings Treasures, who would call him to account for the charge
he had been at therein. But it is time we prosecute our Voyage.

Ian. 7. We came betimes in the morning before the City of Bacim. Bacim.
Being come near the City, the Portuguez Governor gave us seven Pieces, and we
answered his civility with three. We stayed there above four hours expecting a
Portuguez Jesuit, whom we had promised to carry to Goa; but finding he came not
within the time he had promised, we kept on our course. Being got about a
League thence, we perceived coming out of the Port a Portuguez Frigot, which,
as we imagined, came to bring the Jesuit aboard us; whereupon we struck some of
our sail, to expect it: but the Captain told us, that it was the Governors
desire to the President, that that Frigot might go to Goa under the English
Colors, as fearing to meet some of the Dutch, who incessantly rove up and down
that Coast. He brought us, as a Present from the Governor, three Oxen, some
Sheep, Bread, several Baskets of Citrons and Oranges, and diverse other
refreshments, wherewith we merrily pursued our Voyage.

Wednesday, Ian. 9. with a good North Wind, we passed by the Isles of Bandera
and Bambay, which reach all along the Coast, from Bacim, as far as Rasiapour.
That of Bambay is of a considerable bigness, and has a very good Haven toward
the Continent.

Ian. 10. We passed in sight of Rasiapour, Rasiapour.
which is but 21. Leagues from Goa. In the afternoon we passed by the City of
Fingerla, within four Leagues of Goa, where the Hollanders have a Factory; and
in the evening we discovered the Isles about Goa, and afterward the two
Castles which secure the entrance of that noble City.

Ian. 11. We cast Anchor under the Castle Deguard, Come to Goa.
about a quarter of a League from the City. We found in the Haven six Gallions
and a Carrack, whom we saluted with our great Guns. The Mary fired twenty five,
the other nine, and the third five. The General of the Gallions gave us a
volley of his greatest pieces. The Castle fired three; we, in answer thereto,
five; the other two, eight between them. Immediately after, came aboard us a
Portuguez Captain to complement the President from the Viceroy. Not long after,
came the General of the Gallions aboard us in person, in a Gondole gilt and
covered with Scarlet. At his coming into the Ship there were twenty Guns fired.
After the first Complements, he entreated the President to go along with him in
his Gondole to the Gallion, to refresh himself for some hours: But the
President excused himself, in regard he was then going to the City, and
promised, at his return, to give him a visit aboard. The Gallions were there
only to keep the Haven against the twelve Dutch Ships, which pretended to block
up the City of Goa toward the Sea. At our coming thither, they were got off at
some distance, to recover themselves after an Engagement, wherein they had lost
two of their Ships, some few days before, which were burnt by the Fireships:
but the next day they came up again, and cast Anchor in the Road, to hinder the
Carrack from getting out, while the Frigots and little Vessels, which could go
along the Coast, brought thither all sorts of Provisions and Commodities, so
freely, that, one day, I saw coming in a Caravan of above three hundred Boats,
laden with Pepper, Ginger, Cardamomum, Sugar, Rice, Fruits, and Conserves.

The President, who as he went up the River had his Trumpets sounding before
him, went strait to the house of the Fiador de la fasende, who is as it were
the Overseer of the Exchequer, it being with him chiefly, that he was to
negotiate the business, which had occasioned his calling at Goa. The Fiador was
sick in bed, yet did he receive the President with all civility, and promised
to do him all the good offices he could expect, from the friendship they had
long before contracted together. Thence the President was carried in a
Palanquin to the Lodgings which were assigned him: The English President visits
the Viceroy.
whither as soon as he was come, he sent to demand audience of the Viceroy,
which was immediately granted him. The Viceroy's Palace lies upon the River, so
that we went thither by boat. We found upon the Riverside, many Hidalgos, or
Gentlemen, of the Viceroy's retinue, who conducted us into the Hall, where he
was to give the President audience. The Guards, who were all clad-in the same
livery, had taken their Arms, and stood in two files in the Antichamber,
through which there was an entrance into the Hall, which was richly furnished,
and full of the Pictures of several Princes of Europe. The Viceroy, who was all
in black, as were also all his Courtiers, rose out of his Chair at the
Presidents coming in, and sat not down again till the other was set. All the
rest of the Company stood before the Viceroy, some only of the Gentlemen
excepted, who carried us into one of the cross Rooms to entertain us. The
President, having dispatched his business, took leave of the Viceroy, who
brought him to the Hall door, where he stood bare, till we were all got out.
The same Gentlemen, who had received us at our coming out of the Boat,
broughtus back to the River, showing us, as we came a long, twelve excellent
Horses, sumptuously covered and harnessed, which had been purposely brought
thither, that we might take notice of the Viceroy's magnificence. We saw there
also a Biggel, which is a Creature about the bigness, and much of the same
color as a Run, but is headed like a Horse, main'd like an Ass, having black
and cloven feet, and upon his head two black horns.

We had hardly dined, at our return to our Lodging, ere we were tired with
Visitants. Most of the Portuguez Lords came to salute the President; and there
was no Monastery but sent its Deputies to complement him. The ten days we
stayed at Goa were spent in reciprocal Visits and continual feasting. One of
the noblest Entertainments we had, was that which was made us the 15. of
January, by a Portuguez Lord, who had been Governor of Bacim, and was then
newly come to the government of Mozambique. Every course consisted only of four
dishes of Meat, but they were so often changed, and the Meat so excellently
well dressed, that I may truly say, I never was at the like. For with the Meat
there was brought such variety of excellent Fruits, that by the continual
change and intermixture of both, the appetite was sharpened and renewed. But
what was most remarkable, was, that though the Portuguez Ladies are as seldom
seen as those of the Muscovites and Persians, yet this Lord, knowing he could
not any way more oblige the English, then by allowing them the sight of Women,
we were served at Table by four handsome young Maids of Malacca, while he
himself was attended by two Pages and an Eunuch. These Maids brought in the
Meat, and filled our Wine; and though he himself drunk not any, yet would he
have the English treated after their own way, and drink to what height they
pleased. Being risen from Table, he brought us into a spacious Chamber, where
he again pressed us to drink; and when the President was to take leave of him,
he presented him with a noble Coverlet of Watte, a quilted Covering for a
Horse, a fair Table, and a rich Cabinet of Lacque.

The next day, The Jesuits of Goa treat him.
being the 16. we dined at the Professed House of the Jesuits, who had invited
us to a sumptuous Feast. There were in this House a hundred and fifty Fathers,
and at least as many Scholars or Students, yet did not that great number near
fill that noble Structure, which was four stories high, and had the pleasantest
prospect in the World, as well toward the Sea, as on the Land side. They first
showed us all the conveniences of the House, their Wealth, and the order they
observed in their Economy. Then they brought us into a fair arched Hall, as
big as an ordinary Church, which was beset with Tables placed all along the
Walls. The Cloth was laid, with the Trenchers, the drinking Cups, and Earthen
pots, and they had brought in Bread and Fruit. In the midst of the Hall, there
was another little square Table, covered and furnished as the rest; for those
who were to do penance for their having done any thing contrary to the
discipline of the Order. In the midst of the Entry to this Hall, there was a
Pillar, out of which issued a Spout of water for the washing of their hands.
Then they carried us up to the third story, to another Hall, which was not as
large as that below, but so richly furnished, as might become the Appartment of
a very noble House, as well in point of Tapistry as other things. The Table
prepared for us was very large, and placed in the midst of the Hall, covered
with a noble Cloth, beset with Fruit, and Bread, and China dishes, which
Persons of Quality in those parts do prefer before those of Silver.

The Father Provincial, A feast at the professed house of the Jesuits.
having given the President the precedence, sat down by him, and afterward
ordered all our company to be so placed, as that, between every two, there were
two Jesuits to entertain and discourse with us; the rest standing behind to
wait on us. The Meat was brought in little dishes of Porcelain, to every man
his own dish; and this for several courses, both of Flesh and Fish, all
excellently well dressed. The desert was suitable to the rest of the
entertainment, and consisted in Tarts, Florentines, Eggs dressed after the
Portuguez way, admirably well perfumed, Marchpains, and Conserves, both dry and
liquid.

At our rising from Table, they conducted us into several Chambers, where they
left us, to take the ordinary repose, during the greatest heat of the day.
There was in every Chamber three Beds, and in the midst upon a Table a great
Vessel of Porcelane, full of fair Water. Then they came and carried us into a
Hall, where we were to have the divertisement of a Ball, which was danced by
the Children of certain Indians, whom they had baptized and instructed in the
Roman Catholic Religion. The Archbishop of Goa, who was Primate of all the
Indies, was there also in person, as well to participate of the divertisment,
as to entertain the President, by order from the Viceroy. The Dancing Master
made the first entrance alone, and did pretty well for a Portuguez: The Habits
of the Dancers were very rich, but they had no Visards on, nor any thing upon
their Heads, but a Crown of Flowers. The noblest entrance, and that which
discovered the subject of the Ball, was that of fifteen persons who came in,
bringing along with them, some pieces of a broken Pillar, some Garlands of
diverse Flowers, wherewith they adorned the Pillar after they had, after several
turnings, absolutely set it together, all performed with observance of the
Music. At the upper end of this Pillar came out a Flower, made like a Tulip,
which opened of it self, while they danced, till at last there came out of it
an Image of the blessed Virgin, with her Child in her arms, and the Pillar it
self opened in several places, to cast out perfumed Waters like a Fountain.
After they had danced a while, they took the Pillar asunder, after the same
manner as they had put it together, and went out of the Room in very good
order. The Jesuits told us, that by that invention they represented the pains
they had taken, in planting among the Pagans and Mahumetans of those parts, the
Church of God, whereof our Savior is the only Pillar or Cornerstone. After
this there was an entrance of twelve Youths, who sung and played every one upon
a different Instrument, all done in exact measure. There came in also some
Morris-dancers, who danced to the Castagnets, and kept measure with the Music
so exactly, that I never saw any thing like it. There came in also one Man
alone, who was covered with Birds-nests, and clothed and masked according to
the Spanish mode, who began the farce of this Comedy, by ridiculous and
fantastic postures, and the Ball was concluded with the coming in of twelve
Boys, dressed like Apes, which they imitated in their cries and postures. The
Ball being over, we staid there a while to hear their Music, which was
altogether after the Portuguez way. As we took leave of our Entertainers, they
told us, that they made use of those Divertisements, as well to reduce the
Pagans and Mahumetans of those parts to the embracing of Christian Religion, by
that kind of modern Devotion, as to amuse the Children, and divert them after
their studies.

The 18. of January, Another Feast at the Jesuits College.
we were invited to dinner by the Jesuits of the College, which they call the
Bon-Iesus. We were received at the entrance by some of the most ancient
Fathers, who showed us in several Halls and Chambers the Pictures of several
Princes and Persons of Quality, who had been of their Order; as also the
Histories of those of their Society, who had suffered Martyrdom for Christian
Religion; among whom the Authors of the Gunpowder plot in England were not the
least. But they forbore giving us the Explication thereof; only they
entertained us with a long relation of the cruelties, exercised some years
before, upon those of their Society in Iapan, where the Emperor had made use
of the most exquisite torments could be invented, upon the Christians, as well
the Foreigners, who had spent their endeavors in planting Religion in those
parts, as upon the Iaponneses who had made profession thereof.

Having showed us whatever was worth the seeing in their College, they brought
us unto the Church, which is no question one of the most sumptuous the Jesuits
have in all Asia. The Structure is vast and magnificent, and the Ornaments are
so suitable to the greatness thereof, that it were not easy to imagine any
thing more noble. The first thing we were showed was the High-Altar; but though
it were one of the noblest I ever saw, yet came it not, in wealth, near another
lesser one, which had been built in honor of Saint Francis Xavier, whom they
call the Apostle of the Indies. We were showed his Image, which was upon wood,
drawn according to the life, and we were told his body was still to be seen in
that Church, in the same posture as it was at the time of his departure.

The Jesuits told us, that the body of the said Saint Francis Xavier was found
in the Island of Ceylon, and that it was discovered only by a most delightful
smell, which had brought those who found it many Leagues distance from the Sea,
to the place where it was hidden. Which story does not agree very well with
what others write of the same body. For besides, that the scent which is
carried from the Island of Ceylon so far into the Sea, proceeds from the Gro^e
of Cinnamon, wherewith that Island is in a manner covered. Maphaeus, The
Sepulchro of Francis Xavier.
one of the gravest Authors that ever were of the Society, says in express
terms, that Francis Xavier, not satisfied with the progress he had made in the
Indies by the means of his preaching the Faith of Christ, would needs try
whether it might have the like success in China: but that he died on the
Seaside, as soon as he landed. Whereto he adds, that the Master of the Ship,
which had carried him thither, caused the Corpse to be put into unslak'd Lime,
to the end he might carry away the bones, after the flesh had been consumed;
but that after certain days, that consuming matter had not made any impression
upon it, and that the body, instead of being corrupted, smelled very sweetly;
and that thereupon they resolved to carry it to Goa, where it was received with
great Ceremonies. They related to us a great many Miracles wrought by that
Saint; but I remember only two or three of the most considerable; to wit, that
he had caused the Sun to come back an hour after it was set; that he commanded
the Sea and the Winds with the same power, as our Savior had sometimes done;
and that he had raised up two Men, one whereof had been buried a whole day
before.

Out of the Church they brought us into their Refectory, where the Tables were
placed all along the walls, as we had seen them in the Professed House, and in
so great a number, that there was room enough for two hundred persons. Yet were
there only four of the chiefest among them that dined with us, while all the
rest stood and waited on us. We were as well treated by these as we had been by
the others: but I must confess these gave us the best Canary that ever I drunk.
Of all the Moral Virtues, there is not any the Jesuits endeavor more to
practice then Sobriety, in so much that Drunkenness is a Vice they can the
least of any be charged withal; and yet at this time they often called to
drink, I conceive, purposely to engage us, to make it appear that it was not
out of pure Complement we commended their Wine. After dinner, they carried us
up into the Steeple, whence we could take a view of all the City, the Sea, the
River, and all the adjacent Champion, as far as the Mountain, much better then
we could have done from the fourth Story of the Professed House.

As we took leave of them, The Hospital of Goa.
they promised to send two of their Fathers to our Lodgings the next morning,
who should show us the great Hospital, whereof the Jesuits have the oversight.
It is a very noble Structure, consisting of Chambers, Halls and Galleries, able
to lodge above a thousand sick persons, who are very carefully supplied with
all things. Every Bed is marked with a certain Figure; and those which are not
taken up, are known by their mark, which is standing upright; whereas those
which are, have the mark in some other posture. The noblest Appartments of the
Hospital were the Kitchen and the Apothecaries shop belonging to it, both well
furnished with all things necessary for the accommodation of the sick, whereof
there were a very great number; but most of the Pox, or Bloudy-flux. Those who
are to look after them have this foresight, that they would not have the sick
to be disheartened by seeing others dye; for as soon as they perceive the sick
party so far spent as that there is no way but death for him, he is carried to
a private room, whither a Priest is sent to him, who stirs not thence till he
be dead.

Having viewed the Hospital, The Monastery of the Augustines
we went to see the Monastery of the Augustines, which they call the Convent of
our Lady of Grace. It is seated upon a little eminency, so that, seeing it at a
certain distance, a man would take it for one of the noblest Palaces in the
World. The Friars carried us all about it, and showed us particularly the rich
Copes and other Priests Vestments, which they said were given them by Persons
of Quality, who had spent some time among them. I delivered them the Letters of
recommendation, which the Augustines at Ispahan had given me, directed to them:
whence it came that their civilities toward me were extraordinary. They
proffered to show me what was most remarkable about the City; but in regard I
had already seen as much as I desired, I thanked them, and came away with the
rest of the company.

As soon as the President had dispatched his business with the Viceroy, who
paid him nine thousand pounds sterling, in ready Money, and promised him the
rest should be paid, either in Money, or Commodities, to those English
Merchants, whom, to that purpose, he had brought from Surat, he returned their
civilities, of whom he had received any, and took leave of all. The Viceroy's
Presents to the President.
The Viceroy, the General of the Gallions, and all the principal Lords about
the Court, sent him very considerable Presents. The former presented him with
several Skins of Cinnamon, a Biggel, some Butts of Sack, Sheep, and certain
Baskets of Fruit, and other refreshments. The Jesuits sent him Aqua vitae, and
good store of all sorts of Conserves, dry and liquid, with an entreaty, that he
would take along with him, for England, certain Jesuits, and among the rest,
one who had lived long enough in China to be thoroughly acquainted with the
Country. Of all the Presents that were sent him, what the President esteemed
most, was a Bottle of Oil, which had been extracted out of the Flower of
Cinnamon, and a Candle made of the Oil extracted out of Cinnamon it self.

Ian. 20. We left Goa, Mande ^lo lea^^es Goa.
and met upon the River with above a hundred small Vessels, laden with all
sorts of Provisions and Commodities, which came from Cananor, and the Coasts of
Malabar, and had passed, notwithstanding the Block-house of Dutch Vessels,
which could only hinder the Gallions and Carracks from getting thence, to go
for Portugal, or toward the Moluccas. As soon as we were got out of the River,
we made strait to the Generals Gallion, which was called the Bon-Iesus, and
carried sixty four Brass Guns, all Cannons or Culverings. There were aboard her
six hundred Men, Mariners and Soldiers; and it was one of the noblest Vessels
I ever saw. The General received the President with much civility, and brought
him into his Chamber, in and about which were an Antichamber, a Closet, and
two Galleries: and after a Collation of Conserves and Sack, contrary to the
custom of the Portuguez, who never proffer a Man drink, unless he ask for it,
he showed us all the Ship, which had the name of a Gallion, but might very well
be accounted a Carrack by reason of the bigness of it. The other Vessels of the
Fleet were also very noble ones, there being not any one among them, that had
not fifty Guns at least. The General and President were in private discourse,
for about half an hour, after which the President took his leave, and the
General conducted him to a door which was in the Stern of the Ship, at which it
was more commodious getting out, then it is in other Ships by Ladders of Ropes.
As soon as the President was got into the Boat, all the Portuguez Fleet fired
their Guns. The Governor of the Castle de Guarde, having saluted the
President, who was his intimate Friend, with all the Guns he had, presented
himself upon the Battery, put off his Hat, and took leave of us. The President
being come aboard, ordered twenty Guns to be fired, which the General answered
with twenty others; whereupon we went into the Road, and lay between the
Portuguez and Dutch Fleets.

But, Goa described.
ere we leave Goa, it will not be amiss, to give yet a little further account
of what we found most remarkable in that City, which no doubt is one of the
noblest and greatest of those the Portuguez are Masters of in any part of the
Indies. It lies in the Kingdom of Cuncam, or Decam, fifteen Degrees on this
side the Line, in an Island, which the River divides from the Continent.
Alfonso Albuquerque took it by Composition, on the 16. of February, 1510. from
Zabaim Dalcam, Prince of Goa, who recovered it again from him on the 30th of
May following; but on the 21. of November in the same year, Albuquerque
receiving fresh Forces irom a Fleet, which Diego Mendez Vaseoncelos had then
newly brought from Portugal, set upon the City and took it by storm. The City
of Goa was, even at that time, very considerable for its Traffic, but much
less then it is now, as may be seen by the Walls of the old City, which are yet
standing, though the Gates be down, in so much that there is nothing between it
and the new City, built by the Portuguez, since they established their main
Trade there. It has on the South Side the Island of Salsette, which is divided
from the Continent only by a small Rivulet, as is also the Island of Bardes,
which lies on the North-side, and under which Ships may cast Anchor with all
safety, without fear of any Winds. The Castle de Guarde lies at the foot of a
Rock, on which they have built a Tower, in form of a Redoubt, wherein, in the
night time they make a Fire, for a direction to Ships, and it has several
Brass pieces placed even with the Water. From the mouth of the River to the
Haven are about two Leagues, but it is equally broad all along, even at the
place where it runs between the Island and the Continent, though in some places
it be so shallow, that in Summer time there is not above two foot water.

The Island of Goa does not produce any thing, and is so barren, that some few
Lambs and Goats excepted, it is not able to sustain any thing; and yet the
Portuguez have some Gardens there, and in them some Fruit, but it is to be
attributed rather to their industry, then to Nature. Palm-wine is there in
abundance, and all other provisions are brought thither from the two
forementioned Islands, or from the Continent, so plentifully, that they are so
cheap there, that notwithstanding the Block-house of the Hollanders, a Hog
might be had for a Crown, six sucking Pigs, ten Pullets, or eight wild Ducks,
for as much; but there are very few Oxen there, then which Sheep are yet more
scarce. They permit not the Indians to go over into the Continent, without
leave obtained from those who keep the passages, who make a mark in their
Arms, which they are obliged to show as they come back: for the Portuguez
would not have the Decanines and Canarines come into the City without a
Passport. All the fresh water they have within the City comes from a Fountain,
which represents a Lucrece, out of whose Wound there comes Water enough to
supply the whole City: but the Ships take in fresh water near the Castle, above
which there comes out of the Rock a Rivulet, which there falls into the River.

The City has now neither Gates nor Walls, Goa has no w^ll.
but the River, which makes the Island, secures it against the attempts, which
an open place might be exposed to. The public Buildings are very fair, and the
Palaces of great Persons very magnificent, especially in their Household Stuff.

The Inhabitants are either Castizes, that is, Portuguez, born of Father and
Mother Portuguez; (...)
or Most zes, that is, born of a Portuguez Father, and Indian Mother. The
Mestizes are distinguished from the others by their color, which inclines
toward the Olive; but those of the third Generation are as black as the
Inhabitants of the Country; which happens also in the fourth Generation of the
Castizes, though there were no mixture among them. The Portuguez are either
Titulados, as those who are employed in the principal charges; Fidalgos da casa
del Rey, that is, Gentlemen in ordinary of the Kings House; Mocos Fidalgos,
young Gentlemen, that is, the Sons of Titulados, or Cavalleros, or newly
admitted to Gentility by the King, Cavalleros Fidalgos, Escuderes Fidalgos, or
simply Gentlemen. There are also such as have the quality of Mocos da camra, or
Grooms of the Kings Chamber, who pass also for Gentlemen. All the rest are
Hombres, Honrados, and Soldados. The former are Merchants or Tradesmen, and
appear publicly with the same gravity, and almost with the same retinue as
Gentlemen; in as much as, some only excepted, who cut Leather for Shoes, and
Stuffes for Clothes, all the rest have their business done by Slaves.

No Person of Quality goes abroad afoot; for some are carried by their Slaves
in a Palanquin, and others ride on Horseback, or go in painted and gilty
Gondoles; but not any without a Slave to carry an Umblello, or Fan.

The Portuguez have the reputation of being very highly conceited of
themselves; The Portuguez of Goa pr^uder then any other.
but those of Goa are such in so high a degree, as well in their gate, as all
their other actions, that they treat, as unacquainted with the World, such as
are newly come from Portugal, and are not accustomed to their manner of going
and life. They are excessively civil one to another; nay, they are, in this, so
ceremonious and exact, that he who should omit to render a person, that gives
him a visit, the honor he conceives due to himself, whether it be in making
him sit down otherwise then he would, or not bringing him to the street-door,
must expect the effects of a deep resentment, whereof the least are cudgelling
or caning, which they liberally bestow on persons of mean condition, who being
below them, have omitted giving them the respect they look for from those that
are not their Equals, though indeed they owe them not any.

Winter begins there toward the end of June, Winter begins in June.
with a South-west Wind, which comes from the Sea, and reigns for the space of
four months, all along that Coast, from Diu, as far as the Cape of Comory; and
during all that time, the Sea is not only innavigable, but there are few
Havens, where Ships can ride in safety, and unexpos'd to Storms, mixed with
terrible Thunder and Lightning, which disturb the Air there in that season.
Which is yet so much the more to be wondered at, inasmuch as, at the same time,
the Coast of Coromandel, which is in the same Peninsula, and at the same degree
of elevation, and in some places is but twenty Leagues distant from that of
Malabar, enjoyes a pleasant Spring, and the most divertive season of the year.
Accordingly, those who go from Cochim to Saint Thome, by land, as they pass
over the Mountain of Balagatta, which divides the whole Peninsula, as the
Apennine does Italy, discover, from the top of the Mountain, on the one side, a
clear and temperate Air, and on the other, a Country covered with a perpetual
mist, and drowned with the Rains that continually fall. The same observation
may be also made in those Ships, which go from Ormus to the Cape of Rosalgate.
Where, as they pass the Cape, they suddenly pass out of fair Weather, into
dreadful Storms and Tempests. Whence it comes that, in those parts, there are
but two Seasons, as there are also principally but two Winds that reign there
in the Summer time, to wit, those of the East, which the Portuguez call
Therentos, which come from the Land-side, and blow from midnight till midday;
but they are not felt above ten Leagues within the Sea; and those of the West,
which they call Virasons, which come from the Sea, immediately after dinner,
and blow all the rest of the day.

This change of Seasons from one extremity to another is the cause of many
Diseases among the Portuguez; The Diseases of those parts.
but the most common there are those which they call Mordexin, which kills
immediately, burning Fevers, and bloody Fluxes, against which they have in a
manner no remedy but bleeding. The Plague is a Disease not known in the Indies;
but, ^o make amends, they have the Pox, which destroys every year a great
number of Portuguez. For, though the Country produces present and topical
Remedies against the Disease, yet so violent are their inclinations to Women,
who, on the other side, are as mad for Men, that they will not take the time to
be cured of a Disease, which is not got off by Remedies, if they be not
accompanied with a very regular diet. The Women of those parts ^ave an
excessive affection for white Men, and, being kept very much in restraint, they
are put to all imaginable inventions, to let them know how passionately they
love them, and ^o get them into their Lodgings: where they many times prosecute
their delights, even in ^he Husbands presence, by means of a Drug, which so
stupifies his Senses, as that he seems ^ither to have lost them, or to sleep
with his eyes open.

The Indians call this Herb Doutro, Doutry, or Datura, and the Turks and
Persians Da^ula. Garcias ab horto, and Christopher d' Acosta, affirm, that it
is a kind of Stramonea; that the Herb grows abundantly all over the Indies, in
the shade, and that it is somewhat like Bearsfoot. They extract the juice of
it, while it is green, or they beat the Seed to powder, and mix it in
Conserves, or put it into his drink, whom they would reduce to that condition
for twenty four hours: during which time he is deprived the use of all his
Senses, so that he does not see what is done before him, though his eyes be
open, unless some body moisten the soles of his seet with fair water, which
revives and recovers him, much after the same manner as if he awoke out of a
sound sleep.

There are few Portuguez Women, or Mestizes, seen going about the City; and
when they go abroad, The Women go abroad.
either to Church, or upon necessary Visits, they are carried in close
Palanquins, or are attended and watched by so many Slaves, that it is
impossible to speak to them. When they appear in public, they are all very
richly attired, in Velvet, Flower'd-Sattin, or Brocado, and adorned with
abundance of Pearls and precious Stones; but at home, they go in their Hair,
and have about them only a Smock, which reaches to the Navil; and thence
downwards, they have Petticoats of painted Clothes falling down to the Feet,
which are bare. They eat no Bread, as liking the Rice better, now that they are
accustomed to it; nor do they fare over-deliciously as to other things, their
ordinary sustenance being Salt-fish, Mangas, or only Rice, soaked in a little
Flesh or Fish-broath. They make use of certain Bottles, made of a kind of black
Earth, which they call Gorgolettes, and have a Pipe coming up to the brims, so
as that they may suck up the Water without lifting up the Bottles to their
mouths.

The Men there are so jealous of their Wives, The jealousy of the Portuguez
that they permit not their nearest Relations to see them: for Chastity is so
strange a Virtue in those parts, that there is no Woman but contrives all the
ways imaginable to pursue her enjoyments, never minding the breach of those
Laws which God and Nature has imposed upon them, though the frequent
misfortunes which happen upon that occasion should engage them to be more
cautious and reserved. The perpetual idle life they lead makes them so high in
their desires, for they do not any thing of business in the world, but spend
the day in chewing of Bettele, which adds fuel to the flames of their lewd
inclinations, as do also the Cloves and Nutmegs, which they eat, out of an
imagination that they prevent the corruptions of the Teeth and Stomach, which
commonly make the Breath stink.

The Indian Women, who conceive by an European, have so great an affection for
their Children, that they would rather dye then part with them. Children are
not clothed till they are of age to wear Breeches: and till that time they are
brought up by Slaves, or other Indian Women.

The Soldiers live after another rate among them. The Portuguez Soldiers.
For those who go in that quality from Portugal, do not list themselves under
any particular Captain, nor will be engaged to continue in any one certain
place to keep Garrison there: but when they come to the Indies, they do what
they please themselves. Accordingly they have no pay, but when they are in
actual service upon the Engagements they are forced to at Sea, against the
Malabars, or the Dutch. But the Captains, who have occasion for these people,
treat them with much civility, and give them now and then somewhat toward
their subsistence, that they may be assured of their persons and services, when
they have any work for them: so that they have what to live upon, yet spend not
much. For commonly they live ten or twelve in the same house, where they diet
together, having but two or three Servants among them, and as many Suits of
Clothes, for those who go abroad, either to beg, or upon some design, while the
rest stay at home, till their turns come to march out.

The Marriages and Christenings of the Portuguez are celebrated with very great
magnificence. Their Marriages and Christnings.
The Friends and Relations come on horseback to the Bridegrooms door, and
thence march before him to Church, into which he enters, accompanied by two of
his Friends, who are instead of Godfathers to him; and the Bride follows him
in a Palanquin, accompanied also by her two Godfathers. After the benediction
of the marriage, they reconduct the new married couple to their house, into
which only the Godfathers enter with the young couple, who go into a Balcony,
or stand at a Window, to give the company thanks, which in the mean time show a
thousand tricks in the Street. Their Chistenings are performed, in a manner,
with the same Ceremonies, save that, at these there is carried an Ewer with a
clean Napkin, a Salt-sellar, and in the midst a Silver Basin, in a heap of
Roses, or other Flowers, a Wax-candle, into which they put a piece of Gold or
Silver, for an Offering to the Priest. The Godfather, and the Midwife, are
carried with the Child in Palanquins.

Most of the Portuguez have many Slaves of both Sexes, Their Slaves.
whom they employ not only about their persons, but also upon any other
business they are capable of; for what they get comes in to the Master. Whence
it comes that handsome Wenches are sought after, to be employed in the selling
of Fruits, and such Commodities as the Portuguez send to market; to the end
their beauty might draw in Customers, and so they by a double way of trading,
bring in double profit to their Masters. Their keeping, as to diet, stands them
in very little; and all the clothing they give them is only as much
Linnen-cloath as will cover the privy parts. The Children born between Slaves
belong to the Master, unless the Father will redeem them, within eight or ten
days after they are born; which if they let slip, they are not afterward
admitted to do it, and the Master disposes of them; and when they are able to
do any thing, makes use of them himself, or sells them in the Market, as we do
Cattle.

The Inhabitants of the Country are Pagans, The Inhabitants of the Country, and
their houses.
and for the most part Benjans. Their Houses are all of Straw, and very little,
having no light but what comes in at a little low door. All their
Household Stuff consists principally in certain Mats made of Rushes, which
serve them both for their lodging at night, and to lie down upon at meals.
Their Dishes, Drinking-cups, and Napkins, are made of Fig Leaves, of which they
also make Pitchers and Oyl-pots, and their ordinary sustenance is Rice, which
they boil in Earthen pots. They daub over their Houses with Cow Dung, out of an
imagination that it drives away Fleas.

They are so superstitious, that they never go abroad till they have said their
prayers; and if they chance to meet a Crow, wherever they be, they
immediately return home, and undertake no business of any consequence that day.
When they travel, they do their devotions before their Pagodes; and the
Portuguez tolerate their Idolatry, upon this account, that the Inquisition
has no power, but only over such as either are Christians, or have been such.
They have also their particular ceremonies for their Marriages, their
birthdayes, and other days, and seasons of the year: but they differ so little
from those whereof we have spoken already, that we shall need say nothing of
them. There are among them some very able Physicians, who are so highly
respected at Goa, that they are permitted to have their Umbrellos carried with
them; which is a Privilege allowed only persons of quality: nay the Portuguez,
even to the Viceroy himself and the Archbishop, make use of them, rather then
of those of their own Nation. They never eat but with those of their own Sect,
though they were ready to starve. Nay, in this particular they are so
scrupulous, that if, in their journey to Cochim, their provision should fall
short, they would rather starve, then be obliged to eat what another had sown
or made ready. Most of the Porters about Goa are Christians, as are also their
Money-changes, whom they call Xaraffes, who make an external profession of
Christianity, but, in their dealing, are Jews, apt to overreach and deceive
all that have to do with them. There are in Goa many Decanins and Canarins, who
have Shops there, and buy of the Portuguez, Porcelane, Velvet Damask, and other
Stuffes of Silk and Cotton, as also some China Commodities, all by whole sale,
and afterward sell them again by retail. These also bring Provisions from the
Continent, and trade therein, having to that end their Brokers and Factors, who
manage their business, The Decanins excellent Gravers, etc.
while they go to Cambaya, and along the Coast to improve their Traffic. There
are amongst them Goldsmiths, Jewellers, Gravers, and other Artizans, who do
things incomparably better then any of ours. These also farm the Kings Demesne
in the Islands of Bardes and Salsette; upon which account, having sometimes
occasion to go to Law, they are so well versed in the Laws and Customs of
Portugal, that they need no Advocates to plead their Causes.

Most of the Canarins are either Husbandmen, or Fishermen. There are some of
them have no other employment then dressing the Cocos-trees, to get the Wine
and Fruit they produce. Others only wash Linen, or whiten Cloth. The Peasants
bring in every day to the City, Their women delivered without pain.
wild Fowl, Milk, Fruit, Eggs, and other provisions to be sold. Their Wives are
delivered with the greatest easiness imaginable. They make no use of Midwives,
but are delivered alone, wash their Children themselves as soon as they are
born, put them under a few Fig leaves, and return to their work, as if they had
not been about any such thing. They live in perfect health to 100. years of age.
The Children brought up after this rate, grow so hardy and strong, that it is
an ordinary thing to see Men among them of a hundred years of age, yet have not
a Tooth missing, but all the time in perfect health. They are all excellent
Swimmers, whence it comes, that they venture over to the Continent in their
little Boats called Almadi^s, which indeed are so little, that they can hardly
carry one person: in so much that they are frequently overturned, but they
recover them again by swimming, cast out the Water, and prosecute their Voyage.
Though in these parts they burn the dead bodies instead of burying of them, yet
are not the Women obliged to burn themselves with their Husbands Corpse, but
only to cut off their Hair, and make a Vow of perpetual Widowhood.

The Jews, The Jews of Goa.
who live at Goa, have there their Temples and Synagogues, and enjoy an
absolute liberty of Conscience. They are either Indians born of, Father and
Mother, Jews, or they come out of Palastine; these last, for the most part,
speak the Spanish tongue.

The Mahumetans, who live there, trade for the most part to Meca, and other
places upon the Red Sea, whither they carry Spices. The Portuguez and the
Mestizes have their greatest Trade in Bengala, Pegu, Malacca, China, and in
Guzuratta, at the City of Cambaya. No Person of Quality at Goa, but goes once a
day to the Market, whither the Merchants, nay, most Gentlemen come, as well to
hear what news there is, as to see what there is to be sold; for, from seven in
the morning to nine, (after which the heat is such, as that a Man is not able
to stay there) the public Criers, whom they call Laylon, sell there by outcry,
all sorts of Commodities, but especially Slaves of both Sexes, and Jewels.
There you shall see the Crier laden with Chains, Gold Rings, and precious
Stones, and followed by a great number of Slaves, all to be sold. There are
also to be sold there, Persian and Arabian Horses, Spices, all sorts of
Aromatic Gums, Alcatifs, Porcelane, Vessels of Agat, several things made of
Lacque, and whatever is thought precious or rare in any other part of the
Indies. Merchants and Tradesmen are distinguished by Streets; so that Silk-men
are not shuffled in among Linnen-Drapers; nor the Druggists among those who
sell Porcelane. The greatest profit they make is in the exchange of Money. For
when the Spanish Fleet comes in, they buy Ryals at ten or twelve in the hundred
loss; and in April, when the Ships go away for the Molucca's and China, where
the Ryals are much esteemed, they fell them again at twenty five or thirty in
the hundred profit, notwithstanding the Order there is to sell them at four
hundred Reis. They make the same advantage by the change of the Laris, which
they also sell at ten or twelve in the hundred profit.

They have several sorts of money. Their money.
The least is that which hey call Basarucques, which on the one side have a
Globe, on the other two Arrows crossed. They are made of Tin and Lattin mixed
together, and eight of these Basarucques make a Ventin, whereof five make a
Tanghe. Five Tanghes make a Serafin of Silver, which, according to the King.
Command, is set at three hundred Reis, and six Tanghes make a Pardai. The
Serafin has on the one side Saint Sebastian, on the other a sheaf of Arrows.
There are also Serafins of Gold, coined heretofore at Ormus, of a more refined
metal then any other Moneys of the Indies; whence it comes, that the
Goldsmiths melt down all that fall into their hands of them. They have also
Santemes of 16. Tanghes, and Pagodes of 14* 15. and 16. Tanghes.

Foreign Merchants pay at their coming in eight in the hundred for all
Merchandises, Customs upon Foreign Commodities.
and as much at their going out; but the Farmers of the Customs are so
reasonable in their valuing of them, that the Merchants have no cause to
complain. They have also this favor, that if a Merchant has paid the Customs
at his coming in, and has not put off his Commodities, he may carry them to
some other place, without paying ought at the Exportation. In like manner, a
foreign Merchant that has bought of a Portuguez, or other Citizen of Goa,
Spices, or any other Commodities of Malacca or China, may enter them under the
Sellers name, and so avoid paying the Customs due at exportation.

The Viceroy at the time of our being there, The Viceroy of Goa.
was D. Pedro de Silva. His person was not answerable to his quality, but he
had about him above fifty Gentlemen, who gave him the same respect as they
could have done the King himself. This charge is continued in the same person,
but for three years, as well in regard it were dangerous, a Subject should
longer be possessed of a Dignity, which differs from the Sovereign only in
time; as that the King of Spain has many Lords to gratify with an Employment,
which enriches them sufficiently in that time. For, besides that his whole
Court lies at the Kings charge, he has the disposal of all his Revenue, and
every year makes a Visit for sixty or eighty Leagues about, which is worth to
him very much. But the Presents which the neighboring Princes, and the
Governors and under Officers make him, are not to be valued. He has his
Council of State, and his Courts of Law and Equity. He is absolute Judge in all
civil Causes, the most important only excepted, wherein there may appeal be
made to the King. Criminal Sentences are executed there, notwithstanding the
Appeal; but it is not in the Viceroy's power to indict a Gentleman, but he is
obliged to send him, with the Informations brought in against him, to Portugal,
unless the King order some other course to be taken with him. The Viceroy at
his arrival into the Indies, lands in the Island of Bardes, or some other Haven
on that side, whence he immediately sends his Agents to Goa, to take possession
of his charge, and what ever depends on it. His Predecessor makes way for him,
upon the first news he receives of his Arrival, unfurnishes the Palace, and
leaves him only the Guards and the bare walls. Thus much we thought fit to say
of the City of Goa.

January 22. about noon, Mandels^c continues his Voyage.
the President sent away the two Ships which came along with us from Surat, and
were to carry thither the money which had been received at Goa; and after he
had dismissed certain Jesuits, and several other persons of quality of Goa, who
were come to visit him aboard, we hoys'd sail, yet expecting to come aboard our
Ship the General of the Dutch Fleet, whose name was Van Kenlen, who had
entreated him to convey some Letters to his Superiors. But he came not. In the
Evening we saw all the Dutch Fleet under sail, whence we imagined that the
General intended to give us a visit, but with the night we lost sight of them,
and having a reasonable good wind, kept on our course.

Ian. 23. At break of day, we had a sight of the Dutch Fleet again; and then we
conceived they were going to relieve the King of Ceylon, who had entreated the
General to assist him against the Portuguez, who had declared war against him.
About noon, we were at thirteen degrees latitude, and out of sight of land. But
in regard we intended to go toward the Coast of Malabar, upon intelligence
brought us, that an English Ship, coming from Bantam, richly laden with
Spices, had been set upon and spoiled by the Malabar Pirates, the next day we
changed our course, and took it more Eastward, so to get toward the land. The
Malabars had taken their advantage of the condition that Ship was in, which was
so over-burthen'd, that she could make use of but six Guns; they found indeed
no great difficulty to enter her; but they were no sooner in, ere the English
sent above six hundred of them, with the upper Deck into the Sea. They
dispatched as many with the second; but afterward being themselves forced to
go to the Stern, to avoid the fire, they yielded to the Malabars, who, with the
Ship, took the Captain, the Masters Mate, the Clark, and fourteen others, whom
we intended to redeem.

About noon we passed in sight of Monteleone, Monteleone.
a high mountain from which the Malabars discover, at a distance, the Vessels
they conceive they may set upon with advantage, and at night we came to the
Haven of Cananor, where we found three English Vessels, the Dragon, the
Catharine, and the Seymour, commanded by Captain Weddell, one of the most
experienced Sea-Captains of his time, one that had been at the taking of Ormus,
and was then entertained into the service of a new Company, erected not long
before in England, for the trade of the Indies. Having fired some Guns to
salute the Castle, we sent to Captain Weddell, to know what condition the
English prisoners were in; and hearing they were most of them set at liberty,
we would stay no longer on that Coast.

The Portuguez have a Garrison in the Castle of Cananor, The Malabars.
but the City is inhabited by Malabars. They call by that name all those people
who live upon that Coast from the City of Goa, as far as the Cape of Comory, or
Comorin. The Country is very fertile, and brings forth abundance of Spices, but
particularly the best Pepper in the Indies, which is most esteemed, because the
grain of it is bigger then it is any where else, even then that which grows in
Sumatra and Iava. The Inhabitants go stark naked, covering only those parts,
which Nature would not have seen even in Beasts. They make holes in the tips of
their Ears, and are black, but have not such great Lips as the Moors of Africa.
They tie up their Hair together upon the Crown of the Head, and let their
Beards grow to the full length, without any ordering or trimming, in so much
that they are not unlike those figures, under which we would represent the
Devil. Nor is their disposition unsuitable to this pleasant external shape, for
they understand nothing of civility, nor are capable of any Commerce or
Conversation. They are for the most part Pirates and Soldiers, who may be said
to have rashness rather then courage, and are expert enough in the handling of
their Arms, which are Sword and Buckler, Bows and Arrows. They make also a
kind of Muskets themselves, and use them with advantage. They obey neither the
King of Cuncam, nor the Viceroy of Goa, but they have their particular King or
Prince, who also performs the functions of High Priest, and is of the Sect of
the Bramans. These were the most considerable enemies the Portuguez met with,
at the beginning of their establishment in the Indies: but ever since they made
a Treaty with them, they have lived in very good correspondence. Zamori^
Emperor of Calicut^ and Cananor.
Their Prince, whom they call Zamorin, is also King of Calicuth, upon the same
Coast. In the year 1604. the Dutch made a Treaty with him, for the freedom of
Trade; but the Portuguez coming to be more powerful in those parts, and the
Dutch finding it easier to settle themselves in other places, where they
continue their Trade with greater advantage, they have neglected the friendship
of these Barbarians. I observed at Cananor, that there were some men among
them, who never pared their Nails; and that there were others, who wore
Bracelets and Rings about their Arms. These are the Gentry of the Country,
whom they call Nayres, that they may be distinguished from Persons of meaner
condition, whom they call Polyas. The Nayres are very proud, and conceited of
themselves, and permit not the Polyas so much as to touch them. They always go
with their Sword and Buckler, wherewith they make a noise in the Streets as
they go, and perpetually cry out Po, Po, that people should make way for them.
As soon as they perceive them coming, they close on both sides, look down to
the ground, and do them reverence. Some affirm, that this punctilio of Honor,
whereby they pretend to a respect due to them from all that are not of their
race, was one of the things that most obstructed the Treaty which the Portuguez
were ready to conclude with the King of Cochim, at their first establishment,
in regard they would have the Portuguez do them the same submissions as the
Polyas did. The Portuguez, on the other side, who are as highly conceited of
themselves as any Nation in the World, refused to do it; so that to decide the
difference, it was agreed, that a Portuguez and a Nayre should fight for the
honor of the two Nations; upon condition, that the Conqueror should give the
Law to the conquered. The Portuguez Champion had the advantage, and by that
means obtained the precedence for his Nation; and ever since that time, the
Portuguez have the same honor done them by the Nayres, The privileges of the
Nayres
as they have done them by the Polyas. Many of these Nayres never marry, in
regard they have a certain privilege to see the Wives and Daughters of their
Camerades, and to that end, to go into their Houses at any time of the day.
When they go into any House upon that score, they leave their Sword and Target
at the Street-door, which mark prohibits entrance to all others whatsoever, nay
the very Master of the House himself, finding those Arms at his Door, passes
by, and gives his Camerade full liberty to do what he please. The Polyas are
not so much honour^d as to have the Nayres visit their Wives, who must be
content with their own Husbands; for it were a great crime in a Nayre to defile
himself, by conversing with the Wife of a common person. The Nayres are all
Soldiers, made use of by the King, both for his Guard and in his W^rs. On the
contrary, the Polyas are forbidden the bearing of Arms, and so are either
Tradesmen, Husbandmen, or Fishermen.

The Malabars write with a Bodkin upon the bark of the Cocos-tree, The writing
of the Malabars.
which they cut very thin, and in an oblong form like a Table Book, drawing a
String through the middle, which hold the leaves together, and comes twice or
thrice about the box or case, which is as it were a covering to it. Their
Characters have nothing common with those of the other Indians, and are
understood only by their Bramans, for most of the common people can neither
write nor read.

The King of Calicuth does not eat any thing, The order of succession in
Calicuth.
which had not been presented before to his Pagode; and it is to be
particularly observed, that in this Kingdom it is not the Kings Son, but the
Kings Sisters Son, who inherits the Crown, it being the common persuasion, that
the Children born of the Queen, are begotten rather by their Bramans then by
the King himself.

As concerning the City of Cochim, Cochim described.
it is to be observed, that there are two Cities of the same name in the
Kingdom of Cochim, one whereof lies upon a great River, and belongs to the King
of Cochim, the other to the Portuguez. This last, whereof we now speak, is
seated upon the same Coast, at ten degrees on this side the Line, having on the
West Side of it the Sea, and on the Land-side a Forest of black Trees, whereof
the Inhabitants of the Country make their Boats called Almadies. These Trees
they make hollow, and so their Boat is all of one piece, yet with these they
make a shift to go along the Coast as far as Goa. The Port is very dangerous,
by reason of the Rocks which make the entrance into it very difficult.

At the beginning of Winter, there falls such abundance of Rain in the
neighboring Mountains, that several Brooks are of a sudden by that means
overflown, and run with such violence, that the Earth which they carry along,
and which is stopped by the Waves that are forced by the Wind against the
Earth, makes in that place a kind of Bank, which so stops up the mouth of the
Haven, that it is impossible to get into it or out of it, during that time, nor
indeed till the Wind, which changes with the season, forces the Sea back again,
which carries along with it the filth which the Rain had left in that place.

The Portuguez carry on a great Trade in this place in Pepper, which the King
of Cochim sells them at a certain rate, agreed upon with the Viceroy at his
first coming to Goa; but the Inhabitants of the Country, and other Foreigners,
pay dearer for it.

The King of Cochim is one of the most powerful Princes of those parts; it
being certain, The power of the King of Cochim A great Privilege of the
Bramans.
that he is able to raise above a hundred thousand men; the most part Nayres,
who are obliged to serve at their own charge, either with Horse or Elephants.
As to their manner of life, it is not fully so brutish as that of the Malabars,
but they observe the same Custom, for the succession of their Kings, and the
Consummation of their Marriages, which work is performed by their Bramans.

This sort of people is so highly respected amongst them, that the Master of
the House seeing a Braman coming into it, makes him way, retires, and leaves
him alone to do what he please with his Wife. They make holes in their Ears,
and hang little weights of Lead at them, which stretch them so much, that in
time they reach down to their Shoulders. The principal Commerce of this place
consists in Pepper, Ginger, and Cinnamon.

It is not long since all the Malabars had but one King; The Zamorin of
Calicuth was sometime Emperor of the Malabars.
but Sarama Perymal, Monarch of all that Coast, from Goa, as far as the Cape of
Comeri, having embraced the Mahumetan Religion, and desirous to end his life in
solitude, near the Sepulcher of his great Prophet, distributed his Territories
amongst his Friends, upon condition that the Kings of Cananor, Cochim and
Chaule, should acknowledge the Sovereignty of the King of Calicuth, on whom he
bestowed the Dignity of Zamourin, or Emperor; but since the establishment of
the Portuguez in those parts, the power of Zamourin is grown so low, that at
the present, the King of Cochim is more powerful then he.

January the 26. We left Cananor, and saw going thence Captain Weddell, who
would gladly have come along with us into England, had he not been obliged to
go and dispatch some business he had to do at Cochim and Calicuth. Captain
Weddell cast Anchor there, but we only fired some Guns, and pursued our Voyage.

The next day we discovered, An Engagement with the Malabar Pirates.
at a great distance, eighteen Sail of Ships, which coming directly toward us,
easily discovered what their design was. We had much ado to clear our Guns, for
the Ship was so laden that every hole was full. However we had the time to put
our selves into a posture of receiving those Pirates, who had not the confidence
to come within Cannon-shot of us, while daylight might discover them; but
presently after midnight, as soon as the Moon was up, they set upon us on all
sides, though with little advantage, for they were so well received, that at
the first firing of our Guns we sunk two of their Frigots, and made three or
four others incapable of further engaging. Our small Shot in the mean time
playing upon those which came nearest our Ship, that they thought it their best
course to let us alone.

The same night we passed by the Castle of Chochim, Pass in sight of Cochim.
and the next day, the twenty eighth, we could discern no more then fourteen of
the Malabar Frigates, which followed us a far off, whereupon we conceived the
other four were sunk. Mean while, we continued on our Voyage with a favorable
Wind, discovering toward the East, a low Country planted with Cocoes, and
something farther, toward South-east, the Cape of Comory, The Cope of Comory.
the most Southerly quarter of this part of the Indies, by the Ancients called
India on this side Ganges.

The night following, the Malabars made as if they would again attaque us, and
two of their Frigots came within our Cannon, we only gave them two Volleys
without Bullets to draw them nearer, but they retreated.

On the morrow, the twenty ninth, we saw the Isle of Ceylon, The Isle of Ceylon.
at the head whereof we were fixed as immovable by a Calm, which lasted three
weeks complete. This Island lies ten Leagues from the Continent, extending from
South-south-east to the North-east, betwixt the Capes of Comory and Nigapatam,
which lies at eleven degrees, toward the Coast of Coromandel. It Is in length
sixty Leagues, in breadth forty, and about two hundred and fifty in compass.
They say, it was heretofore much larger then now at present, and that the
flowings of the Sea, which in those quarters are exceeding violent, carried
part of it away, on the side toward Comory. This, without dispute, is the
richest and most fertile of all the Eastern Islands, if we may credit Maffeus,
the most learned and grave Author that has written of the Affairs of the
Indies, or particularly the experienced and famous S. Borhart in his Phaleg;
this is without doubt the Ancients Taprobane, The ancient Taprobane.
though Mercator, Ios. De l' Escale, Em. Osorius, and others, take the Isle of
Sumatra to be it, of which we shall speak hereafter.

Howsoever, Its des^ription.
it is most certain, Ceylon, or Zeilon, is the most considerable of all the
Indian Islands, for it produces not only all such things as the other Islands
afford, but moreover, there shall you see whole Forests of Orange and
Lemmon-trees, as also of Cinnamon, which emits its odor very far upon the Sea,
and great quantity of precious Stones, in so much as, except the Diamonds,
there is no Stone which is not there found. They fish likewise there for
Pearls, but they are not so fair as those of Baharam: but in recompense it
produces the best Ivory of the World. When discovered by the Portuguez.
Laurence, Son of Francisco Almeida, discovered it in the year 1506. who took
possession of it in the name of Emanuel King of Portugal, erecting there a
Column, with an Inscription, signifying, that it had no owner, though at the
same time he had a Treaty with one of the Kings of the Island, wherein he
promised him the King of Portugal's protection, for two thousand five hundred
Quintals of Cinnamon, in acknowledgment. The Portuguez have since fortified the
Town of Colombo, which lies at seven degrees on this side the Line, and kept
it, till the Hollanders, three years since, in the year 1657. took this
important place from them; by this means dispossessing them of all they held in
this Island.

The Hollanders began not their Commerce here till the year 1602. in the time
of Fimala Derma suri Ada, King of Candy, who is the most puissant, and in a
manner the sovereign of the Island, who succeeded to the Crown by ways so
extraordinary, that I persuade my self 'twill not be tedious to the Reader, to
hear the particulars.

Mara Ragu, King of Settavacca, had three Sons legitimate, and one natural,
called Derma. The History of Fimala Derma King of Candy.
Some will have this Derma to be the Son of a Chyrurgion; but they are
mistaken, it being certain, he was the Son of Mara Ragu, begotten on one of
these Balladeiraes, or Dancers, such as almost all the Indian Princes keep for
their divertisement. Mara Ragu had an affection for this Child, and caused him
to be brought up a Soldier, that one day he might command his Forces; wherein
Derma improved so well, and acquired such reputation, that the Army, who
conceived it would be a happiness to be under a Martial Prince, established him
in the Throne, this unnatural Child having first taken away the lives of his
Father and his three legitimate Sons. Derma murders his Father and three
Brothers.
The Cingales, who in this Island of Ceylon are as the Nayres amongst the
Malabares, had some regret to admit this change, and be Subjects to a Bastard:
but he began his reign with such severity, and ordered so many executions, that
they who murmured most were compelled to entertain what they could not hinder,
till such time as they found means to make him away by poison.

The death of Derma, and that of the King of Candy, which happened much about a
time, very much advanced the establishment of the Portuguez in this Island.
For, allowing to the Cingales their ancient Liberties and Privileges, and
without scruple of Religion, intermarrying with them, they stood fair to become
Masters of the Island, had it not been for the opposition of one Lord of the
Nation, of whom they had good reason to be confident. His name was Fimala Derma
Suri Ada, and was grand Modeliar, that is, Constable of the Kingdom of Candy,
when the King dyed. He was Son to one of the chief Princes of the Kingdom, and
in his youth had his breeding amongst the Portuguez, who brought him to
Colombo, where he was baptized, and named Don John of Austria, in remembrance
of the natural Brother of Philip the second King of Spain. Afterward they
educated him at Goa, whither they brought him at such time as D. Emanuel de
Sousa Coutinno was Viceroy; and he was there likewise while Matheo Albuquerque
succeeded D. Emanuel in the same Dignity. Fimala declares against the Portuguez
The Portuguez observing him to be a graceful person, and being, as they
thought, sure of his affection, made no difficulty to confer upon him the
Office of Grand Modeliar of Candy, and by this means to set him in the first
rank of the whole Kingdom, wherein D. John of Austria made such use of his
trust, that he gained the affection of all the Soldiery, so as that after the
decease of the King, the Cingales promoted him to succeed in his place.

The first thing he did, was to put to death all the Portuguez in the Town of
Candy, and to declare war against the rest. There was yet a Princess, Heir to
the Cr^wn, whom the Portuguez had brought to Mannar, where they baptized her,
and named her D. Katharina, with design to make use of her when occasion should
require, as in the present Conjuncture it did. For Pedro Lopes de Sousa,
Captain General of Malacca, conceiving he could raise the Inhabitants of Candy
in favor of this Princess, enters the Kingdom with a powerful Army, and with
him brings along D. Katharina with intention to marry her, by which means he
would make himself King, having first caused her to be acknowledged Heir. He
became Master of the capital Town without much difficulty, but that proved his
ruin. For D. John, who, with his Cingales, was retired to the Woods, did not
only annoy him in cutting off all the Portuguez, who came out of the Town for
forage or other necessaries of livelihood; but he so cut off all Provisions,
that Lopes, to maintain his Army, was constrained to betake himself to the
Field, and leave the Town, to give D. John battle. Gives Battle.
It was fought in the year 1590. upon a Sunday; and notwithstanding the
advantage the Portuguez had of their Firearms, and above forty Elephants
armed for war; D. John, who would now have no other name then Fimala Derma Suri
Ada, routed and absolutely defeated them. Lopes was killed upon the place, and
D. Katharina became prisoner to Fimala, who afterward married her, by this
means acquiring a right to the Crown, which before he only held by the Sword.

Four years after this Victory, D. Ieronimo d' Azeuedo, General of the
Conquests of Zeilon, having received Orders from the King of Spain for a new
attempt on the Kingdom of Candy, raises a potent Army, which the Viceroy of Goa
reinforced with all the Cavaliers and Hidalgos attendance: The second Battle
given.
he advances to Ballene the place where the first Battle was fought, and thence
sends defiance to the King of Candy.

The Portuguez were not more fortunate in this, then they had been in the
former battle; for though the Portuguez Army received not a defeat, and D.
Ieronimo got high honor by his retreat for five days together in fight of the
Kings Army, that pursued him to the very Gates of Colombo; they were
notwithstanding so weakened, that from that time the Portuguez durst never
attempt the Kingdom of Candy by force. Nevertheless they cease not to maintain
a war by surprises and incursions one upon another.

For not long before the Hollanders arrived in the Isle of Zeilon, The
treachery of a Portuguez Renegado.
the Portuguez were most basely trappan'd by the double intelligence, which one
Ieronimo Dias kept with them. He was by birth a Portuguez, but as the rest of
his Nation, who settle amongst the Indians, making no difficulty to plant
themselves in places where there is no public exercise of Religion, easily
lose that whereof they had only a fleight and superficial knowledge; so this
man having renounced his Religion, undertook to betray his Countrymen, as I am
about to tell you. This Ieronimo, being prisoner to the King, remained at Candy
till he had contrived the means to betray the Portuguez. Afterward he escaped,
and returning to D. Ieronimo d' Azeuedo, told him, that if he thought fit, he
would undertake to kill the King of Candy. Azeuedo supposing after the Kings
death, 'twould not be hard for him to possess himself of the Kingdom, hearkens
to the Proposition, raises to himself an assurance in a Man, who undertakes in
cold blood to murder a Sovereign Prince; allows him three Captains, Christoval
Iacomo, Albert Primero, and Iean Pereina, with two Soldiers, to assist him in
this enterprise, which he made appear very feasible: promising to make him King
of Candy immediately upon the Kings expiration, and furnishing him with a good
sum of money for the purpose, without which, he said, there was nothing to be
done. Dias would go alone, as well that he might seem to have escaped from the
Portuguez, as to dispose the King to put these five Portuguez, his Accomplices,
into the Fort of Ballene; for that he was to persuade the King, that they came
likewise to render themselves to him, to serve against the other Portuguez: but
being come to the King, he discovered the double dealing he had contrived, so
as the night following, the King re-inforc'd the Garrison of Ballone Fort, and
went in person thither, on design to surprise the Portuguez, who were
ambuscado'd in the Woods, to affault the Fort upon notice of the Kings death.

These five Portuguez, Confederates in Dias's treason, being arrived at the
Fort, were received in; but as they entered were conveyed into private rooms,
where they were disarmed and put into Irons: which could not be carried with so
much secrecy, but some of those Cingales the Portuguez brought along with them
discovered it, so as returning with speed they gave notice to the Portuguez in
the Ambuscade, who otherwise had run the hazard to be cut in pieces through the
ill success of the enterprise. Ieronimo Dias for his service was rewarded with
the dignity of Grand Modeliar, which he enjoyed at the time the Hollanders
arrived in the Island of Zeilon, The Hollanders ill treated in the Isle of
Zeilon.
where they sped no better then the Portuguez. For the King of Candy, who in
the year 1602. received their Admiral with civility, in the year following,
caused their Vice Admiral, with fifty of his Men, to be put to death in cold
blood; in so much as for that time they were constrained to lay aside all
thoughts of settling a trade there. But since they have found opportunity for a
firm establishment, by gaining from the Portuguez the Fort de Punto de Gallo,
and fortifying the Port de Negombo, where they drive a great trade, much
augmented by their taking likewise the Town of Colombo from the Portuguez,
where these last kept commonly a Garrison of eight hundred men.

The King of Candy is the most puissant and most absolute of all the Kings of
Zeilon. The Kingdom of Candy.
He delights in the Portuguez manner of building, and fortifies his Holds after
the modern way. This Kingdom extends it self along that River, on which the
City of Vintane is situate, where the Kings Galleys and other Vessels have
their retreat. It contains many fair and well built Towns. The Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants are like the Malabars, but not so black. They go naked as low
as the Navel, but some use Coats or Dublets after the Portuguez fashion. In
their Ears they hang Pendants, and the greatest part have a Cris or Poniard by
their sides. The Women.
Women have likewise their Breasts bare, and go very decent in habit, and in
their conversation with Men discover much of modesty. They dress their Heads
much like the European Women, laying their Hair very close on their Head, and
tying their Tresses behind. They wear Collars of Gold or Silver, and Rings upon
their Hands and Feet, and their Arms and Legs beset with abundance of precious
Stones. Their houses are conveniently enough built, and the Women very skillful
in Cookery. The Cingales addict themselves to nothing at all, nor are they fit
for war, by reason they are accustomed to so idle a life they can endure no
hardship.

Throughout the Indies there is no part so abounds in all sorts of Victuals,
Victuals cheap.
as this Isle Zeilon. Fowl, Fish, Venison, Poultry, Butter, Milk and Honey, are
at extraordinary low rates, as well as Ananas, Bannanas, Cocos, Iacques,
Mangas, Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, and all other sorts of Fruits. They eat of
all things in general, even of Pork, and all sort of Cattle, except the Ox,
Cow, or Buffle; Wine they drink not, no more then the Mahumetans, Their
Religion.
who dwell amongst them, and enjoy a full liberty of Religion. These Islanders
are of the same Religion as other Pagans in these parts. They bear great
reverence to their Bramans, who observe a more austere way of living, and eat
not of any thing has had life, by reason that for the whole day they adore the
first Beast they meet with at their coming out of doors in a morning. Maids are
here married at the age of ten or twelve years: And they burn their dead Corpse.

Fimala Derma Suri Ada had gotten some tincture of Christian Religion, if at
least it be to be found amongst the Portuguez; it was soon razed out by the
compliance he had for the Cingales; and after his decease his Successors fell
back to Paganism. There are some amongst them, who adore the head of an
Elephant, wrought in wood or stone, and say, their intention is to obtain
wisdom; for they are of opinion, the Elephants of Ceilon are not only more
knowing then other Elephants, but further, that they out-go men in judgment. In
their houses they have a Basket, wherein they put such things as they design
for an offering to their Pagodes, to whom they have a particular devotion in
their sicknesses, because it is from them alone they look for remedy. They
hold, as matter of faith, that the World shall not perish so long as their
grand Mosquey, which may be seen at a great distance from the Sea, between
Punto de Gallo and Monte Calo, shall be extant. Another particular opinion they
have of a Mountain in this Island called Pico d' Adam, and say it was there
that the first Man was framed; that the Spring on the top of this Mountain rose
from the tears Eve shed for Abel; and that the Isle of Ceilon was part of the
terrestrial Paradise. To conclude, they are very docile, and willing to
acknowledge the errors of their Idolatry; in so much that there were great
likelihood of their conversion, if Christians would undertake these long
Voyages, as much out of a religious zeal, as worldly concernments.

All the other Kings of Ceilon, Kings tributary to the Portuguez.
except the King of Candy, pay tribute to the Portuguez: but it is so
inconsiderable, that the Princes think it not worth while to take Arms to free
themselves from a subjection, which consists but in a bare acknowledgment. For
the King of Matecalo, who is not the least considerable amongst them, pays
annually but fifty Duckates.

The Island produces Pepper, but their chiefest Commodity is Cinnamon. They
find here Mines of Brass and Iron; and certainly there is both Gold and Silver,
Mines of Gold and Silver.
especially in the Kingdom of Candy, but the King will not permit a search to
be made for the discovery thereof. Their rich Stones they permit not likewise
to be sold to Strangers, which are there found in great abundance; but there is
so great plenty thereof, that it is impossible but some may be had under hand;
for they are found in the heaps of Gravel, and in the Town of Candy; nay, after
the Rain has washed down the Earth of some neighboring Mountains, the
Inhabitants find them in the currents of Water, and though they are obliged to
bring them all to the King, it is impossible that Order should be exactly
observed.

The Island likewise yields Timber and Stone for building; the Soil produces
Corn, Oil and Wine, if any Man will take the pains to plant the Vine, Cotton,
several Roots for Dyers, Ginger, Cardamoms, Mirobalans, Corcoma, and diverse
other Medicinable Drugs, Nutmegs, etc. but particularly so great a quantity of
Rice, that the whole Coast of Caromandel is furnished from hence. Likewise here
is so great a quantity of Cinnamon, that the Hollanders buy it for a hundred
and twenty eight Livres, forty eight Souls the Quintal or Hundred weight.

The chief Maritime Towns of the Isle of Ceylon are situated at this distance
following: that is, from Punto de Gallo Westward, Alican. 9. l. Verberin, 1 l.
Calutre 3. l. and Colombo 6. l. Nogombo 5. l. le Gilan 5. l. Putalon 10. l.
Maunar 18. l. Eastward to the Coast of Matecala, Bellingan 4. l. Mature 2. l.
Du^dule 1. l. Tamnadar 1. l. Halpilana, two Leagues and a half. Attalle 3. l.
Veleche 9. l. Tansilir 7. l, Trincoli, 12. l. Matecalo 5. l. and thence to the
River of Trinquamale 10. l. To go from Colombo to Candy; the way lies through
Tranquero grand, that is, the great Fort, or the great Rampire, 3. l. Maluana
2. l. Grouabley 3. l. Settavecca 3. l. Grouenelle 2. l. Mumera tuate 4. l.
Duiely 3. l. Matappety 2. l. Altonnar 1 l. Ganiattany 1. l. Ballene 1. l. Cady
1. l. From Matecalo to Candy, the Road is as follows, Aldea de Nore 1. l.
Occato^y 2. l. Viador 2. l. Neguritti 5 l. Niluale 2. l. Vegamme 4. l. Vintane
6. l. Vendro 5. l. Candy 4. l.

The Calm staid our Ship hard by this Isle, for near upon three weeks, which I
employed in inquiring of our President and certain Jesuits, who were aboard our
Vessels, into this pleasant part of the Indies, which I had never seen, and
merits to be known by the Description I shall make from the report of these
persons, amongst whom there were some who had spent there the best part of
their lives. I will then begin with the place where we were, and faithfully
deliver you all I could learn of those Kingdoms and Provinces, which without
question are the wealthiest of any in the World.

Toward the Cape of Comory, or Comorin, where we then were, are likewise those
Islands the Portuguez call Maldivas, The Maldives.
or Maldivar. They extend along the Coast of Malabar, having the Cape upon the
North, and taking up about sevenscore Leagues by Sea, which divides them into
such small parcels, that they are esteemed near upon a thousand. Some are
inhabited, others not, by reason they lie so low the Sea often drowns them, as
it does likewise the Skirts of the Continent, near Cochim, and Crangonar. The
Malabares say, that heretofore they were joined to the Continent, and were
separated by the Sea, which in some places has left such narrow divisions,
that an active man might leap from one side to the other. The Capital City,
which consists of four Islands, and gives them the appellation of Maldives, or
Naldive, is a place famous for trading, and the Residence for the King of all
the Islands. Except Cocoes, which are there in great abundance, they produce
little, notwithstanding the Inhabitants by industry make very neat Garments
both of Silk and Thread brought from other places; in so much that set aside
the Moguls, there are not amongst the Indians any that go more neatly
apparrell'd then they.

As concerning Coromandel, The Coast of Coromandel.
the Eastern part of the Indies on this side Ganges is so called, a Coast
divided from the Malabares by the Mountain Balagatta, extending from South to
North, from the Cape of Comorin, or rather the point of Negapatam, to the River
Nagund, and the Town of Masulepatam, containing all along the Coast, about a
hundred Leagues. It Is the more commodious, for that it serves for a retreat to
all Vessels which are constrained to quit the Coast of Gusuratta during the
Winter season, and it has many good Havens, and the best Roads of any in all
the Indies.

The Portuguez there possess the Town of Saint Thomas, The Inhabitants on the
Coast of Coromandel are Christians*
at thirteen degrees, thirty two minutes on this side the Line; and they say,
that at the time when Vasco de Gama discovered the Indies, and seized on Cochim
and Cranganor, the Inhabitants on this Coast, who called themselves Christians,
craved protection of the King of Portugal; and that arriving at Saint Thomas
they found Christians who made profession of the Greek Religion. For this
purpose they tell a Story grounded on a Tradition, which nevertheless is not to
be proved out of the Ecclesiastical History. A History of Saint Thomas.
Thus then they say, that Saint Thomas, one of our Saviors twelve Apostles,
having long preached the Gospel in the Kingdom of Norsingia, notwithstanding
the opposition of the Bramans, resolved to petition the King that he might
build a Chapel for the doing of his Devotions, and that the Bramans engaged
the King to deny him the favor. But it happened that a huge piece of Timber
was so lodged in the mouth of the Haven, belonging to the Town of Meliapour,
then the Metropolis of the Kingdom, that not only great Vessels, but the
smaller Barks, being not able to get in, the Trade of the Town was in a short
time quite lost. There was a trial made with a company of Elephants to remove
the Tree, but in vain; then the Magicians of those parts were employed to try
if their Art could do what strength could not effect, but to as little purpose;
wherefore the King proclaimed a considerable reward to him that could clear the
Haven, which invited the Saint to offer his service, and this for no other
reward, then the mere Timber it self. His proffer to draw it out himself made
him at first appear ridiculous, and specially when they saw him tie his Girdle
to it, to draw out a weight that many Elephants had not the strength to stir;
but he pulling, the Beam followed, as easily as if it had been a little Boat,
which when he had laid upon the Land, the King was amazed with admiration, and
in honor of the Miracle, permitted him to build the Chapel, as he had
requested. The Bramans seeing their Doctrine disparaged by this Miracle, and
that if Christian Religion began to spread in those parts, there was little
hope to support the Pagan; they resolve to free themselves of the Apostle, and
cause certain Panyms to murder him while he was at his Devotions in his
Chapel. Some there are who will have the Church dedicated to this Saint in
that place, to be built by a King of Narsinga, and that the door was made of
that miraculous beam; but the Portuguez say they built it, of which indeed
there is most probability.

Lentscholen says, that in these parts there are certain people with one leg
bigger then the other, and that they are held to be the Progeny of those that
martyred the Apostle.

Maffeus, in the eighth Book of his Indian History, relates how John the second
King of Portugal made search for the bones of this Saint upon the Coasts of
Coromandel, which he transported to Goa, where he built a fair Church in honor
of him: but if credit may be given to Ruffinus and Socrates, in their
Ecclesiastical History, the Apostle Saint Thomas suffered his Martyrdom at
Edessa in Mesopotamia, Saint Thomas the Apostle martyred at Edessa.
whither heretofore they made Pilgrimages to his Sepulcher; yet Marco Paulo
Veneto says otherwise, though with some contradiction to himself. Gasper Balbi
a Venetian Jeweller, who has made a very handsome relation of his Travels in
the Indies, says, That, being at the Town of Saint Thomas, in the year 1582.
there was a Church then building in the honor of Saint John Baptist; and that
the building almost finished, they found they wanted Timber to perfect it, when
at the same time the Sea cast a Tree ashore of such a bulk, that looking on it
as a thing extraordinary, they would needs measure it; and finding it to be a
just proportion for the Edifice, the people cried out a Miracle, wherein they
were confirmed, when sawing it, it yielded just so many Beams as served to
finish the Church. Headds further, that the Tree came from some far distant
place, because in cutting, it sent forth such a stinking smell, that it
infected the whole Country. The Town of Saint Thomas is not very great, but the
greatest part of the Houses are of Stone, and well built. The Church there has
no Steeple, yet may be seen at a good distance. There live here about six
hundred Portuguez, or Mestizes, besides some Armenian Merchants.

The Indians, The Town of Meliapour.
Pagans, and Mahumetans, live in the Town of Meliapour, which is seated on a
small River two Leagues from Saint Thomas Northward; but it is fallen from the
pristine glory it had, when it was the Capital Town of the Kingdom of Narsinga.
The King of Portugal has no Governor at Saint Thomas, nor so much as a
Magistrate, nor any political Order; by reason whereof diverse disorders are
daily committed without punishment.

The South and South-west Winds reign here from April to September, during
which time the Road is very good; but all the rest of the year, small Barks are
constrained to get into the River Palacatte, and greater Vessels into the Haven
of Negupatam. You have five fathom water even within Cannon-shot of the Town;
but the Sea is so rough at all times, there is no Landing without danger!

Upon this Coast the Hollanders have diverse Plantations where they drive a
great Trade; but principally at Potlapouli, otherwise called Nisapatam, where
they have had their Warehouses ever since the year 1606. and at Paleacatte,
where they have built the Fort of Geldria.

This Country was heretofore divided into three Kingdoms, that is, Coromandel,
Narsinga and Bisnagar; but at present it is all subject to one Prince, who
resides sometimes at Bisnagar, sometimes at Narsinga.

Above the Town of Masulipatam, lies the Country, or Kingdom rather, of Orixa,
Orixa*
reaching from the River of Masulipatam to the River of Guenga; but the
Hollanders would have it comprehended under the name of the Coast of
Coromandel. The chief Towns of the Kingdom are Masulipatam and Golcanda,
Masulipatam and Golcanda.
the one considerable for Commerce, the other for being the Kings Ordinary
Residence. The Country yields plenty of Salt, and Diamonds are likewise there
found; but all above five Caratts in weight appertain to the King.

Next to Orixa, Bengala.
winding toward the North, lies the Kingdom of Bengala, which gives name to
the Gulf, by the Ancients called Sinus Gangeticus. They drive here a great
trade in Rice, Sugar, and Cotton, but chiefly in Silks, which are esteemed the
best in all the Indies. The finest Canes we have are brought from Bengala,
where there likewise grows a sort of Canes which are finer then the Osier, in
so much as Vessels are made of them, which being glazed with Lacque on the
inside, co^tain liquid matters, as long and as well as a Glass or Silver Bowl.
There also grows a certain Herb, having on the top of its stalk, (which is
about the compass of a man's thumb) a great button like a tassel: this tassel is
spun out, and there are excellent Stuffs made of it. The Portuguez call it
Herba de Bengala, and make of it Hangings, and Coverlets, in which they
represent all sorts of Figures.

The people of the Country are all Pagans, and, in the manner of their living,
exceeding brutish. The Inhabitants.
Theft is here very common, and Adultery, though it be punished with severity
by cutting off their Noses who are taken in it; they forbear not nevertheless
to pollute themselves with all sort of uncleanness can be committed in that
Vice. The bear religious worship to the River of Ganges, and hold the water
hereof to be so holy, that who wash themselves therein are cleansed from all
their sins; and this superstition reaches so far, Their superstition.
that the King of Narsinga sends to the Ganges, for the water he uses for his
purifications.

The Kingdom of Pegu joins upon Bengala, Pegu.
upon the East Side, and takes its name from the capital City, where the King
has placed the Seat of his Monarchy. This is a very potent State, and as
Gaspar Balbi says, (whom I follow in this Relation, because I saw not the
Country) the Metropolis is divided into two parts; the one called the old, the
other the new Town. The King, with all that relate to the Court, live in the
latter, and Merchants and Tradesmen inhabit the other. For the greatest part,
the dwelling-houses are built of Canes, but they are joined to Warehouses that
are vaulted to prevent fire. The new Town is apiece, and the Flankers of
it so straight, that from any Gate thereof one may discover both corners of the
Wall. There are Bastions of Timber, Crocodiles in the Moat.
and a large Moat, full of water, where they keep Crocodiles to secure the Town
from surprizal. The Peguans hold this Creature to have something Divine about
it, whence it comes they are so desirous to drink the water, though they fetch
it not without danger of being devoured by the Crocodiles, as it often happens.
Notwithstanding, they water their Elephants there; but this is a Beast that
strikes terror in the Crocodiles, and would be too hard for them.

The Palace Royal stands in the middle of the City, The Palace Royal.
and has its peculiar Fortifications, Walls and Moats, whereby it is divided
from the Town. The Castle is said to be much more spacious then the City of
Venice; and that there is no entrance but on the Townside, by two Ports, and as
many Draw-bridges. Within the first Port are the Houses of the Grandees, who
enter not into the body of the Castle, without express Order from the King. His
Guard consisting of a great number of Soldiers, with them called Bramas, is
kept at the second Port, The Guard.
where they sit, having their Arms hanging before them on the Wall. In this
place are the Stables for Elephants, as well such as are kept for the Princes
service, as those designed for War, being about eight hundred in number. The
Kings Appartment is exceeding rich, painted Azure, with Flowers of Gold; and
when the King gives Audience, he appears in great magnificence. In his hand he
holds a Fan, to Fan himself, and on his head he has a quadruple Crown of Gold,
enameled white. Near his person stand four Youths, whom he makes use of in his
brutalities; and before him all the Grandees of the Court, who whenever they
speak to him lift their hands above their head, and bow down to the ground.
Being sat, they bring before him his fairest Elephants, and amongst the rest
his white one, which is said to be the only one in all the Indies, nor ever is
there more then one to be seen at Court, which was brought thither after the
Victory he gained against the King of Siam, with whom he had not made War but
to gain that Beast, as we shall tell you anon. These Beasts make their
reverence to him, and testify a Worship to his Person. If we may give credit
to the forementioned Balbi, this, next the King of China, The Kings Forces
is the most Potent Prince on Earth. He says, this Prince can bring into the
Field fifteen hundred thousand Men, and above eight hundred Elephants, and that
his Treasure is sufficient for so mighty an Army, by reason every Person of
Quality is obliged to raise and maintain so many Men of War at his own proper
charges.

He relates to this purpose, that, in his time, the King of Auva, He makes war
upon his Uncle king of Auva.
his Fathers Brother, but Vassal to the King of Pegu, denying homage to his
Nephew, and to pay such Diamonds and precious Stones as he stood obliged to in
that consideration; the King of Pegu, who was well assured his Uncle held a
very private intelligence with some Noble men of his Kingdom, against the
security of his State and Person, to show how mindful he was of his Fathers
request on his deathbed, and the recommendation he then made in favor of the
King of Auva; sent him an Ambassador extraordinary to reduce him to his Duty,
and persuade him to come in again to him: but his Uncle, instead of taking the
advantage of his Nephews Nobleness, puts the Ambassador to death, and declares
War against the King of Pegu. But he having raised an Army of three hundred
thousand men, before he would march into the Field, purged his Court, and put
to death those Traitors who had ingagede to deliver him into the hands of his
Uncle. Assembling then all the Confederates of this Treason, under pretense of
calling them to a Council about this War; he caused them to be secured, A just
execution, but too sev^^^.
and they, their Wives and Children, to be burnt alive. Then to free himself
from the Odium of so horrid an Execution, he sends to the Judge, that he should
defer the Execution, till he received express Order under his Signet; but the
Dogad gini, or Judge, who had other private instructions, proceeded according
to them.

That done, the King of Pegu appeared in the head of his Army, mounted on an
Elephant, covered with trappings of Tissue, having by his side a Sword, that
was presented him by D. Lewis of Atayda, Viceroy of Goa, resolving to march in
few days against his Uncle, but he was hindered by the small Pox, which he had
in extremity. As soon as he was recovered, A single Combat betwixt two Kings.
he causes the Army to advance to the very Frontiers of Auva, where he accepts
a Challenge sent him by his Uncle, that they two might decide the difference by
a single Combat; and was so fortunate, as to kill his Adversary, in view of
both Armies. This single Victory was of greater advantage, then a defeat of the
Enemies whole Army could have brought him: for the whole Kingdom of Auva
delivered it self up, at mercy: The Queen, who was his Sister, fell likewise
into his hands, and was prisoner during life, though kept in a Princely Palace,
and honored and attended as a Queen.

The King of Pegu, in acknowledgment of the service his Elephant had done him
in the Combat, where he fell dead under his Master, caused certain Pagodes to
be made of his Tooth, and had them placed amongst the other Idols kept in a
Varella, or Mosquee, which is within the Castle. The Idols.
Amongst these Idols there is the Figure of a Man, done to the life, in massy
Gold, having on the Head a Crown enchas'd with precious Stones of diverse kinds,
on the Forehead a Ruby as big as a Plum, and on each side the Head Pendants as
rich as can be imagined, about the Waste a Scarf, and over the right Shoulder,
and under the left Arm, a Chain of Diamonds and other Stones inestimable. In
the same Chapel are likewise three Statues of Silver, higher by two foot then
the first; with Crowns set with Gems, and a fourth more massive and rich then
all the rest, and besides these a Figure made of Ganza, which is a mixed metal
of Copper and Brass, valued at as high a rate as the other four. The Kings
Father, who lived in the year 1578. caused these Statues to be made in memory
of that famous Victory he obtained over the King of Siam, in the War he made
against him, for the white Elephant we spoke of.

The Forests of Pegu have greater store of Elephants then all the Indies
besides, The Peguans Arms.
and they are tamed with very little trouble, in ten or twelve days after they
are taken by the means of Females, who entice them out of the Woods, and make
them follow into the very Stables, where there are Dens that hold but one of
these Beasts only, where they shut them close in as soon as they are entered.

The Peguans have Firearms, but ordinarily they use half Pikes made of Canes,
short and broad Swords, and long and narrow Bucklers made of boiled Leather
doubled, and laid over with a certain black Gum called Achiran; their Salades
or Helmets are made of the same stuff, and like ours in fashion.

They are generally Pagans, They are Pagans.
except some who contracting alliance with the Portuguez, have embraced their
Religion. These Pagans believe that God, who has under him many other Gods, is
the Author of all good which arrives to Mankind; but the disposing of all evil
he leaves to the Devil, Adore the Devil.
to whom these wretches bear more veneration then they do to God; because the
one will do them no hurt; and they must please the other, that he may not.

They do they Devotions ordinarily on the Monday, Their Feasts.
and have besides, five principal Feasts which they call Sapan. The first,
which they call Sapan Giacchi, is chiefly celebrated by a Pilgrimage, made by
the King and Queen, twelve Leagues out of Town, where they appear in triumphal
Chariots, so set with precious Stones, that, without Hyperbole, it may be said
they carry the worth of a Kingdom about them. They call the second, Sapan
Carena, observed in honor of the Statue kept in the grand Varelle of the
Castle, in honor of which the Noblemen of the Court erect Pyramides of Canes,
which they cover with several Stuffs artificially wrought of diverse fashions,
then have them put into Chariots drawn by above three hundred persons to the
Kings view, that he may judge of their inventions. All the people come
likewise, and bring their Offerings to him. The Sapan Giaimo Segienon, they
celebrate also in honor of some of these Statues, where the King and Queen are
both present in person; and the fourth Feast, which they call Sapan Daiche, is
particularly celebrated in the old Town; at which the King and Queen cast
Rose Water at one another. All the Grandees have likewise a pot of Rose Water
in their hands, wherewith they so water themselves, that their bodies are as
'twere bathed all over, nor can any one pass the Streets that day, without
hazard of being washed with water thrown from the windows. At the fifth Feast,
called Sapan Donon, the King and Queen go by water to the Town of Meccao,
attended by above a hundred Boats, all which row for the fastest, to gain a
Prize allowed by the King.

The King dying, they prepare two Boats, which they cover with one gilt
Covering, and in the middle of these Boats they place a Table, How the Kings
Corpse are burnt.
whereon they lay the dead Corpse; and underneath the Table they make a fire of
the Wood of Sandale, Beniouin, Storax, and other sweet-scented Woods and Drugs,
then turn the Barks down the Stream, certain Talapoi or Priests mean while
singing and rejoicing till the flesh be entirely consumed. These Ashes they
temper with Milk, so making a Paste, which they carry to the mouth of the
River, where they cast it into the Sea. But the Bones they bear to another
place, and bury them near a Chapel, where they build another in honor of the
deceased.

Their Talapoi carry a Bottle made of an empty Gourd at their girdle, The
Churchmen.
and live by Alms, as our Mendicant Friars. They are in great esteem amongst
them, and they very well preserve their credit by their exemplary life. On
Monday morning they go about with their Tin-basins, to awake the people and
invite them to a Sermon. They treat not at all of points of Doctrine, but
chiefly insist upon Morality, exhorting the Congregation to abstain from
Murder, Thief, Fornication and Adultery, and to do to others as they would be
done by. For this reason they are of opinion, that Men are sooner saved by good
Works and innocence of Life, then by Faith. They have no Aversion for those
that forsake their Religion to become Christans, so their Life be correspondent
to the Profession they make.

They exclaim lowdly against the Offerings the Peguans make to the Devil,
particularly when they perform any Vow they made in their sickness, or in any
other unfortunate Accident, and endeavor to abolish this wicked custom, which
is grown so inveterate, that hitherto they have lost their labor. These people
ordinarily live in Woods, and to prevent the danger of wild Beasts, whereof
these parts are full, they have their Couches hanging in the Air betwixt boughs
of Trees. They eat but once a day, and are habited in red Vestures that reach
to their heels, barefooted, and over their Shoulders a short Coat or Mantle
that comes to their hams. They shave their heads, nay cannot endure hair upon
any part of their body; and to guard them from the Sunbeams they wear a Hat.
Great honors are done to them after their death, and after their Corpse has
been attended certain days, they are burnt with Sandale-wood, they cast the
Ashes into the River, and inte^r the ^ones near the place they lived in.

Pegu yields no Corn at all, A strange Souce.
but in recompense, they have more Rice then they can spend; in so much that
they can afford some to their Neighbors. They have a custom to make a Drug of
certain little Fishes, which they pound in a Mortar, and being so brought to a
Paste, they lay it in the Sun to putrify, till it be quite corrupted, and
grows moist, and then they use it in their Sauces, instead of Oil or Butter,
making a dainty of that, which it were not possible for us to endure the smell
of.

Sodomy was heretofore so common in those parts, Other peculiar Customs.
that to extirpate this Vice, which had near destroyed the whole Species, one
of the Queens of Pegu ordained by Edict; that every Man should carry in his
Yard a little Bell, which would make it swell in such sort, that he should not
be able to do Nature any violence. And to the end the Women should not be
frustrated of their due, their Virginity was to be taken away, while they were
yet very young, by means of a Composition, of contrary operation to that used
by common Women to heighten the pleasures of their Gallants. These little Bells
are put in betwixt the skin and the flesh: and to effect the operation, they
cast them into a sleep, with a certain Drink, to make them insensible of the
pain they are put to by the Incision, whereof notwithstanding they are cured in
few days. For their greater aversion from Sodomy, they paint the Boys at
seven or eight years of age with a certain blew, which extending with the skin
as it grows, changes into another color, and makes them look most horribly.
The Women, on the contrary, do all they can to appear lovely, and attract the
Men, covering their privy parts only with a thin piece of Linen, which sits
not so close, but the least wind shows all they have.

All of them in general make their Teeth black, and Men, when they ride on
horseback, fill their Mouths with something that pu^fs out their Checks. They
who marry buy their Wives of their Parents; and when they are cloyed send them
home again, but the money belongs to the Wife, who on her side is obliged to
restitution, if she part with her Husband without cause.

The King is Heir to all that dye without Children, The third part of all real
Estates falls to the King. Merchandises of Pegu*
and they who have Children can leave them but two thirds of their Estate, the
rest belongs to the King.

The best Commodities to be brought to Pegu, and which may be sold to greatest
profit, are Stuffes and Linnen-clothes, from Saint Thomas, Musulipatam and
Bengala; Pepper, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Optum and Sandale-wood, etc. by reason they
have no other Spices then Ginger. At Pegu they take in no other Merchandises
then Silver and Rice, which they transport to Malacca. In bargaining they make
no words at all, they do no more but give their Hand covered with a
Handkerchief, and in grasping or moving their Fingers they make their meaning
known. For borrowing of money they stick not to pawn their Wives and Children;
but if the Creditour enjoyes them carnally during that time, he is then paid,
and the Debtour acquitted.

Siam, Siam.
one of the most considerable Kingdoms of the Indies, lying at eighteen degrees
on this side the Line, has on the North, the Kingdoms of Pegu and Auva; on the
West, the Gulf of Bengala, from the Haven of Martanan to the Town of Tavaga;
toward the East, Patana, whence the Coast runs first Northwards to thirteen
degrees and a half, comprehending in this space, the Gulf of Siam: And lastly,
Southward, to twelve degrees, lying more at a distance from the Sea; it joins
Eastward on the Deserts of Cambodia, and the Kingdoms of Iangoma, Tangou and
Lansiaugh, to eighteen degrees toward the forementioned Kingdoms of Pegu and
Auva, making as it were a semicircle, containing near upon four hundred and
fifty Leagues. The Country in some parts is rough and mountainous, in other
parts covered with Woods, and to the Seawards it is low and marshy, and
generally flat, good and fertile, yielding in abundance all necessaries for
livelihood; and having on the Gulfes diverse Isles, Rivers, Bays, Harbors and
Roads, commodious for the transportation of such things as they themselves can
spare.

The River called Menam, Menam a River.
that is, Mother of the waters, is one of the greatest India has. The breadth
of it is not great, but its length such, that hitherto no man has discovered
the head of it. It sends its Current from North to South, passing through the
Kingdoms of Pegu and Auva; and at last, running through Siam, by three Streams
it falls into the Gulf of Siam. Overflows as Nile does.
One quality it has common with the Nile and Ganges, that it yearly overflows
the adjacent Country, for the space of five months together, destroying in
that time all Worms and Insects, and leaving, when it retires, a slime or moist
soil proper for the increase of Rice. That Channel of this River which is most
commodious for Barks or Vessels, is that, which lies most Eastwards, at
thirteen degrees and a half elevation, but what makes it almost useless, is,
that there lies a Shelf a League in length, or better, at the mouth of the
River, which at low water holds not above five or six foot water.

At high water it holds fifteen or sixteen foot, and in September, October and
November, seventeen or eighteen foot. Vessels of greater burden ordinarily
stay in the Road two Leagues from the Shelf, where having at no time less then
five or six fathom water they ride secure. They who venture to come over the
Shelf with the Tide, may go up along the River to the City of Banckock, six
Leagues from the Sea, and thence may pass by boat in five or six days, as high
as the City of India, twenty four Leagues within the Land, except in the
months before mentioned, during which season the River is innavigable.

The Provinces of this vast Kingdom are all very populous, Siam very populous.
though not equally; for such as have the Commodity of Rivers and Havens, far
exceed those that lie more remote. It would be very difficult to reckon all the
Towns of this great Dominion: wherefore we will here give only an account of
the principal and most considerable, either for greatness, or as the most
considerable of the several Provinces. The chief of the Kingdom is India, by
some called Odya; then Camboya, Campaa, Sincapura, Picelouck, Surkelouck,
Capheng, Soucethay, Kephinpet, Conseywan, Pytsyay, Pitsedi, Lidure, Tenou,
Mormelon, Martenoy, Lygor, Bordelong, Tanasserim, where the Portuguez drive a
good Trade, Banckock, Pipry, Mergy, etc. Besides which, there are many more,
which rather deserve a place in a Map, then in the Relation of a particular
Man's Travels.

The City of India, India.
the ordinary Residence of the Court, is seated on the River Menam, which makes
an Island entirely taken up by that City, having on the Riverside a strong
sufficient wall, for about two Leagues in compass, and the Suburbs on both
sides the River, as well built and adorned with Temples and Palaces as the Town
it self. Here are diverse very fair Streets, with Channels regularly cut; but
withal there are some which are neither large nor fair, though the River
crosses the Town in so many places, that there is scarce a house but may be
gone to by boat.

The Houses here, Its houses.
as generally all over the Indies, are but of ordinary building, and for the
most part covered with Tiles. There are within the Town above three hundred
fair Mosqueys, or Chapels, with gilt Steeples, or Pyramides, which at a
distance yield a glorious prospect, with abundance of Pagodes of all sorts of
Metals. The Palace, which is as it were a City of it self within the other,
has its Towers and Pyramides gilt, so as the City of India may be said to be
as beautiful, as large, and as populous as any City in India; nevertheless, I
will not affirm what Fernando Mendez Pinto writes, that it contains within its
Circuit four hundred thousand Families, whereof three quarters are Siamezes*
but thus much I can add, that the City has this advantage, that it is
impregnable; for being of it self strong enough to endure any Siege for many
months; it has an infallible relief, which never fails at six months end, by
reason that the River overflowing, no Line can withstand it, nor no Camp can be
so strong but must dislodge.

The King of Siam that now reigns, The King of Siam of a very ancient Family.
and who amongst his other Titles, takes that of Precau Salcu, that is, Sacred
Member of God, holds the Crown from his Ancestors, who have possessed it for
many Ages; and next to the Mogul, this Prince can reckon more Kings of his
Family, then any Prince of the Indies.

He is absolute Monarch in his Dominions, Is absolute.
solely disposing, with an Independent Authority, of all Affairs of his
Kingdom. He makes War and Peace, imposes Taxes on his Subjects, creates
Magistrates, sets value on Money, and makes Laws and Statutes, without the
consent or advice either of States or Lords: He allows them to consider of such
Affairs as come to their knowledge, and to offer him their Advice by way of
Remonstrance; but he reserves to himself the Power to approve, or reject, what
he pleases.

These Noble men are called Mandorins; and are there as the Privy Council, a
quality the King bestows on whom he pleases, as he does of all other Honors in
the Kingdom, without regard either to birth or merit; because his Subjects are
his Slaves, and the King is Master of all they possess, even their very lives,
whereof he has power to dispose to his service and advantage. It Is true that
in this, as in deposing the Mandorins from their Dignities, and reducing them
to the rank of their fellow Subjects, he observes some appearance of Equity, by
following in some measure the Laws of the Kingdom, but being above the Law, he
explicates and executes it as he pleases.

The Prince is exceeding magnificent in his Apparel and Train, His manne^ of
life.
but his State appears in nothing more then his manner of living. For the
people, who seldom see him, have a peculiar Veneration for his Person, nor do
the Grandees and Officers scarce ever come into his presence. When he gives
Audience, he sits most gloriously habited on a Throne of Gold, with a Crown on
his head, and at his feet the Officers and Gentlemen of the Household on their
knees; and not far from him a Guard of three hundred Soldiers. No one speaks
to him but on the knee, and they who come for audience present themselves in
this sort, their hands being lifted above their head, and making to him ever
and anon most low reverences: The continual inclinations that are made him, and
the Titles given him, must likewise be accompanied with oblieging speeches, and
attributions beyond what either greatness or goodness can deserve.

His Answers are received as Oracles, and his Orders executed without delay or
dispute. He has in every Province of his Kingdom his Palaces and Gardens: when
he removes his Household, he has with him a number of Elephants laden with
Tents, to be pitched when he comes to places fit to rest in.

He has but one Wife. Has but one Wife,
to whom they give the Title of Queen; but he has an infinite number of
Concubines, which are chosen for him out of the fairest Virgins of the Kingdom.
He feeds very high, but drinks only Water, because the Laws both Civil and
Ecclesiastical prohibit the use of Wine to Persons of Quality; when he pleases
to recreate himself upon the River, he goes in a splendid gilt Barge under a
Canopy of Brocadoe, attended by some of his Domestics, and a Guard of three or
four hundred, in seven or eight other Barges, which have each of them fourscore
or a hundred Slaves to row. The Noblemen who follow, and are sometimes to the
number of a thousand or twelve hundred, have each their several Barge.

The like is done when the King goes from his Palace into the City; Then he
sits in a Chair of Gold, born on the shoulders of ten or twelve Waiters, having
marching before him many Elephants and Horses richly harnessed, in this sort
marching with a slately and grave pace, while the people prostrate themselves
to him, and render him the same honors they might do to God himself.

He appears particularly in his greatest Magnificence on a certain day in
October, designed for this Ceremony. A magnificent Precession.
On this day, he appears both in the City, and upon the River, to make a
procession to one of his chiefest Mosquees, whither he goes to sacrifice, and
to do his Devotions for the prosperity of the State. In the head of this
procession march about two hundred Elephants, each of them carrying three armed
Men* then comes the Music, consisting of Hoboyes, Tabours, and Cimbals: next
come about a thousand Men completely armed, divided into several Companies that
have their Colors and Banners. Next to these follow many Noble men on
horseback, and amongst them some with Crowns of Gold upon their Heads, with a
Train of fourscore or a hundred persons on foot. Betwixt these Noble men and
the Lifeguard, march two hundred Soldiers, Iaponeses, all very well clothed,
and go immediately before the Horses and Elephants, which are for the Kings
particular use, their harness made with Buckles and Studs of Gold, set with
Diamonds and other precious Stones. The Servants, who bear the Fruits and other
things for the Sacrifice, march before certain Grandees of the Kingdom, whereof
one bears the Kings Standard, the other the Scepter of Justice. These walk on
foot immediately before the King, who sits, mounted on an Elephant, in a Chair
of Gold. The Prince his Son, or some other Prince of the Blood, follows next
after him, and then comes the Queen and the Kings other Women on Elephants, but
not to be seen, as being in certain wooden Closets gilt. The rest of the
Household, and six hundred of the Guard, come in the Rear, which by this means
consists of fifteen or sixteen thousand persons.

As to their Procession upon the River, Procession upon the River.
they observe the order following. First, in the head of this Fleet march about
two hundred Noble men, each in his several Barge, where they sit in a gilt
Cabin, and each Barge rowed by three or fourscore Slaves. Then follow four
Barges assigned for the Music, and next follow about fifty Barks of State,
each having fourscore, or fourscore and ten Rowers; and after these come ten
other gilt Barges, in one of which the King is seated in a Throne of Gold,
attended by diverse Noble men, all upon their knees before him, and amongst
them, one of the chiefest Mandorins, who bears his Standard. The Prince follows
after him in another Barge, and after him comes the Queen, and the Concubines;
And lastly, in a great number of other Barges, the household Servants and the
Guards, so as that this Procession consists of twenty five or thirty thousand
persons, who come either to see the magnificence of the Ceremony, or to adore
their Prince.

Since the thirds of all real Estates fall to the King, The Revenue.
we may well suppose his Revenue to be very great; but this advantage comes not
near the profits accrewing to him by the Commerce, which by Factours he holds
with Strangers for his Rice, Copper, Lead, and Saltpeter. He has in his
Country good store of Gold; and the Customs he has of all Merchandises, both
coming in and going out, bring considerable sums, besides the Presents which
Governors of Provinces are obliged to make him every year. A great profit
likewise he raises by Commerce with ready Money into China, and along the Coast
of Coromandel, which yields him yearly two thousand Cattys of Silver advantage.
He has throughout his Kingdom abundance of Officers for managing of his
Revenue, and receiving his Moneys, which as Mendez Pinto says, amounts
annually to twelve Millions of Duccats; but principally in the City of India,
whither they repair from all other parts, His Expenses.
once a year, to make their accounts. The greatest charge the King is at, next
his Household, is in building places and Mosquees, rewarding Services, and
maintaining his Guards, the rest comes into the Treasury, which by this means
swells almost to infinity.

Most Cities have their particular Jurisdictions, and Judges for Administration
of Justice, to take an account whereof there is a Council appointed in the City
of India, consisting of a President, and twelve Counselors, who give a
definitive Sentence, and decide all differences brought before them by way of
appeal: it is nevertheless allowed them sometimes to prevent these Sentences by
a Review before the Privy Council* but this happens not frequently, by reason,
the Charges are so great, very few will undertake it. They plead by Counselors
and Atturneys, both by word and writing, but in presence of both parties who
are to enter a Summary of the Plea in the Recorders Register. But besides
Counselors and Atturneys, you have here the Pettifogger, who is inseparable;
so as Suits sometimes last whole Ages here as well as in other places.

In Criminal matters, they have an extraordinary and summary way, but much
after the same form and manner used in France.

First, They inform, then imprison, then examine; the Parties are brought face
to face; and where evidence falls short, they are put to the Rack, upon
pregnant presumptions, The Steward records the whole, and makes report to the
Judges, who upon the criminal Confession, or Deposition of Witnesses, give
Judgment, and cause the Sentence to be executed immediately, without appeal,
save that they never put any to death without the Kings express Order, in whose
power it lies to confirm the Sentence, or pardon the Party, as he pleases.

Their punishments are severe, rather cruel: The slightest Crime is punished
with pecuniary Fines, Their punishments.
Banishment, or Transportation: For Theft they suffer amputation of Hands or
Feet, or are condemned to perpetual slavery. The ordinary punishments of these
Countries are unknown there; but condemned persons are cast alive into boiling
Oil, according to the atrocity of the Crime, but always with Confiscation of
Goods, for the benefit of the King, and the Judges.

In want of sufficient Testimony, Manners of Justification.
they make use of certain extraordinary ways for Conviction, or Justification
of the Criminal, which they do by consent of all parties, with the Judges
permission, who allows them to maintain what they say, by Water, by Fire, or by
boiling Oil. When they submit to the Trial of Water, the Accuser, and the
accused party are both let down along a great Pole, which is planted in the
River, and he that stays longest under water gains the day; as he that
patiently holds his Hand longest in boiling Oil. Others, who choose the trial of
Fire, are to go five or six steps, very slowly, in a great Fire, and that
betwixt two Men, who lean as hard as they can upon their shoulders. But the way
they hold most infallible for their justification, is, to swallow a Pill of
Rice, over which their Priests have pronounced some words of malediction, which
he that swallows without spitting is so clearly justified, that his friends
attend him in triumph to his habitation.

The Kings Armies consist chiefly of his Subjects; The Militi^ of Siam.
for though besides five or six hundred Iaponeses, who bear the reputation of
Valor throughout the Indies; he hires sometimes both Rasboutes and Malayes;
the number is notwithstanding so small, that it is inconsiderable. The King now
reigning had taken so great an aversion for the Iaponeses, on suspicion they
had a design upon his person, that he put some to death, and expelled the rest.
Yet since that he has given way for their return to their ancient trust; but,
as I said, they exceed not the number of five or six hundred. His Subjects are
obliged to go to the Wars at their own charges, so that according as occasion
requires, he calls out the hundredth, the fiftieth, the twentieth, the tenth,
and sometimes the fifth man; besides those, the Noble men, at their own
charges, bring along with them a sufficient Guard of their persons: By this
means he raises at a small charge a most puissant Army, wherein there shall be
sometimes three or four thousand Elephants, though he seldom raise an Army of
above fifty or threescore thousand men.

His Infantry are well enough disciplined, Their Arme^.
but very ill armed; only Bows and Arrows, Swords, Pikes and Bucklers, without
Fire-armes. Nor are their Horse better appointed, as being but poorly mounted;
so as his chiefest strength consists in his Elephants, which are trained to the
work, and carry each three armed men; but many which are brought out with the
Army are employed about the Baggage. Great Artillery they have, but manage them
ignorantly. Their Naval Forces are in as ill condition as their Land;
consisting in a multitude of Frigots and Galleys, well furnished with
Artillery, but their Soldiers and Seamen are inexpert. There is an infinite
number of Barks for service against the Enemy upon the River, as advantageous
to them as at Sea, by reason his Neighbors are rather worse provided then he;
but all his Forces joined together were not sufficient to oppose a Spanish,
English, or Holland Fleet; yet this Princes Predecessors have often had great
Victories over their Enemies, while Martial Princes have had the Conduct of
their Armies.

The Kings of Pegu and Siam have at all times pretended to a sole Monarchy over
all the Kingdoms in these parts, Both the Kings of Siam and Pegu pretend to
Sovereignty.
and without dispute Pegu had something the better, but the continual War they
have held, as well for this as other differences, has so wasted the Frontiers
of both these Kingdoms, that the Armies are not able to subsist there any
longer, and so necessity forced them to conclude a Peace; which since they
break not, but by incursions of some flying Army of twenty or thirty thousand,
during the Summer Season. The last War the King of Siam made upon the Kings of
Iangoma and Langsgaugh were purely out of ambition for the Sovereignty they
pretended to over those Kingdoms. It Is not long likewise since the King of
Cambrodia, a Tributary to the King of Siam, revolted; whereupon Siam enters his
Territories with a potent Army, but was opposed so vigorously, that he was
forced to retire. The Kingdom after this enjoyed a long peace, till the
deceased King having caused his Brother to be murdered to establish his Son
upon the Throne, one of the Princes of the Blood took occasion to usurp the
Crown, as I shall immediately tell you.

This Usurper made show as if he would espouse the interests of the State
against the Kings of Pegu and Auva, and especially against the King of
Cambodia, though he would not enter into open Hostility with them, because he
might have enough to do to stand armed against the designs the right Heirs
might have upon his person.

He continued likewise the same friendship for the Hollanders his Predecessor
had testified to them, The King of Siam friend to the Hollander^*
since he took their part against Fernando de Silva, Governor of the Manilles.
This Portuguez taking the confidence to set upon a Holland Frigot upon the
River of Menam, in the year 1624. the King seized upon his Vessel, and forced
Fernando to restore the Frigot. Since which time the Siameses have been
continually vexed by the Portuguez in their Traffic with China, though the
Hollanders assist them effectually against their Enemies, and declare highly
for them; as they lately likewise assisted the King of Siam with six Ships, to
chastise the Rebels of Patany.

For certain, the King of Siam keeps more Elephants then any other Prince of
India, and herein consists his chiefest Forces. For though the Indians affect
this Beast, of what part so ever he is, yet have they a particular esteem for
those of Siam, for their make, their strength, Elephant hunting.
and, as they call it, for their apprehension. They take them here as they do
in Pegu, bringing into the Forest fifteen or twenty tame Females, which being,
as it were, Decoyes, suffer themselves to be led up and down, till some of the
wild Elephants herd with them, and so are by little and little betrayed into a
large Court well walled about, to which you enter by a double walk of Trees,
which as well as the Court is shut up with strong Rails: As soon as the
Elephants are in, then are the Females let out one by one at another Gate,
leaving the wild by themselves. Within this Court are two apiece
Partitions, divided with Pallizadoes like Cages, the one in the middle, the
other at the side of the wall. The posts whereof they are made, are set at such
distance, that men may with ease pass in and out to vex and provoke the Beasts;
but they must make a swift retreat within their Appartment, when this
formidable Foe pursues them. This is the most acceptable divertisement can be
presented to the King, who with the Nobility of his Court is ever present at
this hunting. After the Elephants are by this kind of hunting sufficiently
tired, they drive them into another close Pen no bigger then their bodies, made
of strong beams, where they tie them by the legs to three or four tame
Elephants; whereupon hunger and acquaintance with the others, in three or four
days bring them to live as they do. Sometimes they hunt them in the Forest,
and open Champion, with tame Elephants, till at last they fasten them by the
legs together, and so by force drive them away, but this not without conflict
and danger.

Sometimes in the Kingdom of Siam they meet with white Elephants. A white
Elephant*
All over India they have a veneration for this Creature: but the Siameses, and
the people of those parts, say, they are the Kings of the Elephants; in so much
as the King of Siam, when he meets with one, causes him to be served in Vessels
of Gold, to walk under a Canopy, and allows him a Princely train.

In the year 1568. the King of Pegu, understanding that the King of Siam had
two white Elephants, The occasion of the war between the Kings of Pegu and Siam.
sent a solemn Embassy to request he might buy one of them, and that he would
set a price upon him; which the King of Siam refusing, the King of Pegu
resolves to fetch him with a powerful Army. He found such slender resistance in
Siam, that the King seeing his Kingdom and chief City in the hands of his
Enemies, took poison, whereof he dyed, though that Conquest cost the King of
Pegu the lives of five hundred thousand men.

Raja Hapi, Raja Hapi King of Siam.
King of Siam, who lived about the year 1616. acknowledged at that time the
Sovereignty of the King of Pegu, but this was only till he could find
opportunity to free himself from this subjection, as he did few years after.
For entering the Kingdom of Pegu with a powerful Army, he laid ^iege to the
City of Aracam; resolved not to move thence till he had taken it. In effect he
raised not the Siege, but not being able to force the City, and unwilling to
break his Oath, he built a House near it, where he dyed. This Prince was so
famous for his cruelty, that it is reported of him, that being sick, and hearing
two of his Concubines laugh in an antichamber, he commanded they should be
immediately cut to pieces. He had a Favorite, called Ochi Chronwi, whose
ambition swelled to that height, that he brought four or five hundred Iaponeses
into the Kingdom, clothed like Merchants, to be employed to murder the King,
and settle him upon the Throne. This design took no effect during the Kings
life, but he being dead, Ochi Chronowi seized on the Crown, and caused himself
to be proclaimed King. The Son of Raja Hapi had friends sufficient to cast out
this Usurper, but he was not fortunate enough to keep the Crown in his
possession, for he was likewise slain, and left it to his younger Brother alive
at this day. It Is not long since the King of Siam had the satisfaction to have
two young white Elephants together, but they both dyed in a short time.

The Indians do believe that a white Elephant has something in it of divine,
and say, they respect it not only for the color, but they observe in him that
he looks to be treated as a Prince, and that he is troubled, when other
Elephants render not him the honor due to him.

The King of Siam is a Pagan, The King a Pagan.
nor do his Subjects know any other Religion. They have diverse Mosquees,
Monasteries and Chapels, where their Ecclesiastics retire and assemble to do
their Devotions. They are discerned from other buildings by the gilt Towers and
Pyramides. There are infinite Pagodes of Gold, Silver, Stone, Timber, and other
materials, of all sizes; some of twenty, some thirty, forty, fifty foot, and
amongst the rest one which sits, which if it stood, would be sixscore foot in
height.

Their ecclesiastics are very exemplary in their life, A Hierarchy.
having amongst them a kind of Hierarchy, under the direction of the
High Priest of the Grand Mosquey of the City of India, to whom all the rest
yield obedience. In matters of Religion his Authority is great, but in
Temporals he acknowledges the King, and yields him the same respect as his
other Subjects do. In the City of India, there are above thirty thousand of
these Ecclesiastics; who are easily known by their habit, for they all wear
Garments of a yellow Linnen-cloath, and have their Crowns shaved. Amongst them
they choose the most learned and accomplished for Priests, and to take charge of
the Mosqueys. These are as Parsons amongst them, who on Festival days preach
to the people, Vow Chastity, but may quit the priesthood.
and sacrifice to their Idols. They are prohibited the company of Women on pain
of being burnt alive: but their Vows are not so indispensible, but such as have
not the gift of Continency are allowed to change their profession; every
Mosquey has a Convent belonging to it, for entertainment of Priests designed
for the service, which is regularly said, morning and evening. They live partly
on the Revenue of the Mosqueys, and partly on Gratuities given them by the King
and Nobility, in the way of Alms, but they have their chiefest livelihood at
the peoples Charge, by begging every day through the City, like our Friars
Mendicants. They have likewise Religious Women and Beguins, Beguins.
who are aged, devout Women, who inhabit near the Mosqueys, that they may be
present at all the Church-Services; but these make no Vow, nor are obliged to
any particular rule of Discipline.

They believe there is one God, Their belief
who created the Universe, and has under him diverse other Gods, by whom he
governs the World. They believe the Soul is immortal, and that at its departure
out of the Body, it goes either to enjoy beatitude, or into eternal torments,
having first passed through other Bodies. This is the ground of their Religion,
which, they say, they have received from time immemorable by Tradition of
Saints, whom they have exalted to Deities, and now do part of their Devotions
to them. They hold likewise, that good works will save them, and in particular
their Charity, which they direct not to men alone, but to Beasts likewise. And
hence it is, that on Festival days, the people bring Birds and Fish hard by
the Mosqueys, which they buy on purpose to set them at liberty, because with
the Benjans they believe a Metempsychosis, or transmigration of Souls.

In their Ceremonies they use abundance of lights, Lights in the Mosqueys.
which they set up before their Pagodes, in time of Service. They likewise
Incense them, and adorn them with Flowers and precious Stones. They have no
certain day in the week designed for their Devotions, but they have some in
particular every quarter of the Moon, and observe moreover a sort of Lent for
three months, during which they abstain from several sorts of Meat.

They pray for the dead, Prayers for the dead.
and bury them with many Ceremonies. They wash, shave, and perfume the Corpse in
the presence of the Ecclesiastics; then they are brought near the Mosqueys,
where the Corpse is burnt, and the Ashes buried in the same place, under a rich
Tomb or stately Pyramide, according to the degree and abilities of the
deceased. The nearest Relations shave themselves, give Alms, procure the
Priests to say Prayers, and attend the body with Music, Theatrical
Representations, and Fireworks, so as these Obsequies put them to great
charges.

They never dispute with any of a contrary Religion, but believe, that by
living well they may be saved in any Religion: though they are so fixed to their
own, that there is no hope of ever introducing another. The Portuguez
endeavored to catechize some, but with as little effect as the Mahumetans, who
would have brought in the Alcoran.

The inferior people here invoke the Devil, The Siamedes invoke the Devil.
contrary to the doctrine of their Ecclesiastics, who incessantly preach
against this abomination; but hitherto they cannot pluck up this rooted
wickedness, which they sucked in with their first Milk.

The Siameses are comely, Are well sh^p^d.
and well proportioned, but ill Soldiers, though cruel and insolent enough
after Victory. They are rather black then brown, ingenious in Commerce, but
they are cautious, dissident, dissemblers, unconstant, false, and liars.

The Men are lazy, Their qualities.
and care for no employment which requires labor, such they leave to their
Women and Slaves, leaving affairs and husbandring of land to their charges,
while they walk the Streets, or make their addresses at Court. They cover
themselves with a painted Cloth from the Navel to the K^ces. Their habits.
Men wear short Shirts with sleeves hanging to their Elbows, and Women hide
their Breasts with a linen Cloth, which is fastened about their Neck. All
observe one fashion in Clothes, so as Persons of Quality are not to be
distinguished from others, but by their Train, which consists of about five and
twenty or thirty Slaves.

Their Houses are made of Timber or Canes, Their houses.
of a fashion peculiar to the Country, and covered with Coco leaves, they are
raised three or four foot from the ground, and in every partition have several
windows, which is very commodious. They have no other movables then what are
necessary for the Chamber and Kitchen, and their diet is Rice, Fish and Pulse,
and they drink nothing but Water, but at Feasts they make better cheer, and are
willing to be invited to be drunk with Arac or Strong-water.

Ecclesiastics meddle not in the marriages of Persons of Quality, Their
marriages.
by reason the parties are content to confide in each other for the conditions
agreed upon, and obtaining the consent of their Parents they consummate the
marriage. But they ever reserve liberty of separation, with an equal division
of Goods and Children, without License of any Magistrate, and to marry again,
with whom, and as often as they will. Their contract with their Concubines is of
a different kind, for they are considered but as Slaves, and under the
authority of the Wife, who on her part is satisfied with this precedence,
knowing her Children, who are only esteemed legitimate, shall divide all,
leaving to the natural but a very small share.

The Estates of Persons of Quality are ordinarily divided into three parts; one
falls to the King; one to the Ecclesiastics, they defraying the Funeral
Charges, which there are great; and the third to the Children. People of middle
condition buy their Wives, and consummate the Marriage, after payment of the
sum accorded on; but have the same privilege of Divorce as the others.

Their Children divide the inheritance equally, except the eldest, who has
some advantage.

Till they are five or six years of age, Education of Children.
they bring up their children with little care; then they put them to the
Ecclesiastics to be taught to write and read and to be instructed in Religion;
during which time they see their children but very seldom; but having learnt
these first Rudiments, they put them to a Trade; or if they find them to be
ingenious, they continue them in their Studies, to make them capable of the
Priestly Function, or fit for some employments, which among them are bestowed
according to merit, and not sold for money. Those who live in Cities subsist by
Merchandise, turn Courtiers, or betake themselves to some Handy-craft, or else
become Fishermen, whereof there are very many along the Coast, as there are
also in those Cities, which have the convenience of any River. The Peasantry is
very wretched, living only on their labor, employing themselves in dressing
the Cocoes, and in breeding Cattle and Poultry, but Provisions are so exceeding
cheap that they make very little advantage thereby.

In the City of India, The Traffic of the City of India.
the principal Commerce consists in Stuffs brought from Suratta, and the Coast
of Coromandel, all sorts of Chinese commodities, precious Stones, Gold,
Benjamin, Wax, Copper, Lead, Indico, Calamba-wood, Brasil-wood, Cotton,
Saphires, Rubies, etc. but above all, Deer-skins, whereof they furnish the
Iaponeses with above fifty thousand every year. It likewise yields a great
trade of Rice, which they transport to all the neighboring Islands. By reason
of the abundance of these Commodities, there is scarce a Nation throughout Asia
that have not their Merchants in India, besides the Portuguez and Hollanders,
who have some years since settled themselves in those parts.

The King himself likewise trades amongst them, The King a Merchant.
and for that purpose has his Factors at Pegu, at Auva, at Iangoma, at
Lansiaugh, upon the Coast of Coromandel, and principally at China, where he
has those privileges which are not allowed to any other Prince.

The Money of this Country is very good, The money of Siam.
by reason the King only has power to stamp, and so prevents variation of the
value; there are of it three sorts; Ticals, Mases, and Foangs. Two Foangs make
a Mase, and four Mases make a Tical, worth about thirty Sols French money. Four
Ticals make a Tail, and twenty Tayls a Catly in Silver. In Silver their least
money is a Foang, M^ney of Shells.
but they make use of a certain sort of Shells brought them from Manilles, from
Borneo, and Lequeo, whereof eight or nine hundred amount to a Foang, without
which they could not chaffer, by reason Victuals are so cheap, that a Man may
buy more there for five of these Shells, then in any part of Europe for a
Farthing.

The Portuguez finding of what consequence the King of Siam's friendship is to
them, for supporting of their Trade with the Moluccas, the Philipine Islands,
or Manilles, have still a particular care to preserve a good correspondence, by
civilities from the Viccroys of Goa to the King at their arrival in the Indies,
and by Persons of Quality daily commissioned thither, confirming themselves by
this means so well in the Princes favor, that he not only allows them to trade
throughout his Dominions, but imploys them in his most important Affairs,
permitted them to build a Church in his chief City, and maintains one of their
Priests at his own charge. They enjoyed all these privileges, till such time
as the King of Siam began to favor the Hollanders, whom he found less insolent
and more sincere then the Portuguez, who jealous of the affection of the King
showed to the Hollanders, presently obstructed the Commerce the Siameses held
at Saint Thomas and Negapatam, and proceeded so far, as at last, in the year
1624. they set upon a Dutch Frigot upon the River Menam, as we told you before:
whereat the King was so offended, that the Bishop of Malacca, having a Vicar
Resident at India, he forbad him to come to Court. The Portuguez instead of
making amends for this first fault, in a conjucture when the Hollanders, their
professed enemies, might have joined with the King of Siam, continued still to
obstruct the Commerce of the Siameses; in so much that the King perceiving
their design was absolutely to destroy it, was out of all patience* and in the
year 1631. stayed one of their Ships with all the Men; but they finding means
to make an escape, contrary to their parole, he put an Imbargo upon all the
Portuguez Ships, which were found in the Ports of Lygoar and Tanassary, and put
all the Men in prison, out of which they were not set at liberty till two years
after.

The Hollanders made their first establishment there, The settlement of the
Hollanders at Siam
at the beginning of his age, though it is only since the year 1634. that they
trade there with any profit: they have made great advantages of the friendship
of that King, in order to the Commerce they have at Iava and Sumatra.

On the North-west side of the Kingdom of Siam, lies that of Cambodia, which on
the other side has nothing but the Sea. The Metropolis, from which it derives
its name, lies sixty Leagues from the Sea, upon a pleasant River, which rises
out of a great Lake, as do also all the other Rivers of the Kingdom. But in
that of Cambodia, it is particularly observable, that it overflows every year
as the Nile does; and as does also the River Menam, in the Kingdom of Siam. It
begins to rise at the beginning of June, and so rises by degrees to ten or
twelve foot; but in July and August it is not navigable, for that it drowns the
whole Country. The City of Cambodia, to prevent these Deluges, is built upon an
advantageous rising, having but only one street, and is inhabited by
Iaponeses, Portuguez, by Cochinchinez and Malayes. The Portuguez carry
Malacca-Stuffs thither, and there load with Benjamin, Lacque, Wax, Rice, Brass,
Vessels and Bars of China- Iron.

The King, The Palace Royal.
who is but a Vassal of the King of Siam's, resides in the City of Cambodia, in
a Place fortified with a good Pallisado instead of a Wall, where are some
Pieces of China Artillery, and about twenty four or twenty five pieces of
Cannon, which he recovered out of two Holland Ships wracked on that Coast, all
mounted on four-wheel'd-Carriages, only painted blew, except four which are
mounted on ordinary Carriages, varnished black, with Ladles and other Utensils
of Silver, or Iron, so polished they might be taken for Silver. The King of
Cambodia is nothing so powerful as the two Kings whom we last mentioned; for an
Army of twenty five or thirty thousand is the most he can draw into the Field,
so as were the Siameses more Martial, they might with small trouble make
Cambodia subject to their King.

The Nobility of the Court are divided into Ockinas, The Lords of Cambodia.
Tomimas, Tonimnes, Nampras and Sabandars, each in his degree, but for the best
part without any particular charge, except the first, who are most considerable
in public Assemblies, distinguished by little Cabinets of Gold carried after
them, wherein are Cardamum and other Drugs to rub their Lips, Cissars to cut
their Bettele, by them called Pynang, and for the Lime, Areca and Bettele,
which they chew continually. In the presence of the King, whether it be for
Council or Complement, they stand in a semicircle, and behind them the
Tommaes, known from the others by their Bottles of Silver.

No address is made to the King, but by mediation of these Ockinas; for though
the Priests are next his Person, between him and the Ockinas, and converse
familiarly with him, they esteem it notwithstanding a king of Sacrilege for an
Ecclesiastic to meddle in secular Affairs, so as none but the Ockinas
communicate general or particular Affairs to him; of which it is their Office to
take cognizance, as also of the Kings Orders upon their report. In the whole
Town there is but one Pagode or Mosquee, wherein there are three bigger, and
three lesser Statues. It is supported with wooden Pillars, varnished black,
with a folliage of Gold, and the floor covered with Mats. Their Priests have no
houses near the Pagode, and when the chief of their Ecclesiastics dies, they
build him a Monument of Stone, which at the bottom is apiece, and upwards
to the top grows round like a Pear.

The Portuguez are so well settled here, that the Hollanders cannot hope to
carry on any Trade, The Portuguez ^^cluded the Hollanders
till they have first destroyed that of the Portuguez. At their first Arrival,
in the year 1637. they committed the management of their Affairs to an adoptive
Son of the Queen, to whom the King had given the name of Tisnecha, and the
honor of Nampra, and they used the credit of the Chabandar of the Iaponeses,
in hope by this means they might gain a small establishment. But the friendship
they had contracted with the King of Siam, and the Artifices of the Portuguez,
bred them difficulties they could not master, otherwise they might have laded
there yearly eighty or a hundred thousand Deer-skins, besides Neat and Buffles
hides, above a hundred Picols of black Lacque, at ten Thails the Picol, above
three or four hundred Picols of Benjamin, at seventeen or eighteen Thales the
Picol, and might have vented their Cotton-yarn, and Cloth, for above sixty or
seventy in the hundred profit.

Provisions in these parts are so plentiful, that the Inhabitants having so
much more then they have use for, sell them in a manner for nothing, specially
Venison, Beef, Pork, Goats, Hares, Kids, Cranes, Herns, and all sorts of
Poultry; as likewise Oranges, Citrons, Mangas, Cocoes, etc. but to judge the
better of the fertility of this Soil, take notice, that the people of Quinam
alone fetch yearly thence two thousand Coyangs of Rice, five Coyangs making
four Lestes, or eight Tuns, at seventeen or eighteen Thails the Coyang. And so
much by way of Account of the small Kingdom of Cambodia.

That Tongue of Land is called Malacca, Malacca.
which in form of a Peninsula extends it self from the Kingdom of Siam, from
the South-east toward the North-west, even to the Equinoctial Line, betwixt
the Gulfs of Bengala and Siam, or Cambodia; and contains, besides the City of
Malacca, (whence it derives its name) the Kingdom of Iahor and Patana. When
discovered.
The Country was discovered by Alphonso d' Albuquerque, in the year 1511. since
when the Portuguez have kept their ground there so firmly, that none yet can
supplant them. Malacca is situate upon the strait that divides the Isle of
Sumatra from the Continent, on this side the Line two Degrees and half, in a
large Plain, where there is but only one Mountain, the foot whereof is almost
wholly taken up with the Town, leaving only a small space open toward the
North-east. About eighteen hundred paces may be the compass of it; for six
hundred whereof it lies on the Seacoast, enclosed with a good Wall, as
likewise on the Riverside, which bounds another third of the Town; and on the
Land-side, it is fortified with four regular Bastions. The first, which is on
the Riverside, is called the Bastion of Saint Domingo; another on the
Seashore, Saint Iago; and two more betwixt these two, called Madre de Dios and
Vnze mil Vergenes: from that of Saint Iago, to that of Madre de Dios, there is
a good Pallisado of eighteen foot high* and between those of Madre de Dios to
Saint Domingo, a sufficient Ditch. The College of the Jesuits, also called
Saint Paul's, which serves likewise for a Parish Church, stands on the top of
the Hill, whence it commands the Town, and the Country near about it. There is
likewise another rising ground about a Cannon shot from the City, where there
is a Convent of Iacobins. The River there, which runs North-west, is not very
broad, and at high water it mixes with the Sea, but is fresh at low water.
There is a Bridge over it, though one side is without comparison much higher
then the other, by reason the Land, South-east, is so low and marshy, that it
cannot be broken, but water comes in immediately, and in some places it is
absolutely drowned. No week passes but it rains two or three times, unless it
be in January, February, and March. The Ebb there leaves open above two
thousand paces of shore, which being nothing but a deep mud, affords no landing
at lowwater.

Before the City lie two Islands; one the Portuguez call Ilha da Naos, about a
Canonshot distant from the City, the other, Ilha de Pedra, for the Quarries
where they get Freestone for their building, and lies something more remote.
The Caracks and Gallions cast Anchor betwixt these Islands at four or five
fathom water, but Frigots and Barks enter the River, and Vessels of a middle
rate shelter under the Ilha da Naos, between the River and the City.

In the City of Malacca, its Suburbs, and the neighboring Towns, possessed by
the Portuguez, there may be about twelve thousand Inhabitants, thus accounted;
in the Parish of Saint Thomas, in the place they call Camp clein, a thousand;
in the Suburbs toward the River eighteen hundred: in the Parish of Saint
Lawrence two thousand; and in Senhora Nossa de Pidaede as many; in Nossa
Senhora da Guadalupe, five Leagues thence, about seven or eight hundred; and
within the walls of the City, three thousand, making at most not above three
thousand fighting men. Amongst them there are not above three hundred natural
Portuguez, the greatest part are Mestizes or Mal^yans.

The City is so commodiously situate for Commerce with China and the Moluques,
whereof the Portuguez having experience, to hinder other Nations from footing
there, gave out, that the Air was unwholesome, that it was not inhabitable,
especially for Forraigners, while they notwithstanding continued there, and
followed their business.

They are possessed of no more then the City and Suburbs, and five Leagues off,
upon the same River, the Town of Nostra Senhora de Guadalupe; for about half a
League thence live the Manancambos, Subjects to the King of Iahor: but that
would not have hindered the Portuguez from making it one of the most
considerable places of the Indies, if the Hollanders did not disturb their
Commerce, and find work for the King of Spain's Armies in that part of the
Universe. At the request of the King of Iahor, in the year 1606. they came down
into Malacca, and besieged the chief City, upon promise they should be possessed
of it; but the aid that King brought them was so inconsiderable, that they were
constrained to raise the Siege; yet not till they had so ruined the place, that
it could never since be repaired, six thousand lives being lost in the Siege.
On the other side, since the Hollanders got such strong hold in Ceylon and
Iava, the Portuguez trade with China and the Moluques is quite lost, by reason
they are no more Masters of that Sea. But what more and more ruins the City,
is the avatice of the Governors, who will not accept of that Government, but
on condition to enrich themselves two hundred thousand Crowns in three years:
to raise which sum they are forced to oppress the Inhabitants as well as
Strangers; which oppressions will in time so ruin the Commerce of this place,
that for the future the Portuguez must make no great account of it.

The Kingdom of Patana is not so great as that of Iahor, Patana.
but without comparison more populous: for some that have dealt there for the
Hollanders, and have staid there a sufficient time, affirm, they have seen
Records, that assert the King of Patana can raise an Army of an hundred and
fourscore thousand men. True it is, the Patanans are bad Soldiers, and very
improper for war; but we speak of the number, not the quality, and say, that
the City of Patanan, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, can alone set forth at
least ten thousand; that is, the Malayans four thousand, the Chinese three,
and the Siameses as many.

The City of Patana stands upon the Seaside, Description of Patana*
but the Haven is two thousand paces thence. The Houses are of Timber or Canes,
and well and handsomely built. The Kings Palace is surrounded with a Pallisado,
and the Mosquey is made of Brick.

As to the Inhabitants, Its Inhabitants.
they may be said rather brown then Olive-coloured; of body well proportioned,
but they are haughty and proud; yet this rather in their Comportment then
Conversation, wherein they are very affable: for the Queen her self admitted
the Hollanders to come into her Bark with her Noble men, and excused it, that
the severity their Sex observe, neither permitted her to see them more often,
nor to admit them to her Retirement, to which she was obliged since here
Widowhood.

The Chinese and Siameses, who have lived any time there, are ingenious, and
understand Navigation; but the Malayans meddle only with Husbandry and Fishing,
living miserably, and drinking nothing but Water. They have no liking to Wine,
and for Arac and Aquavitae they have an aversion: but Women they love, and
prefer that pleasure before all others, wherefore there is not a Man, who,
besides four or five lawful Wives, has not as many Concubines.

Simple ^ornication they allow of, and hold it no sin; but Adultery they punish
severely. This is a Crime unpardonable, and for which the Father, or Son, or
one of the nearest Relations, is obliged to be Executioner, the manner of death
being left to the person guilty; yet is this Crime so common, that they would
dispeople the Country, should they punish all that are guilty of it.

Their wealth consists in Land and Slaves, whom they feed with nothing but
Rice, and a little Fish, yet make great profit out of their labor. Only the
Chinese and the Mestizes betake themselves to any Trade, or apply themselves
to Traffic, which they chiefly have in Siam, Burdelon, Lugor, Cambodia,
Cochinchina, Macasser, Greece, Pahan, Iambi, Iohor, Bantam, Bandar, Malfin,
Suchidanar, and other places upon the same Coast or Country, where they carry
all sorts of China Commodities, Purcelane, Skins, Pots, Kettles, and other Iron
Utensils; as likewise Flesh powdered and smoked, Fish dry and salted, Cloth
which they have from the Hollanders and Chinese. From their Neighbors they
fetch Timber to build withal, Rottang, that is, Cordage of Cocoe, Oil of the
same, Fruits dried and preserved, Skins of Neat, Buffles, Goats, Pepper, and
particularly a Drug they call Saroyboura. Swallows nests.
These are only Swallow-nests, which they find on Rocks by the Seaside, and
are of such esteem in China, that they sell them for three or four Crowns the
pound. There are two sorts of them, the white, which are much in request, and
are sold for six, seven, or eight Campans the China Catti; but the gray are not
so dear, and not worth three or four Campans the Catti, which amounts not to
above eleven Sols, or a Mamide of Cambaya.

Though the Country lie not far from the Equinoctial, The Air of Patana.
yet is the Air good and wholesome, though the heats are exceeding great. Summer
begins there in February, and lasts to the end of October; there falls
continual Rains during November, December and January, with a North-west wind.
They Till the Earth with Oxen and Buffles, and sow nothing but Rice, of which
they get great abundance. They have for every month several Fruits, and Hens
that lay twice a day, by reason whereof the Country abounds in all sorts of
provisions for the belly, as Rice, Oxen, Goats, Geese, Ducks, Hens, Capons,
Peacocks, Deer, Hares, Coneys, Fowl and Venison, and specially in Fruits,
whereof they have above a hundred several sorts; as Durians, Mangosthans,
Annas, Lanciats, Ramboutammas, Pissans, Oranges and Lemmons, and above all
Lemmons gibol, called in France China Oranges, bought there five or six hundred
for a Campan; Mamplans, Batians, and Centals, etc. whereof more hereafter.

The Inhabitants breed no Swine, Mahumetans.
but the Forests are so full of wild ones, that they are forced to hunt them
to prevent the destruction of their Rice; which being taken, they bury them in
the ground, as being Mahumetans, and eat none themselves, nor suffer others.

In the Forest likewise there are abundance of Tigers and Apes, which are no
less pernicious to the Fields then the wild Swine are; but the wild Elephants,
of which there are likewise great numbers, are very harmless. They are taken by
hunting, turning a tame Elephant amongst them, with whom they presently fight,
and while they are in the fury they tie their hinder feet together; so as being
not able to withstand any longer, they yield to be driven away, and are tamed
by hunger in a short time.

The Portuguez heretofore bought there fifteen or sixteen horned Beasts in a
year, and carried them to Malacca, paying a Campan a head for the export. But
the Hollanders pay nothing, neither for those they slaughter in the Country,
nor for those they ship for Sumatra or Iava: for doubtless they win more on
their affections then the Portuguez, or any other Strangers.

The King of Patana is Subject, or rather Vassal to the King of Siam, but pays
him annually a very inconsiderable Tribute. Not many years since there reigned
a Queen, that sent him no more then once a year a Flower of Gold, and some
Silk-Stuffes and Scarlet; she was about that time fifty years of age, whereof
she had been a Widow fifteen; when she appeared abroad, which was seldom, to
take the Air, she was attended by four thousand Persons of Quality, with the
Arms and Equipage of her deceased Husband born before her.

The King of Iohor possesses all the utmost parts of the Penninsula, Johor.
the Ancients called Aurea Chersonesus, to the Straight of Sincopura, the chief
Towns are Linga, Bintam, Caryman, etc. but the chief City of all the Country is
Batusabar, situate six Leagues from the Sea, upon the River Iohor, divided
into two Towns, one keeping the name of Batusabar, the other called
Cottasabrang, one being thirteen hundred paces about, the other about five
hundred. They are both built with Freestone, and all the Houses stand along
the Riverside, raised on piles eight or ten foot from the ground, which lies
so low, that at high water it is covered twice a day. In it are near four
thousand Inhabitants able to bear Arms; and could they bring themselves to
take pains in Fortification, with little labor might this River be brought
about the Town, which might thus be made one of the strongest places in the
Indies. The Hollanders have used all their Endeavor to bring them to it, and
to secure themselves from the Portuguez, their irreconcilable Enemy: but their
Houses in Cotta Zabrang, and thereabouts, being nothing but Straw, they care
not much for burning, so they have but time to save themselves in Batusabar,
where the building is of Timber, and they can defend themselves against flying
parties.

The Country belongs entirely to the King, The soil fertile.
who gives Land to manure to any that desire it; but the Malayans are so
slothful, that the Ground is all, as it were, overgrown with Moss, though by
the Herbage and Trees it produces, it is easy to perceive, great profit might
be raised, if the Soil were cultivated. For further testimony of this, the
Hollanders, in their Relations, amongst other things observe, that at a time
the King of Iohor presented their Admiral with Sugar Canes eighteen foot long,
and seven inches about.

The Malacca or Malayan Language is held the most elegant of all the Indies,
where it is at least as general as French in Europe, and is the easier to
learn, because there are no inflections, neither in Nounes nor Verbs. For the
Readers curiosity I shall here insert some of their words, that he may spend
his judgment, and begin with the numbers, which they thus count.

Satu one, dwa two, tyga three, eupat four, lyma five, nam six, tousion seven,
de lapan eight, sambalan nine, sapalo ten, sabalas eleven, duabulas twelve,
tyga balas thirteen, capat balas fourteen, lyma balas fifteen, nam balas
sixteen, tousion balas seventeen, delaban balas eighteen, sambalan balas
nineteen, duo pola twenty, saratus a hundred, etc. Arys the day, Malam night,
Zouson the stomach, leheer the neck, dangudo the mustachoes, Bat the tongue,
Iargary the fingers, Toulang the leg, Goumo the foot, Tangam the arm, Capalla
the head, Rambot the hair, Pourot the belly, Ianget the beard, Tangan the hand,
Molot the mouth, Martye the eyes, Yrotdon the nose, Conet the skin; Babpa
Father, Maa Mother, Ibou Grandfather and Grandmother, bewangdarnet to bleed,
mackol to beat, mollay to begin, billy to buy, chiuy to pay, diem to be silent,
ambel to take, toulong to assist, Manyte I, Pakanera you, andrior to melt,
boday to deceive, dengaer to hear, battou to content, mansuiry to prick, Mus
Gold, Salacha Silver, ada I have, Palla a Nutmeg, toy quitabo we, Lacky a Man,
bilby to traffic, tidor to sleep, tavar to promise, britacot to menace, terran
to clear, pang to cut, Negle Steel, Lada Pepper, minnon to drink tackana to
enchaunt, chium to kiss, bretoun to make, dousta to lie, banga to rise,
suitsidana to wipe the Nose, tieda tau I understand it not, Sick Cloves.

Leaving the firm Land and the Peninsula, Sumatra.
by the Ancients called Aurea Chersonesus, on the Coast of Malacca; we find the
Isle of Sumatra, not above ten Leagues distant. Some have said 'twas rent from
the Continent by the Sea Currents, as Ceylon from that part of the Indies
heretofore called India intra Gangem, but for this conjecture there is little
ground in History, it being not to be affirmed more of this place, then it can
of Sicily, or England, or any other Island in the World; except we shall
presuppose, that at the Creation the Sea compassed the whole Earth, and that
then there was no Islands, but that they were made by the Sea, which afterward
by degrees formed them out of the firm Land. To enter into this dispute is not
our design, no more then to decide whether Sumatra were the ancient Taprobane,
as Ios. de l' Escale, Mercator, and diverse others think; or Ophir, where King
Solomon's Ships fetched the Gold and other precious things, as the Scripture
says; but we shall recite only what we could gather out of these last
Relations.

All conclude that Sumatra extends from the fifth degree on this side, to the
sixth degree beyond the Line; by which Rule it should contain a hundred and
sixty, or a hundred sixty five Leagues in length, with a breadth of sixty; and
so they who inhabit the middle of the Island, to have the Equinoctial Line
perpendicularly over them. By the situation we may judge the heats to be there
extreme; and herewithall there is so much Wood, and such a multitude of Lakes,
that the Air, especially for Strangers, is exceeding unhealthful. Nevertheless
it is abundantly fertile; The Riches.
and besides Gold, Silver, and diverse other Metals, as Copper, Iron, Brass,
whereof they have the Art to make as good Artillery as they do in Europe; it
produces Rice and Millet, particularly Fruit, in such quantity, as the Forests
are laden with it, and sufficiently furnish all the Inhabitants. In the middle
of the Isle there is a burning Mountain, flaming by intermissions, as Vesuvius
in the Kingdom of Naples; and, they report, there is a Balsom Fountain running
incessantly. It Is wealthy in Diamonds and other precious Stones, Silks, Spices,
Wax, Honey, Camphire, Cassia, and diverse other Drugs used in Medicine. There
are whole Woods of white Sandale, and Cotton sufficient to cloth the
Inhabitants.

This Island was heretofore divided into ten Kingdoms, Contains many Kingdoms.
but Men making this Voyage only for Traffic, they are contended to visit
those only next the Sea, and omit to travel further into the Country, where
doubtless Riches are to be found unknown to the maritime Inhabitants. The
Portuguez give us account only of two Mediterranean Kingdoms, which they call
Andragidan and Arunau; as also those of Achim, Pedir, Pacem, Camparam, Z^nde
and Mancabo, all on the Seaside, and on this side the Line. The Hollanders,
for advance of their Commerce in the Isle of Iava, have discovered the Kingdom
of Polymbam beyond the Line, and have made there a most firm establishment, as
may be seen in their Relations. The Portuguez have there nothing at all, but
have freedom of Trade, except hindered by the Hollanders.

The King of Achim has united to his Crown the Kingdoms of Pedir and Pacem,
King of Achim*
with almost all the Northern Coast of the Isle; but he that reigned there in
1596. when the Hollanders first sailed into those parts, was a Fisherman that
usurped the Crown, and, in the Siege of Polymbam, was slain, leaving only one
Son of five months of age, under the government of his Father in Law. Which
young Prince dying, his Grandfather succeeded to the Crown; and that was he the
Hollanders treated with in the year 1668.

The City of Achim stands in a wide Plain upon the side of a very broad River,
The Town of Achim.
but so shallow, that the least Boats get in with difficulty. It has neither
Gates nor Walls, the Houses all built on piles, and covered with Coco-leaves.
The Castle, or Palace Royal, stands in the middle of the Town, which on two
sides has most excellent pleasant Forests, well stored with Apes, Herns, and
all manner of Birds.

The Natives are flat-fac'd, The Inhabitants.
and of an Olive color, they cover their body with a Cotton or Silk Shirt, and
their head with a light Turbant of the same stuff; Children go stark naked,
only Girls have their secret parts hidden with a Silver-plate. The Inhabitants
of Guzuratta, Malabar, Negupatam, Bengalan, and Pegu, and all Strangers that
live among them, cloth themselves after the same manner.

The Castle is fortified with a good Wall and Pallisado, and well flanked, so
as the Artillery commands all the Avenues and streets of the Town. The Houses
in the Castle are built of the same matter and same form of those of the Town,
by reason the River, which often overflows, drowns them sometimes to the first
story. The piles that support them are gayly wrought, and the Houses covered
with Canes. They enter into the Castle by seven Gates, one within another,
which are neither curious nor strong. Without the Kings special License, none
but the Lifeguard and Women enter the Pallisado, all others must sue for
Audience, or expect till the King sends for them. Such as present themselves to
him, do him reverence, with their hands joined and lifted above their head,
crying, Daula tua^con, that is, Long live the King. He never recreates himself
but with Women, or appears in public, but either to see Cock-fighting, to
bathe in the River, or hunt the Elephant. He is served only by Women or
Eunuchs. He uses his Subjects as slaves, and governs by four Sabanders, who are
next in authority to him. His Laws are fevere, and punishments extremely cruel;
so as one shall there meet a multitude of people without either hands or feet,
and have been so mutilated, for miscarriages not worth the name of Crimes.

The King of Achim, Religion.
as almost all that inhabit the Coast of Sumatra, is a Mahumetan; for which
reason I shall not need to say any more of their Religion; only, that they
begin their Lent with the new Moon in the twelfth month, and end it, at the
new of the next month, observing abstinence all day, during that time, till
night. Whence it comes, that their impatience to see the end of their Lent,
makes them still gaze in the West, fixing their eyes up to the Heavens, to find
the new Moon; which is no sooner seen, but they fall to feasting and jollity
for the remainder of that night.

In Sumatra they get no Corn, Their Victuals.
but Rice sufficient, of which the Inhabitants make good varieties,
particularly Cakes with Oil; they have plenty likewise of Beef and Buffles,
Goat and Mutton, though none but the King has privilege to breed Sheep.
Oranges* Lemmons, Bonana, Tamarindes, Batalas, Reddish, Sprinage, and Lettice
in great abundance; they drink Water, or Arac made of Rice or Cocoes.

There is in Sumatra a Tree, in the Malayan Language called Singadi; in Arabia,
Gurae; the Canarians call it Parizaticco; The mournful day-tree.
the Persians and Turks, Gul; the Decanins, Pull; and the Portuguez, Arbor
triste de dia. It puts forth an infinite number of branches very small and full
of knots, from every knot comes two leaves like a Plumb-leaf, save that they
are as sweet as Sage, and are covered with a beautiful white. Every leaf has
its bud, which opening thrusts forth small heads, whereof each has four round
leaves, and from each head comes five flowers, composing as it were a Nosegay,
in such manner as the fifth is seen in the middle of the rest. The flowers are
white as Snow, and a little bigger then the Orange-flower; blows immediately as
the Sun is set, so suddenly, that they are produced as 'twere in the cast of an
eye. This fecundity lasts all night, till the return of the Sun makes both the
flowers and leaves drop off, and so strips the tree that least greenness is not
to be found upon it, nor any thing of that admirable odor which perfumed the
Air, and comprehended all that Asia affords of sweetness. The tree keeps in
this condition, till the Sun has left the Horizon; and then it begins to open
its womb again, and deck it self with fresh flowers, as if in the shades of
night it would recover it self out of the affliction which it is put into by
that Planet, whose return enlivens the rest of the Universe.

There is not in the Island a Tree more common then the Cocoes, Cocoes.
and in regard it is general through the Indies, I will give here a brief
description of it; and first tell you there are four sorts thereof. That which
bears the fruit called Cocoes, which are the Nuts of the Country, is the most
considerable, not only of any Tree in this Country, but indeed of any other
part of the world. This Tree, not above a foot diameter, grows in body
exceeding high, having not a branch but at the top, where it spreads as the
Date-tree. The fruit comes not out of the branches, but beneath out of the
body, in bunches or clusters of ten or twelve Nuts: The flower is like that of
a Chestnut, and it grows only near the Sea, or upon the River side in sandy
ground, and nevertheless grows so lofty, that except the Indians, who by
practice climb it with as much agility and quickness as an Ape, there is no
Stranger will venture to do it. It Is as common in the Indies, as the Olive in
Spain, or Willows in Holland; and though the wood be sappy, yet it serves for
such variety of things, that there is no Tree of so general an use. Ships made
of it, as also Sails, Cables, etc.
In the Maldives Isles, they make Ships that cross the Sea, without any thing
but what the Cocoe affords. Of the outer rind they make a kind of Hemp, which
they call Cayro, whereof they make Cordage and Cables for their Ships. Of the
leaves they make Sails, and cover Houses with them; they make of them likewise
Umbrelloes, Fans, Tents, Mats and Hats, which for their lightness are very
commodious in Summer.

These Trees are planted either for the Fruit, or the Terry which is got out of
them. The Fruit is of the bigness of an Estridge egg; and the Husk, that is
green, as of our ordinary Nuts, being dried, is converted into the Thread
called Cayro, which I spoke of before. Sometimes they gather the Fruit before
it comes to perfect maturity, and then it is called Lanbo, whence may be drawn
two pints of refreshing Liquor pleasant to drink. This Juice by degrees turns
to a little Nut, in taste not much unlike our Haselnut, but something sweeter.
The shell of this Nut, while it is green, is good to eat, but being dry, they
make Cups, Spoons, and other Utensils of it, or make Coal for Goldsmiths. The
Indians peel this Nut, and extract a Milk out of it, as useful to all purposes,
as our Cows milk. None but the poor eat the Fruit, because ordinarily they dry
it, to extract the Oil, which is good to eat, useful in medicine, and to burn
in Lamps. The fruit being kept in the shell, by degrees turns to a kind of
Apple, which in time grows yellow, and is excellent to eat.

They extract Wine out of it, thus; How they make Wine.
pulling off the Flower, they fasten to it a pot of Earth they call Collao,
well stopped and luted with Potters earth, that it may not dye nor sharpen. They
know in what time the pot will be filled with a certain Liquor, which they call
Sura, that has the taste and quality of Whey. This Liquor boiled makes Terry,
which serves them for Wine, and being set in the Sun, makes excellent Vinegar,
and stilling it in a Limbeck makes good Strong-water. They make likewise Sugar
of it, which they call Iagra, but esteem it not, for that it is brown, having
such plenty of white. The Portuguez, steeping Raisins of the Sun and some other
Ingredients in Sura, make a Drink that has the taste and quality of Sack.

The Indians esteem most the inside of this Tree, Paper of this Tree.
for the Pith is white, and as fine as any Paper we have, will hold in fifty or
sixty folds, or as many leaves. They term it Olla, and use it in stead of
Paper, so as Persons of Quality seek much after it, only for this use; of the
Bark they make courser paper, to make up Merchandises in.

The second Species of Cocoes, is the Tree that the Portuguez call Arrequeiro,
for the Areca that comes of it, whereof we spoke in the precedent Book, and of
which we shall have further occasion to speak more hereafter; as well as of the
other two kinds, called Tamor and Lantor, in the description of the Isle of
Iava, to which we shall come immediately.

Bananas is not any where so common as in Sumatra: Bananas.
it is a kind of Indian Fig Tree, which grows to a man's height, and produces
Leaves six foot long, and a foot and half broad. We call it, with the
Portuguez, the Fig Tree, in regard that though the Fruit be not altogether like
other Figs, yet has it the shape and color. It may be called rather a Bush
then a Tree, because it has no body. The Leaves begin to break forth when the
Sprout is but four foot high, and as some come forth, others wither and fall,
till the Plant be at full growth, and the Fruit come to maturity. The bole of
it is not above ten or twelve inches think, and so soft that it may with ease
be cut with a Knife. In the middle of the Leaf there comes out a Flower as big
as an Estridge Egg, inclining to a violet color, out of which comes a branch
which is not wood, but tender as a Cabbage-stalk, laden with Figs. At first
they are no bigger then a Bean, but in time they grow seven or eight inches
long, and as big as a Cowcumber; not a sprig but shall have near a hundred
Figs, which join together like a bunch of Grapes. They gather them before they
are full ripe, which they know by their color, which is of a yellowish green;
then they hang them on a Nail till they ripen, which will be in four or five
days. No stalk has more then one bunch; they cut it close to the ground,
whence it springs again with such vigout, that in a month it recovers its
former condition; and at that rate fructifies the year throughout, which is a
great Ma^na to this Country, where a little suffices; and thus they live in a
manner for nothing. The Cods or Husks, wherein the Figs are enclosed, are no
less delicious and useful then the Fruit it self, and as nourishing as our
finest Bread, and in taste much like a Cake, so as this Tree alone is
sufficient to feed the whole Country.

The Pepper of Sumatra is without doubt the best in the Indies, Pepper.
except that of Cochim. Commonly they plant it at the root of another Tree,
underset it with Canes or Poles, as Hop or French-beans. The Leaves resemble
Orange-leaves, only they are a little less and more sharp; it grows in little
branches as red Goosberries, or Juniper. While it hangs on the tree it is
green, and turns not black till it be gathered and dry, which they do in
December and January. The places which produce most of it are, Malabar, Onar,
Barselor, Mangalor, Calicut, Cranganor, Cochim, Conhon, Quida, Dampin, Dedir,
Campir and Andragir, the Isles of Sumatra and Bantam, and certain places in the
Isle of Iava. They bring forth likewise white Pepper, but not in so great
abundance. The Malayans call Pepper Lauda; the Inhabitants of Iava, Sahargh;
and the Malabars, Molanga. Long Pepper is not gotten but in Bengala, which is
another sort of Fruit like the tag of a point, but something thicker and gray,
containing a small white grain of the same taste and use as common Pepper. In
Malabar and Goa there grows another sort of Pepper, which they call Canarius,
but used only by poor people.

It Is something strange, but very certain, that they spend more Pepper in the
Indies then is brought into Europe; though in the Haven of Bantam only, it is
known they have laded forty eight thousand Bags in a year: for the Indians
dress not any meat without handfuls of it, but they never beat it, nor grind it.

Iava, Java.
an Island commonly called Iava Major, to distinguish it from another less of
the same name, which lies hard by it, is South-East from the Isle of Sumatra,
from which it is dis-joyned, only by a narrow Straight, called the Straight of
Sunda. It lies seven Degrees beyond the Line, and is about fifty Leagues long:
but hitherto no man's curiosity has discovered the breadth of it, which makes
some conceive that it is not an Island, but part of the Continent, known by the
name of Terra Australis, near the Straight of Magellan. Julius Scaliger, in his
Exercitations against Cardan, calls it the Compendium of the World; because
there is not Animal, Plant, Fruit, Metal, nor Drug, which is not here in
greater abundance, then in any part of the Universe.

The Natives say, Inhabitant.
that originally they came from China, and that their Ancestors, weary of the
yoke that King kept them under, removed to the Isle of Iava; certainly they are
in face like the Chinese, their forehead and brows large, and eyes narrow; for
which reason diverse Chinese settle in this Island.

There is scarce a Town in Iava but has a particular King, who not above forty
or fifty years since obeyed all one Emperor, but of late they have shaken off
that Sovereignty, and are all independent. The King of Bantam is the most
puissant, The King of Bantam.
and next him the King of Palambuam, from whom is denominated the Straight that
divides the Isles Iava and Bali. Ten Leagues thence, toward the North-East,
lies the Town of Panarucan, where they drive a great trade with the Slaves they
bring from Malacca, as also in long Pepper and Women's Garments.

Near Panarucan there is a Mountain of Sulphur, which began in the year 1586.
to cast up fire in such violence, A flaming Mount.
that at that first blazing above ten thousand persons perished by it. The
Kings of Panarucan and Palambuam are Pagans, but the King of the City of
Passaruan, six Leagues from Panarucan, is a Mahumetan. At Passaruan they have a
great traffic in Garnitre, a fruit like a Raspberry, whereof the Merchants of
Quilin make Beads and Bracelets, which they sell, and put off all over the
Indies.

Ten Leagues thence Westward lies the City Ioartam, Joartam.
with an excellent Haven upon a fair River, where Ships, in their Voyage from
the Moluccoes to Bantam, take in Provisions and fresh Water.

Upon the same River lies the City Gerrici, Gerrici.
to whose King the other Kings of Iava render the same respect, they again
exact from their own Slaves, and near to these two Cities it is they fetch the
Salt that is brought to Bantam.

The City of Surabaia, Surabaia.
that stands next in rank, has likewise its proper King, who also reigns over
the City of Brandam, six Leagues thence toward the West, and lives at Cidaye.
Cidaye.


This City is fortified with a good Wall well flanked; but the Haven is not
safe, by reason there wants shelter against the Winds that come from Sea-wards.

Ten Leagues Westward lies the City of Tabaon, Taboan.
next Bantam, the most considerable of the Island, as we shall tell you anon.

Five Leagues further North-west is Cajam, Cajam.
a City of no traffic, no more then Mandalicaon, which is inhabited by none
but Fishermen.

Five Leagues onwaads West stands Iapara, Japara.
upon a skirt of Land that thrusts it self three Leagues into the Sea. The
situation of this Town is upon a fair River, with a good Harbor that renders
it very Merchantile. This has likewise a peculiar King, and none of the
meanest in the Island.

Twenty five Leagues from Iapara, and forty five from Bantam, lies Matram, or
Matavam, Matram or Matavam.
a great City, with a King of its own; who heretofore was so powerful as that
he pretended to Sovereignty over the whole Isle; and for this was the declared
enemy of the King of Bantam.

Then five Leagues West from Iapara is the City of Pati, Pati and Dauma.
and three Leagues beyond that of Dauma, which acknowledges the King of
Matavam; as does also that of Taggal, Taggal.
situate with the two others in the same Bay.

The next is the fair and strong City of Charabaon, upon a fresh water River;
and onwards the Cities of Dormago and Monucaon, Monucaon.
whence they pass through the Village Gaccon, to the City of Iacatra, Jacattra.
and so to Bantam. Bantam.


Without question this last is the Metropolis, and most considerable City of
all Iava, situate about twenty five Leagues from the Isle of Sumatra, at the
foot of a Mountain, whence three Rivers rise, two whereof run by the walls, the
other through the City, but all too shallow for Navigation. The Town is
indifferent great, but rascally Houses; the walls, which are of Brick, and
three foot in thickness, are not entirely lined with Earth, yet so flanked,
that at every hundredth pace lies a Cannon, which would sufficiently secure the
Curtain, were it in condition for service; but their Artillery is not mounted,
and they have no other Ammunition then a little Powder brought from Malacca,
where the Portuguez have a Mill. The City Gates are so wretched, that one might
beat them down with a Club; but so vigilantly guarded, 'twould be hard to
approach without notice; there are neither Bastions nor Towers, but in lieu
thereof Scaffolds of three stories, which yield a strong defense.

In the whole City there are but three principal Streets, The Kings Palace.
which all abut upon the Castle called Pacebam. The one goes from the Pacebam
to the Haven; another, where the Slaves and the Kings Domestics inhabit, leads
to the Gate toward the Fields; and the third, to the Gate at the foot of the
Mountain. The Streets are not paved, but are as commodious, by means of the
Sand they are covered with. The Channels, which in diverse places cross the
City, are foul and stinking, by reason the Stream of the River not being strong
enough to carry away the filth it brings it self, and what is thrown forth, the
Water choaks and makes puddles that infect the whole City. No Person of Quality
who has not his private Chapel, or Mesquite, in his House; but one there is
in common, near the Palace, on the Magazine and Stable side. The City is
divided into several Posts, each of which is assigned to some Person of
Quality, who commands in time of War, and has the direction in civil Affairs.
A Drum for a Clock.
They have a Drum as big as those Germane Casks, called Thunderbolts, used
instead of a Bell, which they beat with a wooden Bar as big as a Weavers-beam,
morning and evening, as also on Alarms. Likewise they have Brass basins, which
they beat musically and chime upon, as they do on Bells.

At every corner of the Streets there stands a Guard, The Guard of the town.
and at Sunset they draw up and make fast all Passage-boats, so as in the
night there is no stirring in the Street. At the Prison gate, near the Palace,
stands a Guard of fifty Men; nor is there a Person of Quality, who has not one
of ten or twelve at his House. The Town is full of Cocoe-trees, nor is there a
Mansion without diverse belonging to it. The housing is poorly built, of Straw
or Reeds upon piles, made like those at Achim. They cover their Houses with
Cocoe-leaves, and the sides of their lodging Rooms have only Curtains for
freedom of the Air, which is exceeding necessary in this hot Climate. For
preservation of their Wares, they have Storehouses of Stone, but they are
covered only with Straw, so that to secure them from fire, which is but too
frequent amongst them, they lay great pieces of Timber over the Roof, and cover
it with Sand, that the fire may not find passage. The Rooms in their Houses are
only divided by partitions, made of Canes called Bambus, which they slit so
thin, that a Horse-load serves for all the Rooms in a House. At the Houses of
Persons of Quality, at the first entrance, you come into a square Court, where
the Guard is, and where the Master of the House speaks with such as have
business with him, under a little Shed, covered with Canes or Cocoe-leaves. In
one of the corners of this Court stands the Mesquite, where at noon they do
their Devotions, and not far thence the Cistern where they wash themselves.
Being entered the House, you find on both sides of a narrow Gallery several
little Niches, for Slaves to rest in, who watch for their Masters security; by
reason they are all afraid of being surprised and killed by their Enemies in
the night. All Forraigners, as the Inhabitants of Bengala, Guzuratta, Malayans,
Abissins, Chinese, Portuguez and Hollanders, lie out of Town.

Here are three great Market places, Market places.
where Merchants meet daily; The grand Bazar, or Exchange, is toward the East
part of the Town, and is the meeting place of foreign Merchants; as Portuguez,
Arabians, Turks, Chinese, Quilins, Peguans, Malayans, Bengalans, Gusurats,
Malabars, and other Indians, who are there from the break of the day till nine
of the clock, and then break up. The second Market place is before the great
Mesquite, divided from it by a Pallisado. To this place Women resort with
Sacks, and a weight of three pounds, they call Gantam, who buy Pepper of the
Country people, at eight or nine hundred Caxas the Gantam. But the Chinese,
who are very skilful in this Trade, forestall them sometimes; for they go to
the Peasants and buy all they have by the lump before hand. Betwixt the
Pallisado and the Mesquite stand Women that sell Bettele, Araca, Bananas,
Melons, etc. and some there are sell fine Cakes to be eaten hot.

A little higher on the right hand are Armourers, Armourers.
who sell small pieces of Cannon, Pistols, Sword-blades, Battle-axes, Knives,
etc. Not far thence, there are others that sell Sandal-wood, white and yellow,
and on the left hand are Confectioners, that sell Sugar, Honey, and all sorts
of Sweetmeats liquid or dry. Near to that is the Bean-market, where are sold
all sorts of Beans, black, white, red, yellow, green and gray, at three hundred
Caxas the Gantam. Next to this is the Onyon-market, where Merchants that sell
Cloth by wholesale come, and such as deal in return of Money, and assurances
of the return of Vessels. Hard by this is the Poultry, where, besides tame
Fowl, they sell also Kids, Geese, Pigeons, Parrats, etc. Coming thence you meet
three ways; one going to the Chinese Shops; another to the Herb and
Pulse-market; and the third to the Shambles. By the way to the Chinese Shops,
on the right hand, are some Jewellers, who for the greater part are
Choroacones, that is, Persians, or Arabians, who sell Rubies, Hiacinths,
Turquesses, Granats, etc. And on the left hand is the place for the Bengalians,
with their Toys and small Wares.

On the backside of this Street, the Chinese sell their Silks raw and
colour^d, Damask, Velvet, Sattins, Brocadoes of Gold and Silver, Purcelane, and
Cabinets, and works of Lacque, etc. By the way to the Hearb-market, upon the
right hand upon the Strand, are the Bengalians with their small Wares. On the
left hand Merchants of Linnen-cloath, and at the lower end of this Market
married Women have Seamsters shops; but men are forbidden to come there under
pain of a forfeiture. Then you come to the Hearb-market, where are a multitude
of Simples unknown to us. Turning thence you see the Fish-market, then the
Shambles, with Stalls full of Beef, Buffles and Venison: then the Spice-market,
where Women sell Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, etc. and all sorts of Gums and
Drugs, to Europeans unknown: and the Rice-market, where likewise they sell
Earthen-Ware and Salt; whence they pass by the same way they came, to the place
where Merchants and Masters of Ships meet about their Affairs.

The sale of these Commodities lasts but till nine of the clock, and then opens
the Market before the Pacebam, or Palace Royal, where are sold all sorts of
Victuals, as likewise some Pepper, which they truck with the Chinese. About
noon the Market in the Chinese quarters begins, where nothing is sold but for
the Table.

We told you before, that next Bantam, Tuban or Tubaon, Tuban.
is the chiefest Town in Iava, and in effect, is stronger then all the rest,
and although not so great as Bantam, it is at least as handsome, and as well
built. The Palace is exceeding spacious, and has very fair Appartments, where
Elephants and other Beasts have their several quarters. Each Elephant has his
lodge built upon four pillars, with a post in the middle to tie him to. The
rooms are filled with Chests and Hampers for the baggage, when the King goes
his Progress. Near to his Lodgings is a place where his fighting Cocks are
kept, every one his Pen apart, and every one his Keeper; as likewise the
Parrots, which are much before those they bring into these parts. The greatest
part of a beautiful flame color, with a great golden spot on the back: the
outsides of their wings blew and red, and the inside a lovely carnation. They
are too tender to endure the inconveniences of a long Voyage; besides the
Indians highly esteem them, for that they love their owners, and delight to be
made much of by them. The King of Tuban, whom the Hollanders saw, in their
third Voyage to the Indies, delighted much in these Creatures, as likewise in
Dogs, Horses and white Ducks, by much larger then ours. He had four legitimate
Wives, six Sons, and two Daughters, besides natural Children a great number by
Concubines, which he kept in several Appartments. His Bed was raised some
distance from the ground, built like an Altar of great Stones, whereon lay a
Quilt and certain Pillows of Satin, filled with raw Silk.

The Chief Commerce they have at Tubaon consists in Pepper, which they carry to
the Isle of Body, where they truck for Cloth, and Stuffs of Cotton and Silk,
which afterward they bring to Banda, Ternate, the Philippines, and other
parts, to truck for Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs. The Inhabitants, for the greatest
part live only on Fish. They wear no other Garment then a Linnen-cloath about
the Loins; only persons of Quality sometimes have loose Coats of Chamelot,
which reach but to their Thighs. They are by this habit distinguished from
other persons, and by their train of Slaves, without whom they never come
abroad. They delight much in Horses, and to have their Saddles exceeding rich,
which are made like our great Saddles, and their trappings studded with Gold
and Silver, striving to appear well mounted at Assemblies, and to show the King
their horsemanship, and the nimbleness of their Horses.

The Inhabitants that live in the inner parts of the Isle of Iava are Pagans,
The Javians, Mahumetans.
and the greatest part Pythagoreans, believing a transmigration of the Soul;
for which reason they eat neither Fish nor Flesh. Toward the South part of the
Isle, there are, though but few, some Mahumetans, as we said before, and they
observe the Turkish Religion in all things, sending for Priests to Meca.

They observe two Fasts. Fasts.
The greater of the two begins the fifth of August, and at the beginning of
this Lent it is, the Slaves renew their submission to their Master, with
Ceremonies extraordinary. For they take them by the feet, and rub them upward
to the knees; then closing their hands, they rub the head, face and neck; and
then unclose them again.

Leut being ended, Diverse Wives.
they celebrate Easter, entertaining their Children and all their Domestics
with a Dinner. There is scarce a Man in Bantam, who has not three or four
Wives, and some have ten or twelve, besides Concubines, who wait on their Wives
especially when they go abroad. They make no difference betwixt legitimate and
natural Children. A Father has not power to sell his Child, though he had it
by a Slave. Children go stark naked, only the Girls cover their Privities with
a thin plate of Gold or Silver. Tourg ^^^riages.
They marry at the age of eight, nine, or ten years, not only to prevent the
disorders which in this hot Climate were inevitable, but because the King is
Heir to all, who dying, leave their Children under age; whom he makes his
Slaves, as he does the Widow and Family of the deceased. The Dowry Persons of
Quality give with their Daughters consists in Slaves of both Sexes, and in a
sum of Coxas, which is very considerable, when it amounts to three hundred
thousand, which is much about two Crowns and a half French money.

The Women appear with great decency at the marriage of their Relations, though
they use no great ceremonies. One may know the day by certain Poles which are
stuck in the Houses of the Bride and Bridegroom, with Tassels of red and white
Cotton.

Dinner ended, they bring a Horse to the Bridegroom, whereon he rides about the
Town till evening, expecting the slaves he is to have in marriage, who come
commonly laden with Presents. None but the nearest Kindred sup with them, and
see the new married couple abed.

Women of Quality are kept in such restraint, that they suffer not their own
Sons to come within their Chambers; and when they go abroad, which is very
seldom, all give place and respect to them, even the King himself would do it:
nor dares any man speak to a married Woman without the leave of her Husband.
Women of Quality are known from others, only by their Train; for all are
dressed after the same fashion, wearing a Petticoat of Cotton or Silk, which
comes from the Breast to the mid-leg. Stockings they have none, and go all
bare-headed, tying up their Hair together on the Crown of their Head; but when
they come to Weddings, or other public Assemblies, they wear a Coronet of
Gold, and have on their Fingers and about their Arms Rings and Bracelets. They
are so much addicted to cleanliness, that there passes not a day but they bathe
themselves three or four times. They do not their natural necessities, nor
receive their benevolences from their Husbands, but they go up to the Neck in
Water to cleanse themselves: They do no work at all, which needs be no wonder,
for the Husbands themselves having employed two or three hours about their
Merchandise, all the day after do nothing but chew Bettele amongst their Wives,
who are most sollicitous, by all the little kindnesses they can imagine, to
court their love, washing and rubbing them till they are stirred up to
voluptuousness.

The Magistrate of the Town of Bantam sits in Judicature in the Court of the
Pacebam, Magistrate of Bantam.
from four or five in the Evening till it be Night. The Plaintiff and Defendant
appear both in person, and plead their own Cause. One only punishment of
Criminals is, they tie them to a post, and stab them to death with a Poyniard:
Strangers have this privilege, that giving satisfaction to the party
complaining, they may redeem themselves from death, except they have murdered
in cold blood, or upon advantage.

The Kings Council meets upon Affairs of State, The Kings Council.
under a broad spread Tree, by Moonlight, where sometimes there come near five
hundred persons, who part not till the Moon go down. When the Council is risen
they go to bed, and there lie till dinner time: afterward the Councillors of
State give audience to all who have ought to propose to the Council. When the
King comes there in person, he sits in the midst of them; or else with the four
principal Ministers of State, and propounds the point wherein he requires
their advice, or causes the Governor of the Town to propound it. To a Council
of War they call the three hundred Captains, Commanders of the Troops the
Armies consist of, which is raised in the Town it self. They have a particular
course for quenching fire, which happens but too often among them; for the
Women have this Office imposed upon them, while the Men stand in Arms to defend
them in the mean time from pillage.

Persons of Quality, The train and state of the Nobility
when they go to Court, or through the Town, have carried before them a Lance,
and a Sword sheathed in a black Velvet Scabbard, and by these Ensigns oblige
all the Street to make way for them, who retiring back, fit on their Heels till
these Grandees are past. Their ordinary wear is of Stuff wrought with Silk, and
they wear Turbants of a fine Bengalian Cloth. Some amongst them wear
Mandillions of Velvet, black or crimson, and never forget the Dagger or
Poyniard under their Girdle. They ever go with a numerous train of Slaves; one
amongst them carrying the Bettele-bottle, another the Chamber Pot, and a third
the Umbrello. They all go barefooted, it being thought a disparagement among
them, to walk with Shoes through the Town. In their Houses many wear them;
they are made at Achim, Malacca in China, and the Isle of Sumatra, where are
also made most part of the Umbrello's used in the Indies.

The Iavians are haughty, The qualities of the Javians.
self-conceited, perfidious, mischievous, and cruel; who never fail to make an
end of such they once get advantage of; and having once committed a murder,
they kill all in their power; for knowing death to be their inevitable reward,
they discharge their fury indifferently on all they encounter, without
consideration of sex or age; so as sometimes they are constrained to kill them
in the place, instead of taking them to be delivered up into the hands of
Justice.

They generally wear long hair, are of a Chestnut Complexion, having great
Jaw-bones, flat Faces, great Eyebrows, little Eyes, thin Beards; and being of a
middle stature, well set, and strongly limbed. They are addicted naturally to
theft, and so vindicative, that to be revenged of an Enemy, they stick not to
run upon his Weapons, and hazard an assured death, to take away another life.

This bloody disposition shows they have courage, Good Soldiers.
and would make good Soldiers, were they but as dextrous at Firearms as they
are at their usual Weapons; which are the Pike, the Battle-axe, and the broad
Sword, but above all the Dagger, or Poyniard. Their Bucklers are of Wood, or
boiled Leather stretched upon a Hoop; and for their bodies they have Cuirasses,
the pieces being fastened together with mails of Iron. Soldiers in time of
peace have no pay, but in time of war they have Arms and Clothes, and Rice and
Fish for provision. They are all Slaves, and not only such as belong to the
King, but likewise to other Lords, who are obliged to enroll them for their
Princes service. They are seldom or never idle, but employ themselves most
commonly in making Sheaths for Ponyards of Sandalwood made hollow, or
pollishing their Arms, which they generally poison; keeping them so well, that
no Raizor can be sharper then their Swords. The Iavaneses, as indeed all the
rest of the Indians, hold their Daggers so dear to them, that they will not
speak to any man without that by their side, not one Brother with another, and
at night they lay it under their Bolster. Some use Truncks, through which they
blow little poisoned Arrows, so bearded, that pulling it out the head remains
in the wound, which by this means becomes incurable and mortal. Amongst such a
multitude of Villains, there are notwithstanding some honest people, but the
number is very small: for except some that inhabit near Bantam, upon the
Straight of Sunda, at the foot of the mountain Gonon Besar, who were
transplanted thither from Pasaruan, all the rest are depraved. The people not
able to live under the tyranny of the King of Passaruan, put themselves on
certain conditions under the protection of the King of Bantam, and have built
the Town of Sura, which has a peculiar King, but subordinate notwithstanding
to the King of Bantam. They live very peaceably, and persevere in the exercise
of their Pagan Religion.

The soil is cultivated, Javians Sophuticate their w^res.
either by free people, who take it of the King, or other Lords, at a certain
rent, and are not bound to labor longer then their bargain, and may afterward
do what they please; or by Slaves, who cultivate the Pepper, Rice and Cocoes,
breed Poultry and Cattle for their Masters profit, and to supply his Kitchen.
Some Slaves take the Cocoes at one thousand Caxaes the Tree. Others work by the
day, and get eight hundred Caxaes a day, which is to their Masters profit.
Others are not maintained by their Masters, but serve them six days, and the
six days following work for themselves, and so get their livelihood. The Woman
slaves keep market, where they sell their Masters Pepper, and other
Commodities; or else employ themselves in sewing, or making Cloth, that they
may not live unprofitably. When they have a mind to be eased of them, they lead
them from Port to Port, How they employ their Slaves.
and sell them to him will give most. The ordinary price for one of an able
body is five Fardos, that is about a Pistol a-piece. The Children of a Slave
belong to the Master, who disposes of them as he thinks best; but he has not
power over the life of his Slave, without the express consent of the King or
Governor.

The Pepper which the Iavians sell to Strangers is usually mixed with Ordure,
black Sand, or Gravel, or they adulterate it some other way, either in quality
or weight, as they do all their other Commodities. They keep a trade with all
the neighboring Islands, with notable advantage. At the Towns of Macasser and
Surubya they fetch Rice, which there they buy for one Sata de Caxa the Gantan,
and sell it for double the price. At Balambuam they buy Cocoes, a thousand
Caxes the hundred, and venting them by retail at Bantam, they sell eight Cocoes
for two hundred Caxes. There they likewise buy the Oil of the same Fruit. At
Ioartam, Gerrici Pati, and Iuama, they fetch Salt at a hundred and fifty
thousand Caxaes the eight hundred Gantans; and at Bantam, three Gantans are
worth a thousand Caxaes. They carry Salt to Sumatra, where they truck for
Lacque, Pepper, Benjamin, Cotton, Tortoise-shell, and diverse others
Commodities. From Iacatra, Iappara, Crauaon, Timor and Palimbaon, they fetch
Honey, Wax, Sugar, etc. Salt-fish from Crauaon and Bendermassing; Iron from
Crimata, in the Isle of Borneo; Copper and Lead from Pepa and Guselaen, upon
the Coast of Malacca; from Bali and Cambaya, Cotton and Cotton-cloath, etc.

Rich Merchants make no Voyages themselves, but venture the greatest part of
their money, for more or less profit, as the Voyages are long or dangerous, and
near upon the like conditions we do here in Europe. Obligations, as all other
Instruments, are written upon the bark of a Tree, the Letters ingrav'd with a
Bodkin, and they make it up in a Roll, or fold it apiece betwixt two
boards, which they tie together with a Pack-thread very neatly. Sometimes they
use China Paper, which is very fine, and of all colors. As yet they know not
the Art of Printing, but they paint their own Characters exactly well, which
are rather Figures then Letters. The usual Language is peculiar to the Country;
but the Malayan is more general; the Mahumetan Religion has likewise brought
in the Arabian Language.

The Persians, Strongers commer^s there.
by the Iavians called Coracons, traffic here for precious Stones, and all
sorts of Gums and Drugs, and are a people to be confided in, because they are
open-hearted and civil. The Arabians and Beguians come thither for China-ware,
and bring with them the Commodities of the neighboring Islands. The Malayans
and Quilins let their money out at Interest, or upon change. The Guzurattans
are poor, and commonly Seamen: All these Foreigners are attired all of one
fashion, in a Cotton Garment, and a Turbant of the same stuff. At their coming
to Bantam, they buy a Woman that is for all uses; and at their departure
thence, they sell her again; but if they have Children by her, they are tied to
provide for them.

The Chinese are they that bring the greatest trade hither, The trade of China.
the most industrious to get wealth, and live the best. They are a self-ended
people, that live by Usury, and have there the same repute as the Jews in
Europe. They go into the Country, with a weight in hand, to buy all the Pepper
they can meet with, and having weighed one parcel, so as they may have a near
guess at the rest, pay them present money, or according as they have occasion
for it, and by this means engross so great a quantity, that they have
sufficient to lade the China Fleet when it arrives, selling for fifty thousand
Caxaes the Sack, what cost them but twelve thousand. This Fleet arrives at
Bantam in the month of January, to the number of eight or ten, and are Vessels
of forty or fifty Tun.

By them likewise comes the money hither, which in the Malayan Language is
called Cas, Coin of Java.
in Iavan, Pity, and is current, not only at Bantam, and all the Isle of Iava,
but through all the neighboring Islands. It Is a little thin plate made of
Lead, and the Skum of Brass, so brittle, that letting fall a string of Caxaes,
you shall break at least ten or twelve. They are made in the Town of Chincoa in
China, and they are beholding to Wan^y, King of China, for them, who lived
about the year 1590. and finding that the Caxaes made by his Predecessor
Huyien, King of China, went not off, by reason the Chinese had so filled the
adjacent Islands with them, he contrived this brittle money, which his
Successor Hamendon put forth, as now it is corrupted. It has a apiece
hole through it, at which they string them on a Straw; a string of two hundred
Caxaes, called Sata, is worth about three farthings sterling, and five Satas
tied together make a Sapocon. The Iavians, when this money came first amongst
them, were so cheated with the Novelty, that they would give six bags of Pepper
for ten Sapocons, thirteen whereof amount but to a Crown. But they have had
leisure enough to see their error; for in a short time, the Island was so
filled with this stuff, that they were compelled absolutely to prohibit all
trading, which so disparaged this money, that at present two Sacks of Pepper
will scarce come for one hundred thousand Caxaes.

Likewise from China they bring Purcelane, which they sell here at cheap rates;
for at the first arrival of the China Fleet, six pieces of Purcelane may be
bought for a thousand Caxaes. They bring their Country Silks, Sattins and
Damask, and take away Pepper and Lacque, brought to Bantam from the City of
Tabanbaon, Anil or Indico brought thither from the Town of Anier, Sandal-wood,
Nutmegs, Cloves, Tortoise-shell, whereof they make Chests and Cabinets, Ivory,
whereof they make Chairs for the Mandorins, who prefer this stuff before
Silver.

The Portuguez that deal at Bantam live out of Town, The Portuguez Commerce.
in the same Quarter with the Chinese. They drive here a great trade in
Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Sandal-woods, Cubebs, long Pepper, and other
Drugs; and sell here Cotton, Cloth, and other Stuffs, sent them from Malacca:
for the greater part of them are Factors, and Commissioners of the Governor of
Malacca, and the Archbishop of Goa. At Bantam they have neither Priest nor
Chapel; but at Panarucan they have both.

In the Isle of Iava are all sorts of Beasts, both wild and tame: The Forests
are full of Elephants and Rhinocerots, Leopards and Tigers, which are more
cruel and furious then those of any other place, and do so much mischief, that
people go not without danger to gather Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh and
Benjamin, which is there in its greatest perfection, and whereof there were
great quantity to be gotten, if the Forests were not almost inaccessible, by
reason of the wild Beasts, as also for Serpents, Lizards, and Salamanders,
exceeding dangerous, and of so extraordinary a growth, that there are Serpents
have swallowed Children and Sheep entire. The Tigers and Leopards often come
out of the Woods, and make great spoil amongst the Cattle, which for this
reason are reared with great difficulty. Their Swine have no bristles, and are
so fat their bellies trail on the ground.

The Rivers breed Fish in abundance; Oysters of three hundred weight
and Oysters have there been seen that have weighed three hundred pound; a
thing would seem incredible, if Olearius in his Notes upon Mandelslo's Relation
did not observe, that being in Holland in the year 1652. he ^ought at
Encluysen, of the Wife of a certain Sea-Captain, who had made a Voyage to the
Indies, two Oyster-shells, that weighed four hundred sixty seven pounds, yet to
be seen in the Duke of Holstein's Cabinet at Gottorp; and he adds, That the
woman affirmed there was so much meat within them, that it sufficed all that
were in the Ship, being an hundred and twenty persons.

It Is very hard to hunt Deer, Goats, Boars, and other game, fallow or black,
which abound there, by reason the Woods are so thick, that it is impossible to
make any way through them; and the Iavians are so unskilful at their Firearms,
that it has been observed, That a Iavian, having shot at a wild Buffler, made
a shift to kill the beast; but the Musket recoyling, he fell down, with his
cheek all bruised, and the loss of two of his teeth; in so much that these
creatures may be seen in whole herds, feeding up and down the fields. There are
likewise abundance of Apes, Foins, Squirrels, wild Peacocks and Parrots, and
infinite other birds, exceeding beautiful to the eye.

In the Rivers there is abundance of Crocodiles, Crocodiles.
which seize not only on men bathing, but attempt the Cannows, as they pass
along, snatching men out of them, and dragging them to the bottom. The Chinese
tame this Creature, and fatten it, to be afterward eaten as a great dainty.
Civet
Their Civet yields as much perfume as that of Guiny; but it is neither so
white, nor so good.

They have two sorts of Poultry, Hens.
one like ours, the other betwixt ours and the Indian kind; and these last,
which are in a manner monsters, are so furious, they will fight till death
decides the battle. Amongst the common sort there are some whose flesh is
black, yet are they very good meat.

The Rhinocerot, Rhinocerot.
by the Indians called Abadu, is not so ordinary in the Isle of Iava, as in
Bengala, Patane, and other places, though there are some; and the Iavians make
so great account of this Beast, that there is nothing about him which they use
not in medicine, not only the Flesh, the Blood, the Horn, the Teeth, but even
his very Dung: They hold there is no better Antidote against Poison, and
attribute the same qualities to this, that ancient Authors do to the Unicorn.

The Ants are exceeding troublesome in most of these places, Ants.
but chiefly in the Isle of Iava: They are much bigger then in our parts, and
so mischievous, that there is no Stuff they spoil not, nor Victuals they
consume not, if they can get to it; wherefore they ordinarily set the feet of
Tables and Cupboards in Tubs half filled with Water, to hinder the Ants from
creeping up; and 'twere impossible to preserve any Birds, did they not set them
on Pol^s planted in a Dish of Water; for should they put them in a Cage, the
Ants would get up and kill them. There is besides another sort of Ants, about
the length of a Man's finger, and red; but these are only in the Fields, where
they live on the barks of Trees and Herbs.

As concerning the Trees and Fruits in the Isle of Iava, amongst others there
is the Areca, Areca.
whereof we spoke a word by the way in the precedent Book. The Portuguez call
the Tree that bears it Arre quero, the Arabians, Faufell, and Malayans, Pynang.
It is a kind of Cocoe, but not so great, nor the leaves so big and broad. The
Fruit is like a Date; Nature incloses it in a husk, which opens not till it
flower, and when it ripens, the shell falls off, the fruit remaining at the
branch. It has scarce any taste, but it moistens the mouth, dies the lips red,
and the teeth black. The Indians lap it up in a Bettle-leaf, mix a little Chalk
or Lime with it, and chew it rather out of custom then for any pleasure, though
they hold that it strengthens the Stomach and Gums, and is a topical Medicine
against the Scurvy; and in effect there is scarce an Indian that is subject to
this Disease, or troubled with the Toothache. This Drug will make some people
to be drunk, that all things seem to turn round; but that dizziness is
presently over.

The Mangas grow on Trees not much unlike our Nut-trees, Mangas.
but they have not so many leaves. They are of the bigness of a Peach, but
longer, and something bending like a Crescent, of a light green, drawing a
little toward the red. It has a great shell, that encloses an Almond of
greater length then breadth, and eaten raw very distasteful, but roasted on the
Coals not unpleasant. It Is useful in Physic, against the Worms, and the
Diarrhaea. It ripens in October, November, and December, and being perfectly
ripe, it is full as good as a Peach. They get them while they are green, and put
them up in Salt, Vinegar, and Garlic, and then they call them Mangas d' Achar,
and they serve in stead of Olives. There are likewise wild ones, which they
call Mangas brauas, of a pale green too, but brighter then the other, and full
of juice, which is immediate death without a present Antidote.

The Ananas is one of the loveliest, Ananas.
pleasantest and wholsomest fruits of the Indies. It grows on a bush, and has
leaves like Semper-vivum. The fruit at first is green, but being ripe turns
Orange, or Aurora colored, drawing a little to a red, shaped like a
Pineapple; for which reason the Portuguez, who met with this fruit first in
Brasil, called it Pinas: but it is tender and easy to cut. They are yellow
within, of a delicate scent, they are eaten in Wine, but the excess is
dangerous for Fevers. The juice is so sharp, that if one wipe not the Knife
they are cut with, next morning it will be found eaten. The Tree is so apt to
grow, that a sprig will take root in the earth, though it have not past two or
three leaves, be half withered, and have been cut fifteen days before. The
Canarins call this fruit Ananasa; the Brasilians, Nava, and in Hispaniola, and
the other Western Islands, they call it Iajama: it is as big as the larger sort
of Lemmons, or the middle M^lons, excellent both in scent and taste. At
distance they look like Hartichoaks, only they are not so picked as the leaves
of that Plant. The stalk is like that of a Thistle, and every stalk bears but
one, and that at the top of it; for though many times it puts forth at the side
other stems, yet the fruit that comes of them is very small, and seldom comes
to maturity. They have of them in March, and then they are very pleasant, for
the juice has the taste of sweet or new Wine; and is exceeding easy of
digestion, but it heats, and often brings a Fever.

In Iava there is another fruit called Samaca, Samaca.
it is as big as a Citron, the color green, something drawing to a red; full of
juice, that is tart and toothsom, and within has diverse black kernels: the
leaves are like those of Lemmon-trees, but not so long. They put them up in
Salt or Sugar, and use them as Tamarindes, against burning Fevers,
Inflammations of the Breast, and pains in the Stomach, and Fluxes.

Tamarinds grow on great Trees, Tamarind^
full of branches, whereof the leaves are not bigger then, nor unlike to the
leaves of Pimpernel, only something longer. The flower at first is like the
Peaches, but at last turns white, and puts ^orth its fruit at the end of
certain strings: as soon as the Sun is set, the leaves close up the fruit, to
preserve it from the Dew, and open as soon as that Planet appears again. The
fruit at first is green, but ripening it becomes of a dark gray, drawing
toward a red, enclosed in husks, brown or tawny, of taste a little bitter,
like our Prunelloes. Every husk contains three or four little Beans in a
certain skin, which is that the Portuguez call Tamarinho. The fruit is viscous,
and sticks to the fingers, but of so good a taste, that the Indians use it
almost in all Sawces, as we do Verjuyce; but 'twould turn a man's stomach to see
them cook Meat with this Drug; for squeezing it between their hands, the juice
that runs through their fingers looks more like a Medicine then a Sauce. These
Trees bear twice in the year, and grow every where without being planted, or
otherwise looked after. Physicians use this Drug against burning Fevers, heat
of the Liver, and Diseases in the Spleen, and infused a night in cold Water, it
purges gently. The Tamarinds brought to our parts, are either salted or
preserved in Sugar. The Inhabitants of the Isle of Madagascar, where there
grows plenty of it, call it Quille, and the Iavians, Sunda assu. The Portuguez
gave it the name of Tamarinthes, for the resemblance the fruit holds with the
Date in Arabia, called Tamar, as if they would say, Dates of India. The
Malabars call it Puli, and the rest of the Indians, Ampuli. The Tree is as big
as a Walnut-tree, full of leaves, bearing its fruit at the branches, like the
Sheath of a Knife, but not so straight, rather bent like a Bow. The Indians,
when they would transport their Tamarinds, take them out of the husks, and make
them up in Balls as big as a Man's fist, unhandsome to look on, and worse to
handle.

We told you before, Tabaxir.
that it is common to plant Pepper near to a sort of Canes, by the Iavians
called Mambu, in which the Tabaxir is found. It Is true, in the Isle of Iava
there was never any of them found; but again it is certain, that on the Coast of
Malabar, Coromandel, Bisnagar, and near to Malacca, this sort of Cane produces
a Drug called Sacar Mambus, that is, Sugar of Mambu. The Arabians, the
Persians, and the Moors call it Tabaxir, which in their Language signifies a
white frozen liquor. These Canes are as big as the body of a Poplar, having
straight branches, and leaves something longer then the Olive Tree. They are
divided into diverse knots, wherein there is a certain white matter like Starch,
for which the Persians and Arabians give the weight in Silver, for the use they
make of it in Physic, against burning Fevers, and bloody Fluxes, but
especially upon the first approaches of any Disease.

These Canes are so big, Boats of Canes.
that the Indians cleave them to make Boats, leaving a knot at each end,
whereon they sit to guide it; one before, another behind, and use this sort of
Boat the rather, for that they are persuaded, Crocodiles bear a respect to the
Mambu, and never hurt the Boats made of this Cane.

In the Isle of Iava there is another fruit, Duriaons.
called, amongst the Malayans, Duriaon, not to be seen any where but in this
place and the Malaccaes. The Tree that bears them, by the Malayans called
Batan, is as big as our Apple Tree, the bark thick, plentiful of boughs, and
wealthy in fruit: the blossom, which they call Buaa, is white, inclining to
yellow, and the leaves half a foot in length, and two or three fingers broad,
on the outside, of a pale green, drawing toward a gray; but on the in^ide the
green is very delicate and lively; the fruit is as big as a Melon, covered with
a thick rough rind, green, and has ^ibs, as the Melon; within it is divided
into four quarters, which are again divided into two or three little cells,
that contain the fruit, which is as big and white as a Pullets-egg, and of
taste so delicious, that the Bianco Maugiares, which the Portuguez compound of
Rice, Brawns of Capon, Cream, Sugar, and Rose Water, is not more dainty; each
fruit has a Stone as big and rough as that of the Peach: It will not keep; for
when the white begins to turn, it must be thrown away, and must be eaten as
soon as the husk begins to open. Such as are not used to this fruit will not
like it at first, for that it has the smell of a roasted Onyon; but the taste
is so pleasing, that it may be reckoned amongst the prime and most excellent
fruits of the Indies: One thing it is very remarkable for, that there is so
great an antipathy between it and the Bettele, that the least number of Bettele
leaves laid near a Room full of Duriaons, they corrupt and rot immediately.
Accordingly, when a man has eaten too much of this fruit, let him but lay two
or three Bettele leaves upon his breast, and he shall be eased; and the eating
of but one of these leaves after the Duriaons causes speedy digestion; so as
thus one may eat as much as he will, without the least inconvenience.

The Lantor-tree, Lantor.
which is another sort of Cocoe-tree, as we said before, is frequent in the
Isle of Iava. The leaves are five or six foot long, and so smooth, that the
Iavians write upon it with a Bodkin, and use it instead of Paper.

Of all the Indies, no part bears Cubebs but the Isle of Iava: the Iavians call
it Cuciombi, and Cumuc; Cubebs.
the other Indians call it Cuba China, because the Chinese first fetched it
thence to furnish other parts, before the Portuguez or Hollanders had any
Commerce there. This Fruit grows up another Tree, like Pepper, and in bunches
like Grapes. The Iavians knowing it is not any where but with them, esteem it
so, as they will not suffer a Plant to go from amongst them, and sell it not
unboyl'd, for fear it should be planted elsewhere, though there is such plenty
of it, that a Baruth, a weight of fifty six pounds, is worth but six, or, at
the most, seven thousand Caxaes. The use of it is to fortify the Stomach, and
cleanse the Breast; but the Mahumetans take it with a little Areca, and are of
opinion it restores languishing and spent Nature.

The Mangosthan is a Fruit growing by the Highways in Iava, Mangosthan.
upon bushes, like our Sloes, and much of the same taste.

The Herb the Iavians call Talasse, Talasse.
and which the Malayans call Lalade, bears neither Fruit nor Flower; but it is
used in Sauces, and some eat it green, and assign it the same virtues as they
do the Cubebs.

In Iava they have another Fruit, Jaca.
which grows likewise in other places, called Iaca, in form and bigness like a
Citrul, with a thick and rough rind: Within it is full of certrin Nuts, the
Kernels whereof, being toasted on coals, are good to eat, and stay the Flux of
the belly. The Tree is very great; but the boughs being not strong enough to
bear the Fruit, it hangs all along the body of it, up from the very ground:
Being full ripe, the rind grows hard and black, and emits a very sweet scent;
the Fruit it self often changes taste, yielding one while that of the Melon,
another that of the Peach, sometimes that of Honey, sometimes that of a sweet
Lemmon; but is so hard of digestion, that it is never eaten, but vomited up
again: The Nut of it is as big as a Date, and causes windiness in those that
eat them green; but roasted after the manner we told you, they are very
pleasant, and good for such as have a kindness for Women.

In the same Island, Wild Cinnamon.
toward the Straight of Sunda, there grows also abundance of wild Cinnamon,
which the Portuguez call Cantla de Mato, and the Malayans, Cajumanis. It is not
near so good as the fine Cinnamon, whence it comes that there is but little of
it bought, it being hardly worth the transportation.

The Carcapuli is a Fruit about the bigness of a Cherry, Carcapuli.
and much of the same taste, and the Trees which bear it are like our
Cherry-trees. Of these there are several kinds, whereof some are white, some of
a dark red, and some of a lively carnation color.

The Costus Indicus, Costus Indicus.
by the Malayans called Pucho; by the Arabians, Cost or Cast, is the wood and
root of a Tree that resembles the Elder-tree, as well in height as in flower
and scent: The Turks, Persians, and Arabians, make an extraordinary Traffic of
it, as they likewise do of Calamus Aromaticus, which also grows on the Coast of
the Straight of Sunda. That yellow and spungy matter, which Women use against
pains in the Matrix, is properly in the Stalk of it. The Iavians give it to
their Horses, compounding it with Garlic, Cummin-seed, Salt, Sugar, and
Butter; making it into a Paste, which they call Arata; and they hold it very
sovereign for these beasts, to whom notwithstanding they never give it, till
the extremity of the heats be over.

The Zerumbet, Zerumbet*
which the Iavians and Malayans call Canior, likewise grows in these parts, and
is like to Ginger, only the Leaves something more long and broad. They use to
dry it, or preserve in Sugar, as they do Ginger, but esteem it above Ginger.

There are two kinds of Galanga, Galanga*
by the Arabians called Caluegian. The lesser comes from China, and is much
better then that which is brought out of the Isle of Iava, where they call it
Lanquus. This Herb is neither sowed nor set, but grows naturally, and is about
two foot high above the ground, the flower is white, and the leaves pointed,
and as hard as the point of a Knife. The Iavians use it for a Sallad, as also
in Physic; as they do the root, which is thick and long, and full of knots
like a Cane, as biting in taste as Ginger, and of a very sweet scent.

Benjamin is a Gum distilling from Trees not unlike Lemmon-trees. Benjamin*
While they are young the Benjamin is black, which is the best; but as they
grow old the Benjamin grows white, and loses strength, so as to put it off,
they mingle it with black: The Moors call it Lovan Iavy, that is, Incense of
Iava.

In the Forest of Iava there grow Trees of red Sandale* Sandale*
but the white and yellow Sandale, which is without comparison the better,
comes from the Isles of Timor and Solor. This Tree is of the bigness of a
Walnut-tree, and bears a fruit not unlike our Cherries, but is black and
insipid. The Indians beat white and yellow Sandale, and make a Concoction
wherewith they rub their Bodies, not only for the scent, but for that they
believe it is restroative. They value not red Sandale, but sell it at cheap
rates to other parts.

They have likewise abundance of Ginger, Ginger.
by the Malayans called Aliaa, and by the Iavians, Ga^ti; but they either eat
it green in Sauces, or preserve it, for they never dry it.

Anacardium, Anacardium.
by the Portuguez called Fava de Malacca, by reason of its likeness to ^ Bean,
is very common here, and the Iavians take it in Milk against the Asthma, and
against the Worms: some pickle them as they do Olives, and they are altogether
as pleasant as the Olives.

That Wood, Palo de cuebro.
the Portuguez call Pala de cuebra, grows there in great abundance. It is
white, inclining to yellow, hard and bitter. The Indians bruise it, and take it
in Wine or Water against burning Fevers, and the stinging of Serpents. It Is
said, that for this cure they are beholding to a Creature in size and shape
like our Ferrets, by them called Quil or Quirpela, which they breed for
recreation, and to catch Rats and Mice: this little Beast being a mortal enemy
to Serpents, never meets with any of them, but it sets upon them, and being
bitten runs immediately to this root, which is his present cure.

Palo d' Aguila, Calamba.
by Druggists called Lignum Aloes; by the Portuguez, Palo d' Aguila; and by the
Indians, Calamba, grows in Iava, but not in such quantity as in Malacca,
Sumatra, Cambaya, and other places. The Tree is like the Olive Tree, only a
little bigger. The Wood, while green, has no scent, but as it dries its odor
increases. The weightiest and brownest is the best; the perfection is known by
the Oil that issues out of it when it is held to the fire. They make Beads of
it, and the Indians use it to imbellish their Cabinets, but the chiefest use of
it is for Physic. For this Wood beaten to powder, and taken in broth or wine,
fortifies the Stomach, stays vomiting, and cures the Pleurisy and bloody
Flux. That the Portuguez call Aguila brava, or wild Calamba, is not so good as
the other, and the Indians chiefly use it at the Funerals of their Bramans,
making the fire of it that burns the Corpse.

At Bantam likewise they sell store of Lacque, Lacque.
whereof they make Spanish wax, and the Varnish they lay over so many excellent
works in China, Iapan, and other places. Iava produces of it; but the best
comes from Pegu, where it is called Tieck, and where great and winged Ants get
up the trees and suck the Gum, which afterward they lay upon the boughs as
Bees do Honey and Wax: when the boughs are full, the owners cut them, setting
them to dry in the Sun, till the Lacque falls from the boughs, then they beat
it to powder, and give it what color and form they please.

The other Drugs gotten in Iava, Other Drugs in Java.
are, Pody, a mealy kind of substance, which they use against Rhume and Wind;
Carumba or Flors, a Root whereof they make Sauces, and wherewith they dye their
Cotton-clothes. Conjuapi is a Wood wherewith they rub their bodies. Samparentam
is a Root found near Sunda, stronger then Ginger, and very bitter. Pontiou they
hold good against Fevers, but it is exceeding dear. Gatogamber is a Fruit like
an Olive, good against the toothache. Ganti a Root so like Ginger, that the
Iavians have given it the same name; but it is dearer; and with it they rub
their bodies. Sasam is Mustard Seed. Doringi is a Drug they give Children as
soon as they come into the world. Galam, a Root growing in the water, and is
very refreshing. Tianco, a Fruit they beat and take in water as soon as they
find themselves ill. Maidian, Maya and Corossani, are intoxicating Drugs they
mix in their drinks. Spodium is the ashes of a Tree growing near Sunda,
wherewith they rub their bodies, as they do with Sary, which is a Flower. The
Targary, Surahan and Sedowaya, are Roots for the same use. Sambaya is the Fruit
the Chinese call Geiduar, as big as an Acorn; of high price, by reason it is
not ordinary, and is a sovereign Remedy against Poison, and the biting of
Venomous beasts. Ialave is like Sambaya, and of the same use in Medicine.
Paravas is a very cooling Herb, but very scarce, and very dear. Tomonpute is a
Root like Galigan, used against Inflammations of the Spleen. The Conduri, which
the Iavans call Saga, are red Berries, spotted with black, wherewith they weigh
Gold and Silver, but are not to be eaten, they are so bitter, and, as some say,
poisonous. There is likewise Azebar, the Sycomore, the Nux Indica, and diverse
other Trees, Plants and Drugs, to Europeans some known, some unknown, but
'twould require a peculiar Treatise to name them all, and would fill a large
Volumn to describe their good and bad qualities.

The Iavians making their benefit of the Portuguez ingratitude to the Indian
Princes, who entertained them, do constantly oppose the establishment of any
Strangers in the Isle: But the profit ^he Kings of Bantam and Iacatra received,
by venting their Spices to the English and Duch was so considerable, that at
last they consented, that the people of those two Nations should build a House
for such Factors as they should have occasion to leave there, and for stowing
up the Commodities they traffick'd in. The Dutch, by treaty with those Kings,
regulated the Customs of Importation and Exportation; but those Articles were
so ill kept by the Indian Kings, who raised their rates according as they
discovered the Strangers necessity of Commerce, that the Dutch, to avoid this
injustice, and secure themselves from the violences of the Barbarians, The
Dutch fortify in Jacatra.
by degrees secretly fortified their Quarters at Iacatra, and in a short time
made it defensible. The Indians perceived it not, till 'twas past their hopes
of forcing it; so as in this despair of driving out the Dutch, they made use of
the bad correspondence betwixt the English and them, which chiefly appeared in
a Sea Fight they had near Bantam and Iacatra, January 2. 1619. The Holland
Fleet, which consisted but of seven Vessels, had the worst of the English, that
were eleven. The Dutch being forced to retreat, the King of Iacatra, with the
English Forces, besieged the Dutch Fort, now called Batavia; which Siege lasted
six months, till the Holland General, having reinforced his Fleet with the
Ships that lay in the Mol^cques, constrained the English to raise the Siege, to
embark their Guns, and quit the Straight of Sunda, to get into the main Sea.
The King of Iacatra would have cast the blame of all these disturbances upon
the English; but the Dutch General would not be satisfied with such excuses,
but landing his Forces, to the number of eleven hundren men, he assaulted the
Town of Iacatra, which he took by force, and, having put all to the sword,
fired it. That done, the Dutch completed the fortification of their Quarters,
and brought it to a regular form, with four Bastions of Freestone, well
trench'd and pallisado'd, with Half-moons, Redoubts, and other necessary Works.
The King of Matram, who is as 'twere Emperor of Iava, in the year 1628.
besieged this Fort, and, lying under the Cannon, stormed it several times; but
in the end was forced to raise the Siege, as hein like manner was the year
following; and since that time the Dutch have established their Commerce
jointly with the Chinese, the Iaponeses, Siameses, Succadans, and other
Neighbors, taking ten in the hundred Custom upon all Commodities, whether
brought thither, or carried thence.

The City of Batavia is twelve Leagues from Bantam Eastward, Batavia.
in a Bay, which being sheltred with some small Islands on the Sea side, is one
of the best Roads in all the Indies. Strangers that inhabit there pay a certain
tax by the month, according to the profit they make, which is great: for a
Porter, who will with ease get two Ryals a day, pays but one and a half in a
month; a Fruiterer four Ryals; a Fisherman three Ryals; Distillers of Arack
eight Ryals; Mechanics, as Shoomakers, Tailors, etc. two Ryals so as at
present the most important place and firm est establishment the Dutch have
throughout the Indies.

Between the Isles of Iava and Borneo, Madura* place of no trading.
North-east from the former, lies the Isle of Madura, governed by a particular
Prince, that resides in the City of Arossabaya. In this Isle there is no
Commerce at all, as well because the soil is barren of all Spices, as for that
it is inaccessible, by reason of the Shelves of Sand that on all sides environ
it. The Islanders, for the most part, live by Pyracy, and run up to the very
Coasts of Pegu, which their Neighbors are forced to connive at, least they
should hinder the exportation of Rice, which is there in great abundance. The
Hollanders, who had been hardly used by the Iavians, near Tubam and Cidayo,
Towns three Leagues from Ioartam in the Isle of Iava, coming in sight of the
Isle of Madura, in the beginning of December, 1596. and apprehending some
danger to be taken by certain Praus, or Ships equipped for War, where the
Prince and Cherif, or High Priest of the Island, were in person; to prevent the
Iavians, whose intent was to surprise them, fired some Guns at the great Pran,
where the King, and Cherif, with diverse others, lost their lives; for that Ship
being three Tires high, and filled with Soldiers, there was not a Gun fired
which destroyed not a great number; so as the Hollanders, who in the mean time
got into their Shallops, with little difficulty became Masters of them. This
done, they made no stay there, but failed from thence to the Isle of Baly,
where they arrived January 30. 1597.

The Isle of Baly lies toward the Oriental part of the Isle of Iava, Baly.
being in circuit about twelve Leagues, toward the South, putting out a Cape
or Promon^ory a long way into the Sea. Its s^ituation.
The North point of it is eight degrees and a half beyond the Line, and the
chief City, where the King has a magnificent Palace, derives its name to the
Island.

The Islanders are Pagans, (...).
and adore the first thing they meet with at their going out in the morning;
they are black, and their Hair curling: In habit they differ nothing from their
neighbour-Islanders, with whom they likewise correspond, in wearing no Beards;
for when the Hair first begins to come, they pluck it up by the roots. Their
Women, who have an aversion to Beards, oblige them to do so, as also to squat
down when they make water, because Dogs, held with them unclean beasts, piss
standing. There is not a Man but has several Wives, whence the Island grows so
populous, that they reckon upon six hundred thousand Souls there, though they
give way for abundance of Slaves to be bought from them. The greatest part are
Husbandmen or Weavers; by reason the Land produces great store of Cotton,
Abounds in Rice.
and is very proper for Rice; but they permit not any to be transported, lest
some hard year should bring them to a necessity of being beholding to their
Neighbors. They have store of Oxen, Buffles, Goats and Swine; likewise Horses,
but they are so small, that none but the Country people use them; Persons of
Quality being carried in Sedans or Coaches. Their Forests of Oranges, Lemmons
and Pomecitrons, Fowl.
are stored with Feasants, Partridges, Peacocks and Turtles; their back-Yards
swarm with Poultry, and their Fens and Rivers with Ducks and other wild Fowl.

In the whole Island there is no other Spice then Ginger, Drugs.
which generally grows in all parts of the Indies, but here are found several
other Drugs, as Galigan, Doringui, Canior, Bangue, etc. as likewise a certain
Fruit, enclosed in a Shell, like a Chestnut, white within, of excellent taste,
and sovereign against the Scurvy; also another Fruit as big as a Walnut, that
grows in the ground, like the Saligots.

The Coasts of the Island, Fish.
and the Rivers, so abound in Fish, that, next to Rice, it is the subsistence of
the Inhabitants. They entertain in a manner no Commerce, only they set forth
some small Barks to the Isle of Iava, for vending their Cotton-clothes. The
Chinese sometimes come hither to fetch it, and in exchange bring them
Sword-blades and Purcelane. This is a common Road for all Ships bound from the
Continent to the Molucques, which here take in water and refreshments,
provisions being at exceeding cheap rates. Gold Mines.
Iron and Brass Mines there are, as likewise Gold, but the King will not suffer
them to be wrought, for fear of attempting his Neighbors to an Invasion; he is
well furnished with store of Gold-plate for his own service. Subjects render
him the same respect, and speak to him with the same Ceremony, as the other
Indians do to their King. He seldom appears in public, but all Addresses are
made to a Noble man, in whom the direction of Affairs lies. He is entitled
Quillor, which is the same as Constable, or Grand-Minister, in other places. He
governs by diverse other Persons of Quality, who have their Divisions and
Provinces to regulate, according to Orders from him. The Kings name is in such
veneration amongst them, that all the Subjects unanimously join in a moment to
oppose any disturbance to the peace of the State.

As appeared in the end of the last preceding Age, Pulo raza.
in the person, a Prince of the blood, who rising against the King, and having
some design upon the life of his Prince, was immediately taken and condemned to
death: but the King in compassion changed his Sentence, to perpetual exile in
Pulo raza, that is, the desert Island, where he stood confined with all his
Accomplices, who so well did cultivate it, that diverse other families have been
since transplanted thither. They retain the Pagan Religion they profess in the
Isle of Baly, and quit not that accursed custom, for Women to burn themselves
after the death of their Husbands.

The Isle of Borneo lies more North then Iava, The Isle of Borneo.
and is one of the greatest in those parts: it is situate under the Equinoctial
Line, but so, as the greater part is on this side of it, extending to six
degrees toward the North. Some do assign it four hundred Leagues in
circumference, as Bartholomew Leonardo de Argensola, who wrote the History of
the Conquest of the Molucques, and others; but the Hollanders allow it but two
hundred and fifty Leagues. The principal Towns are Borneo, S^ccidava, Landa,
Sambas, and Benghemassin.

The City of Borneo, Borneo the Town.
from which the Island derives its name, stands in a Marsh, as Venice does; so
as there is no passing from Street to Street but by boat. The same Argensola
says, it contains 23000. Houses, but the Dutch allow it but two thousand. The
best Camphire in the Indies is gotten in the Isle of Borneo: Bazar.
Here is also Gold and Bezoar. This Stone breeds in the Maw of a Sheep or Goat,
about a knot of Grass that stays in the Maw, and is often found within the
Stone. The Persians call these Beasts Bazans, and the Stone Bazar, which is, a
Market, as by excellence proper for a Market or Fair: and from the same word
comes the Bazarucques, the least Money that is sent to the Market. The Stone is
smooth and greenish, and the more substantial and weighty it is, the better it
is, and of the greater virtue. In the Country of Pan, near Malacca, they find a
Stone in the Gall of a certain Swine, more highly esteemed then the Bazar. It
is of a reddish color, as smooth and slippery in the feeling as Soap, and
exceeding bitter; so that when it is to be used, they only steep it in cold
water, and the water is a most sovereign Antidote against all poison, and an
effectual cordial against all infectious Diseases. Here they have likewise
Diamonds, Sapan-wood for dying, as also Brasile, Wax, and good store of Pepper,
Frankincense, Mastick, and all other sorts of Gums.

The Island has diverse Havens and Roads, The Haven
but its Cities are not very populous. Borneo is better then the rest, and the
Haven upon the mouth of a fair River, is large and very commodious. The
Spaniards were once Masters of the Haven, but they quitted it, because the Air
was so unhealthful they could not subsist. Their Houses are of Timber, but so
slightly built, that they ordinarily pull them down to change their
habitations, or pass over to the other side of the River. They are an ingenious
and dexterous people, but addicted to theft, and great affecters of Pyracy, so
as sometimes they will cruze up and down the Sea as far as the Coasts of Pegu,
which is four hundred Leagues from that Island. They use all sorts of Arms, as
Swords, and Gosos, which are Bucklers made of boiled Leather, Lances, Darts,
and a sort of Pikes they call Selihes, the wood whereof is extremely hard, but
withal so small and brittle, that if it break in a Wound, it leaves Splinters,
that render the part incurable. The King is a Mahumetan, as also the greatest
part of the Islanders on the Sea coast; but they that live in the heart of the
Island are Pagans. Their hue is rather black then tawny; they are of compact
well proportioned bodies, and go habited near like the rest of the Indians,
with a Linen about their loins, and on their heads a little Turbant.

On the first of October, The Hollanders treat with the King of Sambas.
in the year 1609. the Hollanders treated with the King of Sambas, for
establishing a Commerce of Diamonds, which are to be found in the Mountains far
within the Country; and since have made one for Pepper, with the King of
Borneo, with exclusion of all other Foreigners; but the Borneans are no more
faithful in the observance thereof then the other Indians.

Betwixt the Isle of Borneo and Molocques, Celebes Isl^.
under the Equinoctial Line, lies the Isle of Celebes; and if credit may be
given to Mercator, this is one of the three Islands Ptolomy calls Sindas. The
chief City here is called Macassar, and lies in the most Southerly part of the
Island, five degrees, seventeen minutes, beyond the Line. It abounds in all
sorts of Provisions, particularly Rice, wherewith in the months of March,
April and May, the Territory is so entirely covered, that it is not to be
imagined there is an inch untilled: and in effect, besides what they convert to
pasture for their Cattle, and what they assign for their Cocoes, there is not
the least parcel lies unsowed. In the face they are like the people of Pegu and
Siam, and 'twas but in the beginning of the present Age they deserted
Paganism, and embraced the Mah^umetan Religion. It Is said, that in the time of
Paganism they were Anthropophagi, and that the Kings of the Molucques sent
their Malefactors to them to be devoured. But it may be averred for truth, that
at this day the Indies have not a people so tractable as they: yet they are
courageous and irreconcilable where they once declare enmity. Their chief
Arms is Bow and Arrow, whereof they impoyson the head to render the Wound
mortal. The Men are of a comely make, carrying in their Prepuce a Ball or two
of Ivory, or a Fish-bone, massy, and not hollow, like the Siameses and
Peguans: but this custom by degrees wears out, as that amongst the Women, to
cut their Hair off; for at present they let it grow, and coif themselves as the
Malayans do. Women, when they walk the Streets, and Slaves, have their Breasts
open, and wear Breeches that reach from the Navil to the Knee; but when they
bathe in their Cisterns or Wells in the Street, they are stark naked. The
Houses of Macassar are built upon Piles, and raised nine or ten foot above the
ground, by reason of the Rains which fall with the West and North-west Winds
from November till March, during which season the Road is exceeding dangerous,
and almost useless, because it is impossible Vessels should get near the Shore,
to lade their Rice.

Upon the same Island there is a King of Tello, and another of Battergoa, who
are the most powerful next to that of Macasser. The Dutch Relations tell
wonders of the prudence of the former, and attest they met there with Barks and
Frigots so artificially built, their most experienced Carpenters acknowledged,
that they could not possibly have improved their Art to that perfection. He had
settled Granaries throughout his Dominions, to store up Rice, which was not to
be stirred till a new recruit had furnished him with sufficient to replenish it;
and did all he could to engross the Commerce to himself; for which purpose he
had his Factors at Banda, to vend his Cotton-clothes, and lade, in exchange,
Mace and other Spices.

The Isle of Gilolo, called by the Portuguez, Bato China de M^ro; by the
Molucquez, Alemaera, is much larger then Celebes: it yields good store of Rice,
of Sagu, whereof we shall have occasion to speak presently, in the description
of the Molucques, wild Hens, and Tortoises of extraordinary size. The Natives
are well proportioned, but savage, and not long since Anthropophagi, as the
Celeb^ans were.

Amboyna is an Island ^o near adjoining to the Molucques, that some have
reckoned it in the number of them, Amboyna.
as well for the situation, as for the production of Cloves, which are said to
be kindly no where but in the Molucques. It Is situate four degrees beyond the
Line, two Leagues from the Isle of Ceiram, and is in circuit about twenty four.
On the West Side of the Capital Town there is a Bay of six Leagues, composing a
good Road, where Ships are well sheltered from all Winds. By reason of this Bay
the Sea wants not much of cutting through the Island; for on the other side the
Sea advances so far within the Land, that it leaves but a small Isthmus of
about sixscore fathom over. The Island being thus, as 'twere, divided into two
parts, the lesser, wherein is the Castle of Amboyna, contains twenty small
Towns, or rather so many Villages, which can send forth about two thousand men,
able to bear Arms. The greater part has four Towns, which have each seven
Villages substitute, The inhabitants.
and can arm about fifteen hundred men. The Natives were heretofore brutish,
and, like their Neighbors, Anthropophagi, or Canibals, in so much that they
would devour their Parents, when age made them decrepit, or when they were
visited with any desperate Disease. The Land it self lay wild, and overgrown
with Forests; but at present it is exceeding fertile, and, besides Cloves,
bears all other sorts of Fruits, as Lemmons, Oranges, Cocoes, Bonanas,
Sugarcanes, etc. Oranges particularly are so plentiful, that one may buy
fourscore for a Button. The Inhabitants are a sort of simple people, habited
like the Bandayans, living meanly enough on what they get by the
Clove-husbandry. They use no other Arms then the Dart, (which they cast so
dexterously, that they will not miss the breadth of a Crown piece threescore
paces distant) the Cimeter, and Buckler. They make a sort of Cakes of Rice,
Almonds and Sugar, which they sell to their Neighbors of the adjacent Islands,
where they take them against Fluxes. They make likewise Rice-bread, in the form
of Sugar-loaves. Their Galleys, which they call Caracoras, are well built; and
they know how to manage them with such address, that ours come not near them
for swiftness.

The Island was first discovered by the Portuguez, The discovery.
in the year 1515. under the conduct of Antonio Abreo, who there erected a
Column, as well to record the possession he took of it for the King of
Portugal, as to serve for a Trophy of his Adventures, in advancing farther into
the Indies then any of his Predecessors had done. These Portuguez, observing
the Hollanders obstructed the advantageous Commerce they carried on here, in
the year 1601. set forth a Fleet of thirty Ships, with a resolution not only to
destroy the Hollanders Tra^fick, but withal, so to chastize the Inhabitants of
Amboyna, who bore more affection to the Hollanders then to them, that they
should change their opinion. D. Andres Furtado de Mendoza, Admiral of this
Fleet, having intelligence of five Holland Vessels that were in the Port of
Banda, resolved to fight them, but was worsted, and forced to retreat into the
Port of Isou, the chief City of Amboyna.

The Hollanders, though victorious, were not in condition to pursue their good
fortune, and much less to hinder the Portuguez from discharging their revenge
upon the Inhabitants, who were most rigorously used by these enraged people;
nay, such was their spite, that they pulled up their Clove-trees, The
Hollanders take Amboyna Castle.
merely that the Hollanders might not make their profit of them. Hereupon
Stephen Verhagen, the Holland Admiral, arriving February 21. 1603. in the Road
of Amboyna, landed a party of Soldiers; with design to storm the Castle. The
Portuguez Governor, perceiving his intention, sent forth two of the Garrison
Officers, to demand of him, how he durst approach a place committed to his
charge by the High and mighty King of Spain; to whom the Holland Admiral made
answer, He was come in the Name of the States of the United Provinces, and the
Prince of Orange, with Order to take in the Castle, and expel the Enemy; so as
he was to come to present Articles, or sustain the Assault he should make as
soon as his Artillery came on shore. This Bravado so daunted the Portuguez,
that he rendered the place without so much as a Cannon shot. There marched out
six hundred Portuguez with their Arms. Such as were married, taking the Oath of
Fidelity, were permitted to stay in Town.

The Inhabitants of all those Islands, Religion.
Iav^, Amboyna, and the Mol^cquez, were all Pagans, till their Commerce with
the Persians and Arabians brought in Mahumetism, which, notwithstanding, has
not so extirpated their former Religion, but such as embrace Circumcision
continue their Pagan Superstitious: Some make open profession thereof, and adore
the Devil, there being neither Town nor Village that has not one peculiar
thereto. Not that they understand in any sort what the Devil is, or that they
have any knowledge of what the Scripture says of him; but they affirm, That
what they adore comes out of the Air, whence some of them call one of their
principal Demons Lanithe, that is, Air, who notwithstanding depends on another
greater then he, called Lanthila, nay, is not so considerable as their Taulay,
who in power is next to Lanthila. The general name for them is Nito, which
signifies evil Spirits, or Tuan, that is, Lord or Master.

They say their Nito appears often to them in the shape of an ordinary person,
Consult with the Devil.
which the Spirit takes on him for this purpose, and by which he pronounces his
Oracles, that his intentions may be known. To have conference with him, they
assemble, to the number of twenty or thirty, and call upon him with the beat of
a little Drum, consecrated expressly to this use, called by them a Tyfa,
lighting mean while diverse Wax-candles, and pronouncing certain words of
conjuration, which they think very effectual. Before they propound their
Affairs, either private, or public, to him, they present him both meat and
drink, and after he that personates the Demon has done eating, the
Congregation make an end of the remainder.

They take in hand no business, Superstitions.
be it never so mean, nay, not so much as piercing of a Tree to draw Terry,
till they have done their devotions to the Devil, and engrav^d certain
characters upon it, which in their opinion will preserve the Tree, and bless
their labor. In their houses they have one place where they light a wax
Candle, and where they wait on the Devil with meat and drink, who not coming,
as it often happens, they eat that themselves which they had consecrated to
him; but leaving some part of it, that, if he should come, he might find
something to stay his stomach. There is not a Master of a Family that is not
provided of a Vesture extraordinary, and a Ring, which he carefully preserv^s,
and which is constantly kept in the house, for a p^rpetual testimony of his
alliance made with the Devil. They are prepossessed with this opinion, that
there comes no ill but from the Devil, for which reason they adore him, to
avert mischiefs, or appease him, when they fall upon them.

They have their Circumcision, Circumcision.
but much different from that of the Jews and Mahumetans; for they circumcise
not Children till twelve or thirteen years of age, and in stead of cutting off
the Prepuce, as the Jews do, they only slit it with a little Cane made expressly
for this purpose.

At their Marriages they use no Ceremonies; Marriage.
for the parties being agreed, the Bridegrooms Father carries a present of some
toys to the Bride, and the Brides Father makes a Feast, at which they have
their (...) of Tabours and Logologo, or Dances in the honor of Nito, and so
consummate the Marriage, which they break with the same facility they
contracted it. For the Wives leave their Husbands upon the least discontent
happens between them, and provided they are able to restore the Present given
them by their Father in Law, pouring water on their Husbands feet, to show that
they cleanse themselves from all the impurity they may have contract^d
together, they take their leave, and the next day may join again in marriage
with some other, if they are so agreed.

Their Oaths for decision of differences, Oaths.
or other matters of importance, they make in the manner following. They put
Water into a Dish, into which they cast in Gold, Earth, and a Bullet of Lead,
then dip in it the end of a Musket barrel, the point of a Hal^ert, Sword,
Knife, or some other Weapon; and they give of the Water to him who is to swear;
the design of all these Ceremonies being to raise in him a fear, that all that
is cast or dipped into the Water will conspire his ruin, if he make a false Oath.

There are amongst them certain people they call zwangi, Sorcerers*
whom they take for Sorcerers; though for the most part they busy themselves
in doing mischief rather by poison then enchantments; but if they can prove the
least against them, so as there be but grounds for presumption only, they are
undone; and commonly the whole Family suffers with them. The horror they have
of these people, is one cause they watch dead bodies, with Sword and Buckler,
for fear the Zwangi should come and eat them.

The Amboynians are naturally timorous, Their qualities.
gross and stupid, unfaithful, and so diffident, that they will not trust a man
six pence without a good pawn. They bury their Goods and Money for fear of
Rapine, for being themselves naturally inclined to theft, they think others
would do to them as they would do to others.

They are not to be taught any thing, I^dotible.
nor have they any Trades, in so much that the Stuffs made by them are like
Sacks, open at both ends, wherewith the Women cloth themselves. They can
neither write nor read, nor have Characters amongst them, so as they have no
intelligence of former Ages, nor any light of Religion. Their business is
fishing, or their Gardens, where they get some Fruits, to live on, but so
slenderly, that it is a miracle they can subsist with so little; nevertheless,
for the greatest part, they are of good proportion, and comely personage.

From the account we have given you of their Marriages, the small affection
betwixt Man and Wife may easily be guessed at; as indeed there is little or
none at all, yet they love their Children most exc^ssively, but so imprudently,
that there is not a Father takes care to correct them; and to this reason we
may attribute the disorders that often happen, the Children out-raging Nature
in the persons of those that brought them into the world.

The little knowledge they have of Religion causes a most remarkable humor of
profanation amongst them, Profaneness
and so great a contempt of sacred things, that they would deride their Nito,
were they not restrained by a sottish fear of some mischief he would do them.
The Portuguez transported thither heretofore some families of free persons,
called Maldecas, whom they had taken near Malacca, and who serving the
Portuguez had gotten their language, and in some measure their Religion; but
these Families are lost by degrees, and the little instruction had been given
them wearing out with time by conversing with Pagans; one may say, that except
some Proselytes made by the Hollanders, who for the greatest part are Chinese,
there is not a Christian in the Island.

The Hollanders have three Forts in the Isle of Amboyna, The Hollanders possess
it entirely.
the Fort Cambella, otherwise called Victoria, (the Bastions whereof are built
of stone) those of Hiten and Louw. The first has in it sixty Pieces of Cannon,
and a Garrison of six hundred men; so as that without question, this, next
Battavia, is the best establishment they have in the Indies.

Banda lies twenty four Leagues from Amboyna, Banda.
and is about three Leagues in length, and one in breadth, reaching from North
to South in form of a Horse-shooe. It contains some small Towns, whereof the
chief is Nera, but Orsattan and Labbettacca are inconsiderable. The Inhabitants
are all Mahumetans, and so zealous in their Religion, and so devout, they will
not meddle in any business till they have said their Prayers. They enter not
into their Mesquites till they have washed their feet; and being there, they
pray with such vehemence, that they may be heard two hundred paces thence.
Those Prayers ended, they rub their faces with both hands, lay a Matt on the
ground and stand upon it, lift their eyes twice or thrice to Heaven, fall on
their knees, and bow their head two or three times to the ground, pronouncing
certain Prayers with a low voice, only moving the lips. In their Mesquites they
have many meetings, where they eat together of what is brought thither by every
one. They have likewise some such Assemblies upon a Mountain, which is in a
Wood in the middle of the Island, where the Inhabitants of Puldrim, Puloway,
and Lantor, their Allies, meet them to consider of public matters. After they
have treated of public Affairs, they sit down on the ground, and they serve to
every one upon a Banana leaf, which serves them instead of a Trencher, a Morsel
of Sagu, which is their Bread, and a little Rice steeped in broth, which they
eat by handfuls. During the Feast, the Gentlemen, to entertain the Guests, have
a kind of Skirmish. They are almost in continual war with their Neighbors, and
keep constant Guards upon the Coast, as well to surprise others, as to prevent
their being surprised themselves. Their Arms are the Cimetar, Arms.
with them called a Phahang, and a Buckler of wood above four foot long. They
handle their Weapons with much address, being trained to it from their infancy.
They have likewise Firearms, but in war they chiefly use a sort of Lance, of
eight or ten foot long, made of an exceeding hard wood, which they cast with
such force, that they will run a Man quite through with it. Having cast their
Lances, for commonly they carry two, they fall to their Sword, which hangs at
their left side under their Buckler, or to another sort of Weapon, which they
dart and pull back with a string, whereto they tie a short Truncheon, having at
the end a crooked iron that is exceeding sharp and dangerous. Some use
Corslets, but these are Persons of Quality; others contenting themselves with
Casks of Steel, and made like Cocks-combs. Their Galleys are very light, having
on both sides, in a manner even with the water, two Scaffolds like wings, where
the Slaves are set to row. They are three to every seat, and every one has an
Oar, which is properly but a deep wooden Shovel, which they thrust as far as
they can into the Sea, and when they draw it back, they bring it about their
heads to cast out the water; which they do so fast, and with such slight, that
a Ship must be a good Sailor, that shall with a good wind take one of these
Galleys.

In the Isle of Banda it is no rarity to meet with people of sixscore years of
age, They live long.
and above. They believe, that who fails to pray for the dead shall have no
resurrection, whereas otherwise, with the Mahumetans, they believe the
resurrection of the dead. Women that are present at the death of a friend, cry
out with all violence, as if by this means they would fetch the Soul back
again, but seeing it comes not, they interr the Corpse, which is born by ten or
twelve persons on their Shoulders, in a Biere or Coffin covered with white
Linen, the Men going before, the Women behind. The Corpse being laid in the
ground, they return to the house of the deceased, where they dine together;
then they burn Incense over the Grave for four and twenty hours, and at night
set a burning Lamp over it, in a Hut made for that purpose.

The Men mind nothing but their recreation, and walking up and down, and leave
all the work to be done by their Wives, whose chiefest business is to break the
Nutmeg shell, and dry the Nut and Mace, wherein consists their greatest
revenue. This excellent fruit, for ought I could ever learn, grows only in the
Isle of Banda, which the Inhabitants call Bandan, or rather in the six Isles
it is composed of, that is Gunaxi, Nera, and Lantor, (betwixt which lies the
Road for the Vessels that are bound thither) Puloway, Pulorim, and Bassingin.

It is a thing to be admired, that these six little Islands should furnish the
whole World with Nutmegs, if it were not certain, that except a few Duriaons,
Nancan, Bananas, Oranges and Cocoes that grow there, they produce not any thing
else; and the Islands are so covered with Nutmeg-trees, that excluding only the
fiery Mountain in the Isle of Gunapi, there is not a foot of Land but is
employed, and the Trees at all times laden with fruit and flowers green or
ripe. They chiefly gather them thrice a year; that is, in April, August and
December, but that which ripens in April is the best. The Tree is not unlike a
Peach-tree, Nutmegs.
only the leaves are more short and round. The Fruit is covered with a husk, as
thick as that of our Wallnuts, which being opened, there appears a very thin
leaf upon a hard shell; yet does it not so cover it, but that the shell is to
be seen in several places, and this is that they call the Nutmeg flower or
Mace, and the shell must be broken to come at the fruit. The flower is of a
lively carnation, while the Nut is green; but afterward it changes, and draws
toward an Orange color, especially when it parts from the shell. The
Inhabitants preserve it in the shell, with Salt or Sugar, and make a very
excellent Preserve. The Natives call the Nutmeg Palla, and Mace Bunapalla.
Maces.
This Spice comforts the Brain, helps the Memory, expels Wind, cleanses the
Reins, and stays Looseness. Mace has almost the same virtues, but it is much
more proper for Sauces. Oil of Nutmegs strengthens the Sinews, The Oil of
Nutmeg.
procures Sleep, stays Defluxions, and cures the pains in the Stomach; and of
powder of Nutmeg or Mace mixed with the Oil of Roses, they make an Unguent
sovereign against such Griefs as proceed from Indigestion.

The Hollanders have built here two Forts, The Hollanders Forts in Banda.
which they call Nassau and Belgica, where the Road is so good, that Vessels
come up within Musket Shot, and ride safely at nine or ten fathom water. The
Island is inhabited with about ten or eleven thousand persons; yet would it be
hard to draw out five hundred Men fit to bear Arms. Here they drive a good
round trade in Garments brought from Coromandel, Rice, Purcelane, Velvet,
Damask, Taffaty, Scarlet, Provisions and Ammunirion for the Forts. The
Inhabitants are obstinate and mutinous, so as the Hollanders cannot assure the
possession of this Isle, but by force alone.

In their Relations of the Isle of Nera, Prodigio^^ Serpents.
they report, there are Serpents so great, that one day, the Author of the
twentieth Relation observing his Poultry daily to decrease, and being told by
the Natives there were Serpents that devoured them, he had then watched so
carefully, that they took one, which about midnight was crept into the
Hen-roost, and had made a strange havoc. The Servants who killed it, found in
the belly five Hens, one Duck, and a sucking Pig, which they made no difficulty
to eat of, no more then they did of the Serpent it self.

Though some comprehend in the number of the Molucques, Molucques.
many of the Islands that fill up this Oriental Archipelago, yet properly there
are called by the name of the Moluccaes, but the five following Islands,
Ternate, Tidar, Motiel, Machiam and Bachiam, by the ancient Pagans called Cupe,
Douco, Moutil, Mara, and Seque. This last is by several Arms of the Sea divided
into diverse Isles, which notwithstanding are not known but by the common name
of Bachaiam, because they are subject to one Prince. They are all situate
under the same Meridian, as 'twere within view of one another, and take not up
above the space of twenty five Leagues, so as the utmost North has but one
degree of Latitude toward the North, and the farthest South, but one degree
toward the South. The Soil is so dry and spungy, that it not only drinks
immediately the Water that falls from Heaven, but dryes up the Torrents at
their very rising out of the Mountains, and suffers them not to pay their
tribute to the Ocean; and yet the Sun not being able either to penetrate the
Forests, or consume the Exhalations arising out of the Earth, there remains
sufficient moisture to furnish both Trees and Herbs with constant verdure.

These Islands, where no Fruit is wanting, and which yield, in great abundance,
Bananas, Cocoes, Lemons, Oranges, Sandal, and Calam^^, and all sorts of Spices,
produce neither Corn, Sagu a sort of bread.
nor Rice; but Nature makes sufficient recompense for this defect, in a sort of
nourishment, which might be accounted miraculous, were it not common in
Amboyna, and other places. They have it from a Tree the Portuguez call
Segueiro, and the Molucquez, Laudan, which grows to twenty foot high, and has
leaves like Cocoes, only a little less* The Tree is a man's fathom about,
nevertheless with a Knife it may be cut down, because it is only Bark and Pith:
The Bark is about an inch thick, and the rest all Pith, which serves for Bread.
It is somewhat like worm-eaten wood, save that it is white, and may be eaten as
it comes from the Tree, taking away the strings of the wood which are mixed
with it; How they make bread of it.
but to make Bread they order it as follows. Having felled the Tree, they cut
it Cylinder-wise, and beat the Pith to powder, which looks like Meal; then they
put it in a Searce they make of the Bark of the same Tree, over a Tub made of
the Leaves, and according as the Searce fills they pour in Water, which
dividing the Meal from the Strings of wood that are mixed therewith, falls into
the Tub, as white and thick as Milk, and leaving a certain settling or
consistency at the bottom, falls out at a little Spout at the top of the Tub;
this settled consistency is that which they call Sagu, and serves them instead
of Meal, and in effect is such, when it is dry. It is baked in certain Moulds
of Earth, which they make red hot in the fire, so as putting in this substance,
it becomes Paste, and bakes in a moment, so speedily, that one Man, in a
morning, may bake Bread to suffice a hundred Men a whole day: From the same
Tree they extract Thuack, which they drink, and is as pleasant as Wine. Wine
from the same Tree.
While the Leaves are young they are covered with a Cotton, whereof they make
Stuffs; and being at full growth, they cover Houses with them; and the bigger
Veins are strong enough to make Rafters for their Houses; and of the lesser
they make good Cordage.

They have store of Cattle; but they rather affect Fish, though Linschotten
says they have neither. Mines of Silver or Gold they have not, and hitherto
there are none discovered of any other Metals; but the Isle of Lambaco
furnishes them with Iron and Steel, whereof they make their Campilans and their
Cris, that is, their Swords and Daggers.

Their Men are rather black then tawny, The Inhabitants.
but the Women not so much. Their Hair is black and smooth, either naturally,
or for that they continually rub it with sweet Oils* their Eyes great, their
Eyebrows large, their Bodies strong and robustous, but fitter for war then
work. They are dextrous and active, and live long, though they grow gray
betimes. In conversation with Strangers they are civil and obliging; but a
little too familiar and importunate in their demands, self-ended in Commerce,
diffident, deceitful, and liars, needy, and by consequence insolent. Men wear
Turbants, after the Turkish fashion, of several colors, decked with Plumes: The
King only wears a Crown like a Miter, but in all things else is clad like his
other Subjects, in a Iupo, and Drawers of China Satin, blew, red, crimson,
green, and yellow. Some there are wear close Coats, tied on the Shoulders, and
cut below, like the ancient Romans military Coats. Women dress themselves in
their Hair, which they lay smooth over their Heads, and tie it behind, and deck
it with Plumes and Flowers, which well becomes them. They have Bracelets,
Rings, Neck-laces of Pearl, Diamonds, Rubies, and Emralds, etc. apparelling
themselves almost all in Silk, using the Stuffes they have from Persia, China,
and the rest of the East, in truck for their Cloves.

The Chinese, Partly Mahumetans.
by possessing a great part of the East, became likewise Masters of this Isle,
and, after their example, the Persians and Arabians, who brought in the
Mohammedan superstitions, admit the adoration of their Gods, from whom diverse of
their Families pretend to be descended. They know no written Law, and their
Customs are barbarous enough; Polygamy is allowed amongst them, and Adultery
passes unpunished; but Theft is severely punished, as a mortal and unpardonable
Crime among them. They have Officers, who at break of day go about the Town, A
particular policy.
and with the beat of a Drum awake the people, and exhort the Masters of
Families to remember their Matrimonial Duties, by reason it concerns the
public, that the Inhabitants should multiply. Both Men and Women express their
arrogance in their carriage and gate. Every Island has a peculiar Language,
whence we may conjecture they are originally derived from several Nations, and
that it is necessity forces them to use the Malayan, for general Communication.

The Iavians were they that first brought Clo^es to these places, The Clove
^ade.
whence the Persians and Arabians might convey them to the Greeks and Roman^.
The Kings of Egypt settled this Commerce, together with that of other Spices,
in the Ports of the Red Sea; where the Romans having reduced that Kingdom to a
Province, continued it till the dissolution of the Empire. The Genueses were
long time Masters of it, by transferring it to Theodosia, now called Caffa,
whither at length the Venetians sent their Consuls and Factors, taking the
benefit of the Caspian Sea. The Turks spoiled this Commerce by means of their
Caravans, that brought Spices to diverse places on the Mediterranean Sea, where
the Europeans might fetch them with less charge and danger; but the Soldans of
Egypt re-established it at Alexandria and Cayro, by the way of the Nile, and
doubtless had kept it still, had not the Portuguez found out a way to surround
Africa, The Portuguez seize it.
and fetch this precious Drug from the utmost parts of the East. Their
Conquests in the Indies, and the Fleet they maintain upon the Persian and
Arabian Coasts, toward Cape Guardafun, entirely bereaved the Soldans of their
Commerce; and the Portuguez continued Masters of it, while they kept that Sea:
but after the Hollanders appeared there, Dispossessed by the Hollanders.
they were constrained to give place, and to lose an advantage, which no other
durst have disputed with them.

In the year 1511. the Portuguez discovered the Molucques. Francisco Serano,
who first set foot on shore, found so much simplicity there, that Boleyfe, King
of Ternate, and Almansor, King of Tidor, made it their earnest request to have
the advantage of the Fort the Portuguez were about to build, to secure the
possession of these Isles. It Is true, these two Princes were declared enemies,
and thought to make use of these Strangers Forces in their particular quarrels:
but it is to be believed their jealousy was grounded on other principles; for
that Cachil Laudan, King of Bachiam, made the like request to Tristan de
Meneses, who went to relieve Serrano.

'Twas now some time since Pope Alexander the sixth had divided the two Indies
betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugal; A difference between the Castilians
and the Portuguez for the Moluccaes.
in so much that of the three hundred sixty degrees, which compose the Globe,
the Spaniards were to possess what they conquered within one hundred and eighty
degrees, counting from the thirty sixth degree of Lisbone, Westward, and the
Portuguez the other hundred and eighty degrees Eastward; by virtue of which
division the Emperor, Charles the fifth, pretended the Molucques belonged to
the Crown of Castile, by reason Ferdinand Magellanus, who had done very
advantageous Service in the Indies, Grounded on a false supposition.
under Alphonso Albuquerque, and had with little satisfaction deserted the
Portuguez, to serve under Charles, computed by Ptolomies authority (upon a
false supposal, that between Indus and Ganges there were thirty degrees,
whereas there are scarce ten) that the Molucques being distant six hundred
Leagues, which make about thirty six degrees from Malacca Westward, they
belonged to the Crown of Castile. He was commissioned by the Emperor to go
take possession of them, and upon this design parted from Saint Lucars the 21.
of September 1519. and having wrought to 53. degrees, and passed the Straight,
Magellan finds a new passage.
called to this day by his name, the Straight of Magellan, he came almost to
the height of the Molucques; but by contrary Winds, and the Sea-currents, he
was forced down to the Manelles, where he was slain, with thirty five of his
company; Gonzalo, Gomez d' Espinosa, and Sebastian del Cano, made afterward
some establishments for the Emperor, taking an Oath of Fidelity of Sutrau
Carala, King of Ternate, Predecessor of Sultan Bongue, of Sultan Almanzor,
King of Tidor, and Sultan Iusuff, King of Gilolo. But the possession of these
Isles was of such importance to the Portuguez, for continuation of their Spice
trade, that they did what was possible to keep them, wherein they found the
less trouble, because the Emperor had his hands full in Europe, and was but
imperfectly informed of the Affairs in Asia, as well by reason the Portuguez
hindered the Castilian Ships passing by the Cape of good hope, as that the
passage by the West was so dangerous, that hitherto it is not used.
Notwithstanding all Acts of Hostility passing between these two Nations in the
Indies, 'twas thought convenient that Commissioners for both Kings should meet
at Segovia, in the year 1525. but not agreeing, the meeting was removed the
year following to Sevil, where likewise they came to no result: so as the
business continued in this state, till the Treaty at Saragossa, in the year
1529. at which the Emperor engaged these Islands to the King of Portugal, for
three hundred and fifty thousand Ducates. Ever since the Portuguez have enjoyed
them, till by the union of the Kingdom of Castile, and Portugal, they were
confounded in Philip the Second. After this the Hollanders ^ut in there, and
the revolution that happened in Portugal in the year 1640. has so changed the
face of Affairs, that the Spaniards must first conquer that Kingdom, before
they think of the Appendages belonging thereto.

Ternate is the first and largest Isle of the Molucques, Ternate.
situate twenty eight Leagues from the Isle of Banda, and forty degrees on
this side the Line. It is about eight Leagues in compass, and no bad Country,
yet yields but little Provisions besides Poultry and Goats. It produces
likewise Almonds, excellent good, and bigger then ordinary, though there be
three or four in every shell, which is so hard, it is not easily to be broken
with a Hammer, but they make so strong a fire, that Smiths and Forgemen use it
instead of Coal. The Inhabitants likewise plant Tobacco, but it is far short of
that comes from the West Indies.

The chief Town, called Gamma lamma, Gamma lamma.
stands on the Seaside, and is but one Street, about 2500. paces long. Their
Houses are built of Canes or Timber, as are also the Masquites and Palace
Royal. The Road is of no use, for that the bottom being nothing but Stone and
Rock, an Anchor cannot fix. The Holland Vessels ride before a Village called
Telingamma, between the Islands of Ternate and Tidor, within half a League of
Malay.

The most precious thing in these Islands is the Clove; Cloves.
I know not if it be the same Pliny calls Garyophylla, though the Persians call
it Calafur, and these two words seem to have the same Etymology. The Spaniards
sometimes called it Girofe, but at present they call it Clavos, by reason of
its likeness to an ordinary Nail. The Molucques call the Tree that bears them
Siger, the Leaf Varaqua, and the Fruit Chamque. The Tree is much like the
Laurel, only the Leaves something less and narrower, like the Almond-tree, and
shoots forth its branches at the top as Myrtle do. When it is in flower it
persumes the Air round about it; and the Fruit is at first white, in time grows
green, and so brown, but not black till it be gathered.

Some beat them down with Poles, but commonly they fasten a Rope to the branch
a little above the boal, and drawing it to them force away the Fruit and leaves
with much violence, and so it is when the Inhabitants sell it, and so the
Chinese and Indians transport it.

The Trees grow of themselves, The tree grows without planting.
as the Chesnut-trees do, without planting, or any cultivation. In the eighth
year they bear, and last a hundred years, bringing forth every two years: for
besides the injury done the branches, in getting off the fruit, as we said
before, the Inhabitants break off the young buds, which shoot forth the first
year, that they may be sure of a better crop the next. It is at its full
ripeness from August till January; and when it is gathered, it is laid in the
Sun, and in two or three days it is sufficiently dried.

Avicenna affirms, Avicenna's error.
that the Gum of this Tree is like Turpentine; but he is mistaken, it being
certain, that it does not produce any at all. For it is so hot, that it does
not only drink up all the Water Heaven is pleased to send it, but it also
attracts all the moisture of the Earth lying about it; nay, its Fruit is so
hot, that if a Pitcher of Water be set in a Chamber, within ten foot of a bag
of Cloves, they will so suck up the Water, that within two or three days there
shall not be a drop left: which that they have done shall not be perceivable
any way, but by the weight. The Inhabitants know this well enough, and make
their advantages thereof. The Chinese have the same experiment in their raw
Silks, which do attract moisture in the same manner.

It is commonly affirmed, What cloves the Moluccaes yields yearly.
that the Cloves grow only in the Moluccaes: but this is said, either in regard
some comprehend under that name many other Islands near them, or that the five
we have named yield more then all the rest. It is generally granted, that they
yield every year near six thousand barrels of Cloves, allowing five hundred
weight and a half to every barrel, and it is certain withal, that the Islands
of Ires, Meytarana, Cavaly, Sabugo, Marigoran, Gamoconora, and Amboyna, yield
also very considerable quantities, especially that of Veranula; though they are
not so fair as those of the neighboring Islands.

In the midst of the Island of Ternate, The Mountain of Ternate.
there is one of the highest Mountains in those parts, covered all over with
Palms and other Trees, having at the top a hole so deep, that it seems to reach
the Center of the Earth. Some have had the curiosity to make trial of the depth
of it, and have found that a Rope of five hundred fathom touched not the
bottom, but reached a fair Spring, the water whereof was very clear; yet has
there not yet been any that durst venture to taste of it. Out of this Mountain
there issues a sulphurous smell, and by certain intervals a thick smoke, and
sometimes, especially at the two Equinoxes, it casts up flames, and red Stones,
with such violence, that some are carried not only as far as the City, but even
into the Islands of Meao, and Cafures, twenty Leagues distant from Ternate. The
smoke infects all the circum-ambient Air, and the excrements which the Mountain
casts forth, do so corrupt the Springs and waters of those parts, that no use
can be made thereof. The Mountain is green two third parts of its height, but
from thence upward it is insupportably cold, and there is on the top of it a
Spring of fair water, but so cold, that a man can drink but very little of it
without taking breath. From the top of it may be seen the Sea, and all the
Moluccas; upon it, a man has a clear and serene Air, which is never troubled
with Mists or Clouds; and there is a Lake of sweet water, set about with Trees,
in which there is a great number of blew and yellow Lizards, bigger then a man's
arm, which sink under the water as soon as any body comes near them.

There is no difference of Seasons in these Islands, But one season in the
Moluccaes.
nor any certain time for Rain, though it rains oftener with the North-west
wind, then it does with the South. There are Serpents there thirty foot long,
and of a proportionable bigness; but they are neither dangerous nor venomous,
no more then are those of Banda. Some affirm, that these Creatures, not finding
any thing to feed upon, eat Grass, and going to the Seaside vomit up what they
had eaten, and by that means draw together a great many Fish, which being
intoxicated with the chewed Grass, flote upon the Water, and so become the prey
and food of these Serpents.

There is in this Island a kind of Beasts they call Cusos, Cusos.
that keeps constantly in Trees, living on nothing but Fruit. They resemble our
Rabbets, and have a thick, curling, and smooth hair, between gray and red, eyes
round and fiery, little feet, and such strength in the tail, that they will
hang by it, the better to reach the fruits. The Forests are full of wild
Birds, and, except the Parrot, there are few domestic, at least of those known
to us. There are Crevisses that come ashore, and creep under certain Trees, the
very shadow whereof is so virulent, that no Grass grows near them. I know not
whether it be from that Tree they contract that venomous quality, which lies in
one part of them, which is so dangerous, that it kills in four and twenty hours
those that eat it. Others there are that resemble Grasshoppers, and lie in
Rocks, where they take them by night with firelight: near the tail, in a bag,
they have a lump that is exceeding delicate, for which they take them.

In the Moluccaes there is a certain Wood, A Wood incombustible.
which, laid in the fire, burns, sparkles, and flames, yet consumes not, and
yet a man may rub it to powder betwixt his fingers.

Near the Fort of Ternate grows a Plant, Leaves turned to Butterflyes.
by the Inhabitants called Catopa, from which there falls a small Leaf, the
Stalk whereof turns to the Head of a Worm, or Butterfly, the Strings to the
body and feet, and the wings are made out of the finer part of the Leaf, so as
at last there is a complete Butterfly.

Tidor is an Island as fruitful as that of Ternate, but larger. In a Signet of
the Kings of this Island, in Persian or Arabic Characters, it appears, this
Island was called Tudura, not Tidor; Tidor.
and they say the word signifies Beauty and Fertility. These people have the
industry to prune and water the Clove-tree, which by this means bears a fruit
much fairer and stronger then that which owes its production only to nature.
The white Sandalwood, that grows here, is doubtless the best of all the Indies.
Here they have Birds, Birds of Paradise.
by the Inhabitants called Manu codiatas, by the Spaniards, Paxaros de l'
Cielo; those we call Birds of Paradise. Many take them to have no feet; but
they are deceived; for they that catch them cut off their feet so near the
body, that the flesh beginning to dry, the skin and feathers join together, so
that there scarce remains any scar.

The Dutch in Ternate possess the Town of Malaya, regularly fortified, and not
far off the Fort of Taluco. In Tidor they have the Fort Marieco. In Motir again
they have a Fort with Bastions of Stone. In Machiam they have made three Forts.
At Taffaso, Tabillola, and Guoffiquia, and in Bachiam, the Fort Bar^eveldt.

The King of Bachiam owns neither the King of Ternate nor Tidor for Superior;
King of Bachiam.
but is himself Sovereign, and independent as to any Foreign Power. His
Territory is great, where there grows great store of Sagou, so as the
Inhabitants subsist with little labor, which makes them so idle and lazy, that
the Kingdom, which heretofore was one of the most considerable of the
Molucques, is so sunk from that grandeur, that at present it can hardly raise
five hundred fighting men.

The Isle of Machiam was brought under the jurisdiction of the Dutch by Admiral
Paul van Carden, Machiam.
in the year 1601. The chiefest of the three Forts they are possessed of is
that of Guoffiquia, which is built upon an Eminency, with four Bastions of
stone, yet is it but a small one, and irregular, in regard that, for want of
place, they could not make all the Bastions of the same bigness, nor extend the
Curtain as far as it should have been. The Fort of Taffaso is also upon an
ascent, and has four Bastions; but it is bigger then the other, and distant
from the Sea about a hundred and sixty paces. These two Forts have neither
Wells nor Cisterns, save that near the top of the ascent on which Taffaso
stands, there is a Well within a Half Moon, which serves for a fifth Bastion to
the place. Tabillola has but two Bastions, so far one from the other, that
they cannot command all the Curtain, so that there is no great account to be
made thereof. This Island is about seven Leagues in compass, and subject to the
King of Ternate: It is very populous, able to raise two thousand and two
hundred fighting Men; and it has Sagu and other provisions sufficient for the
Inhabitants, and yields as much Cloves as any of the other Islands.

Besides the five Islands properly called the Molucques, there are others, to
the number of seventy two, subject to the King of Ternate, situate in the same
Archipelago from Mindanao, on the North-side, and Bina and Corca, which are on
the South, and between the Continent of New Guiny toward the East. The
chiefest are Motir; Machiam, Cajoa, Xula, Burra, Na, Noloa, Meao, Tufure, Do,
Saquite, Totole, Baol, Guadupa, Gorontano, Ilibato, Tamsne, Manado, Doudo,
Labague, Iaqua, Gabe, Tobuquo, Buto, Sanguien, etc. amongst which some lie
seventy Leagues from Ternate. The Kings of all these Islands are Tributaries to
the King of Ternate, and tied to find him such a number of Soldiers, which the
Author of the History of the Molucquez, whom we mentioned before, raises to
sixscore thousand.

North of the Molucques lie the Isles now called the Philippins, Philippins.
discovered by Ferdinand Magellanus, when he compassed the World in the year
1520. and had doubtless given them his own name, had he lived till this new
discovery: Sebastian del Cano, his Camerade in this stupendous Navigation, not
daring to hazard an establishment after the death of Magellanus, who was slain
in these Islands, as we said before, returned for Spain. After this there was
no mention of these Islands, till that in the year 1565. D. Lu^^ de Valasco,
Viceroy of New Spain, sent the Adelantado; Michel de Laguaspe, into this Sea,
where he put into haven in these Islands, which in honor of King Philip the
Second, who then reigned in Spain, he called by the name of Philippines. His
first Conquest was the Isle of Zebue, where he remained six years; after that
he went to Luson, now called Manille, Manille.
from its chief City, whereof Velasco, after a slight opposition, became
Master.

This City lies in a Canton of Land, encompassed all about with the Sea,
fourteen Degrees on this side the Line, in the most Southerly part of the Isle,
which is in compass thee hundred and fifty Leagues. On the North, it has
China, from which it is distant seventy Leagues; on the North-East, the Isle of
Iapan, which is two hundred and seventy Leagues distant from it; Eastward, the
Ocean, and toward the South the great Archipelago, which is as it were divided
into five Seas, filled with so many Islands, Kingdoms and Provinces, that it
may be said, they are in a manner innumerable. The Chinese, who were
heretofore possessed thereof, have now deserted them, but still trade thither.

The Inhabitants in their labor answer the fertility of the soil, which
produces Corn, Rice, all sorts of Fruits, and Drugs; and it breeds Neat,
Buffler, Deer, Goats and Swine; so as they want nothing necessary to
livelihood; and the Chinese take care they shall want nothing that is
superfluous, as Silk, Purcelane, and Lacque. They have also Date-wine, but they
make it of a different manner to other places: for they draw it from their
Cocoes, by cutting off one of the boughs, whence there distills a Liquor which
they suffer to work till it grows as strong as Spanish wine. They have the best
Lemmons and Oranges in the World, and the most excellent Figs and Pears, all
sorts of Birds of prey, and domestic, Falcons, Tercels, Parrots, Eagles, etc.
but principally such abundance of Crocodiles, that they are constrained to kill
them, to extirpate the breed: for you have here Men of sufficient courage to
encounter a Crocodile single, though as big as an Ox. For the Combat they
Gantlet their left Arm to the Elbow, Hunting of Crocodiles.
taking in that hand a Truncheon of a foot long pik'd at both ends, and a
Dagger in the other, and in this posture they go into the River up to the
Waste. The Crocodile no sooner spies his Man, but he comes on with open mouth
to swallow him; the Indian presents him his left hand, and thrusting it down
his throat, hinders his jaws from shutting, and in the mean time gives him so
many wounds in his throat with his Poniard, that he kills him. This Creature is
in form like a Lizard, but covered with Scales, so hard, that he is
invulnerable all over but in the throat and belly. It lays abundance of Eggs,
which are so hard, that they will not break with throwing against a Stone; and
to hatch them they thrust them into the Sand, on a River side, that heat and
moisture, the principles of Generation, may hatch them. These Islands breed
more Tigers, Lions, Bears, and other wild Beasts, then Africa does, but
especially the Algalias, which are the Creatures from which they get the Musks,
and Civet-Cats.

All these Islands are very populous, and so rich, that not only the Chinese
continue their trading thither, with great advantage, but also the Spaniards,
The Commerce of the Chinese and Spaniards in the Philippins.
who heretofore brought thither money from New Spain, by which they gained two
Marks of Gold for eight of Silver, having given over that Trade, in regard they
make far greater advantages by their other Merchandises, the return whereof
many times come to a thousand for a hundred, by the traffic they have there
with the Chinese, who bring all sorts of Cottons and Silk-Stuffes, Purcelane,
Gunpowder, Sulphur, Iron, Steel, Quicksilver, Copper, Meal, Nuts of several
kinds, Biscuit, Dates, Linnen-cloath, Cabinets, Ink-horns, and things made of
Lacque: which the Spaniards come and snatch up to be carried into the
West Indies, where they have money for nothing.

The Spaniards have in the City of Manilla an Archbishop, who has spiritual
Jurisdiction over all the Philippine Islands, The Archbishop of Manilla is
Viceroy.
which he exercises by three Suffragan Bishops, and some Priests. These are so
highly respected by the Inhabitants, who have not shaken off their Original
simplicity, that they govern the Country, and keep it in subjection to the
Spaniards. They are indeed such absolute Masters of these Islands, that though
in several of them there is not so much as one Spaniard, yet is there not one
of the Inhabitants refuses to pay the Tax imposed upon him, which is by the
Poll, at ten Ryals a Head. The same Archbishop has also the Quality of
Viceroy, and exercises all the Functions thereof, jointly with the Kings
Council, which is established in the same City, as well for Affairs of general
concernment, as for the Appeals of such differences as may arise in the other
Cities.

The City and Houses of Manilla are of Stone, The City of Manilla.
and built after the modern way; and the City it self is so great, that the
Spaniards have been forced to divide some part of it from the rest, to serve
them for a Citadel, in case of necessity; by which means they avoid the charge
of keeping so great a number of Soldiers as might be requisite for the defense
of the place. The Haven, which is called Cavite, lies two leagues from the
City, and is defended by two wooden Forts. There live within the City of
Manilla, and about it, above fifteen thousand Chinese, besides those who come
thither every year, from December to April, and trade with above five hundred
Ships. The Iaponeses come thither also, but not in so great a number, and yet
the Spaniards are much more jealous of them, then they are of the Chinese.

IAPAN.
JAPAN is a collection of several Islands made there by the Sea, from the one
and thirtieth degree of elevation to the thirty ninth, being in some places but
ten leagues in breadth, in others, reaching to thirty. This Country, which was
anciently called Chryses, or, if we may credit Mark Paulo Veneto, Zipangry,
has on the East New Spain, on the North Tartary, on the West China, and on the
South the Sea, and that part of the World, which is called Terra Australis. It
is divided into sixty six little Kingdoms, fifty three whereof depend on that
part of this great Empire, which is properly called Iapon, or Iapan, and
consists of two very powerful Kingdoms, called Meaco, and Amagunce, under which
all the rest are comprehended. The other part is called Ximo, and comprehends
nine Kingdoms or Provinces; the chiefest whereof are Bungo and Figen; and the
third part called Xicoum, comprehends the other four Kingdoms.

The Iaponneses themselves acknowledge, It is doubted whether it be on Island
or Continent.
that they cannot positively affirm, whether their Country be an Island, or
part of the Continent; inasmuch as from the Province of Quanto, whereof the
City and Castle of Iedo is the Metropolis, as it is also of the whole
Territory, as far as the extremities of the Province of Tzungaa, it is seven
and twenty days journey toward East and North-East. Then you cross an Arm of
the Sea, about eleven leagues over, to get into the Province of Iesso, or
Sesso, which is so covered with Woods, and checkered up and down with
Mountains, that the Emperor of Iapan has not yet been able to search what may
be had out of them. All they could ever learn, is, that there were seen in
those parts a sort of people, who were hairy all over their bodies, and
suffered the hair of their heads and beards to grow, so as that they seemed
rather beasts then men. Whereto they add, that they make use of that passage by
Sea, to go into Sesso, whence they bring Furs, not out of this respect, that
the Sea divides that Province from Iapan, but that it were a great way about to
go over those inaccessible Mountains which join those two Provinces.

The Island which we call Iapan, and the Inhabitants name Nippon, is divided
into six great Provinces, which are called Sayecock, Chickock, Iamaysoirt,
Ietsengen, Quanto and Ochio, which are subdivided into several other lesser
ones, which are governed and possessed by Lords and Princes, whose names we
shall here give, together with their Revenues, that the Reader may thereby
judge of the greatness of this Empire, whereof we have hitherto had no great
knowledge, setting down the sums according to their way of accounting, by
Cockiens, which are worth about four Crowns French money apiece.

Cangano Tzium Angon, The names and revenues of the Great Lords of Japan.
King, or Prince of the Provinces of Kanga, Ietcoui and Natta, who lives in the
Castle of Canga, has a yearly revenue, one million, one hundred and ninety
thousand Kockiens. 1190000 Surugano Daynangon, Prince of the Province of
Suruga, Toto and Mikawa, who lives in the Castle of Fuytsui, seven hundred
thousand Kockiens. 700000 Ouwarmo Daynangan, Prince of the Provinces of Ouani
and Mino, who lives in the Castle of Nangay, seven hundred thousand Kockiens.
700000 Sendaino Tsuinangon, Prince of the Provinces of Massamme and Oysia, who
lives in the Castle of Senday, which is an impregnable place, six hundred and
forty thousand Kockiens. 640000 Sutsumana Tsuinangon, Prince of the Provinces
of Zatsuma, Osuny, Fionga and Lui^io, who lives in the Castle of Cangasinna,
six hundred thousand Kockiens. 600000 Kinokonny Dainangon, Prince of the
Provinces of Kino and Iche, who lives in the Castle of Wakcjamma, five hundred
and fifty thousand Kockiens. 550000 Cotto Fingo Camy, Prince of Fingo, and the
Neighboring Provinces, who lives in the Castle of Koumanotte, five hundred and
fifty four thousand Kockiens. 554000 Matsendairo Ianonosk, Prince of the
Provinces of Tsaikisen, and Faccatto, who lives in the Castle of Fonckosa, five
hundred and ten thousand Kockiens. 510000 Matsendairo Yonocami, Prince or King
in the Great Province of Ietsegen, which lives in the Castle of Onde, five
hundred thousand Kockiens. 50000 Catto Skibo, King or Prince in the great
Province of Ochio, who lives in the Castle of Ais, four hundred and twenty
thousand Kockiens. 420000 Matsendairo Nangato, Prince in the Province of Souo,
who lives in the Castle of Fangi, three hundred and seventy thousand Kockiens.
370000 Mitono Tzuinangon, Prince of the Province Fitayts, who lives in the
Castle of Nito, three hundred and sixty thousand Kockiens. 360000 Nabissima
Sinano, King or Prince in the Province of Fisien, who lives in the City of
Logioys, three hundred and sixty thousand Kockiens. 360000 Matsendairo Sentaro,
Prince of the Province of Inaba, who lives in the Castle of Tackajano, three
hundred and twenty thousand Kockiens. 320000 Todo Isumi, Prince of the Province
of Fuga Iche, who lives in the Castle of Tsou, three hundred and twenty
thousand Kockiens. 320000 Matsendairo Kuncy, Prince of the Province of Bisen,
who lives in the Castle of Okajamma, three hundred and ten thousand Kockiens.
310000 Juno Caemman, The most valiant of all the Gallant persons in the
Country, and Prince of the Province of Totomy, who lives in the Castle of
Sawajamma, three hundred thousand Kockiens. 300000 Fossocawa Ietschui, Prince
or King of the Province of Boysen, who lives in the Castle of Cocora, three
hundred thousand Kockiens. 300000 Ojesungi Daynsio, King in the great Province
of Ietsengo, who lives in the Castle of Iany Samwa, three hundred thousand
Kockiens. 300000 Matsendairo Sensio, King also in the same Province of
Ietsengo, who lives in the Castle of Formanda, three hundred thousand Kockiens.
300000 Matsendairo Auwa, Prince of the Province of Awa, who lives in the Castle
of Inots, two hundred and fifty thousand Kockiens. 250000 Matsendairo
Ietchigenocemy, Prince of the Province of Kange, who lives in the Castle of
Takato, two hundred and fifty thousand Kockiens. 250000 Matsendairo T^isio,
Prince of the Province of Ie, who lives in the Castle of Matsiamma, two hundred
and fifty thousand Kockiens. 250000 Ariuma Gamba, Prince of the Province of
Tzickingo, who lives in the Castle of Courcine, two hundred and forty thousand
Kockiens. 240000 Morino Imasa^k, Prince of the Province of Mymasacka, who lives
in the Castle of Tziamma, two hundred thousand Kockiens. 200000 Toringanocami,
Prince in the Province of Dewano, who lives in the Castle of Immagatta, two
hundred thousand Kockiens. 200000 Matsendairo Tosa, Prince of the Province of
Tosanocory, who lives in the Castle of Tokosianna, two hundred thousand
Kockiens. 200000 Satake Okion, Prince in the Province of Dewano, who lives in
the Castle of Akia, two hundred thousand Kockiens. 200000 Matsendairo Sunosano
camy, Prince of the Province of Sunosa, who lives in the Castle of Tattebys,
two hundred thousand Kockiens. 200000 Forvuo Iamayssiro, Prince of the Province
of Iusimo, who lives in the Castle of Matsdayts, a hundred and eighty thousand
Kockiens. 180000 Ikenocamy, Prince of the Province of Samke, who lives in the
Castle of Coquan, a hundred and eighty thousand Kockiens. 180000
Fondacaiuocamy, Lord of the Province of Farma, who lives in the Castle of
Triatno, a hundred and fifty thousand Kockiens. 150000 Sackay Connay, A Lord
very considerable in the great Province of Dewano, who lives in the Castle of
Fackeso, a hundred and fifty thousand Kockiens. 150000 Terasawa Simadonne, a
Lord in the great Province of Fisen, who lives in the Castle of Carats,
sixscore thousand Kockiens. 120000 Kion Gock Wackasa, Lord of the Province of
Wackasa, who lives in the Castle of Offano, sixscore thousand Kockiens. 120000
Fori Tango, a Lord in the great Province of Ietsegen, who lives in the Castle
of Fouckiamma, sixscore thousand Kockiens. 120000 Sackaybarra Schibon, Lord of
the Country of Kooske, who lives in the Castle of Tattaiits, sixscore thousand
Kockiens. 120009 Minsno Fiongo, Lord of the Country of Bingo, who lives in the
Castle of Foukyamma, sixscore thousand Kockiens. 120000 Matsendairo Cawaits,
Governor or Captain of the Castle which the Emperor has in the Province of
Quanto, has a yearly revenue, a hundred and ten thousand Kockiens. 110000
Ockendeyro Imasacka, Lord of the Country of Simotoke, who lives in the Castle
of Oetsnomio, a hundred and ten thousand Kockiens. 110000 Sammada Ins, a Lord
in the Province of Simago, who lives in the Castle of Koska, a hundred and ten
thousand Kockiens. 110000 Toytsisibayma Finda, a Lord in the Province of
Tzickingo, who lives in the Castle of Iannangainua, a hundred and ten thousand
Kockiens. 110000 Ongasura Onckan, a Lord in the Country of Farima, who lives in
the Castle of Akays, a hundred thousand Kockiens. 100000 Indatii Toutomii, Lord
of the Country of Iiio, who lives in the Castle of Itasima, a hundred thousand
Kockiens. 100000 Nambou Cinano, a Lord of great quality in the Province of
Ochio, who lives in the Castle of Moriamma, a hundred thousand Kockiens. 100000
Niwa Groseiman, another Lord of great quality in the said Province of Ochio,
who lives in the Castle of Siracawa, a hundred thousand Kockiens. 100000 Abono
Bitchion, Governor or Captain of the Castle of Iwatsucki, which belongs to the
Emperor, in the Country of Mousays, eighty thousand Kockiens. 80000 Kiongock
Onieme, Lord of the Country of Tanga, who lives in the Castle of Tanabe,
seventy thousand Kockiens. 70000 Makino Suruga, a Lord in the great Province of
Ietsengo, who lives in the Castle of Nangaoecka, seventy thousand Kockiens.
70000 Nackangamua Neysien, a Lord in the Province of Bongo, who lives in the
City of Nangona, seventy thousand Kockiens. 70000 Matsendairo Tamba, a Lord in
the Country of Cinano, who lives at a place called Matsmoutte, seventy thousand
Kockiens. 70000 Noeytosamma, a Lord in the Province of Fitaiits, who lives in
the City of Iwayro, seventy thousand Kockiens. 70000 Ieckenda Bitshiou, Captain
of the Castle of Matsiamma, in the Province of Bitshiou, sixty thousand
Kockiens. 60000 Matsura Fetsennocamy, a Lord in the Province of Fesen, who
lives in the Lordship of Firando, sixty thousand Kockiens. 60000 Sengock Biofo,
a Lord in the Province of Cinano, who livs in the Lordship of Oienda, sixty
thousand Kockiens. 60000 Catto Dewado, a Lord in the Province of Iyo, who lives
in the Castle of Oets, sixty thousand Kockiens. 60000 Tosawa Okiou, a Lord in
the Province of Dewano, who lives in the Lordship of Cinchiro, sixty thousand
Kockiens. 60000 Matsendairo Iwamy, a Lord in the Province of Farima, who lives
in the Seigneiory of Chisogory, sixty thousand Kockiens. 60000 Matskonra
Boungo, a Lord in the Province of Fisen, who lives in the Lordship of
Sunabarra, sixty thousand Kockiens. 60000 Ietschawa Tonnomon, a Lord in the
Province of Bongo, who lives in the Lordship of Fita, sixty thousand Kockiens.
60000 Tzangaar Ietsi^, a Lord in the great Province of Ochio, who lives in the
Lordship of Tzungaa, upon the Seaside, sixty thousand Kockiens. 60000
Ougasauwara Sinano, a Lord in the Province of Farima, who lives in the Province
of Sekays, sixty thousand Kockiens. 60000 Itho Cuiri, a Lord in the Province of
Fongo, who lives in the Castle of Orafi, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000
Furtafiobo, a Lord in the Province of Iwamy, who lives in the Castle of
Daysiro, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000 Wakibacca Aways, a Lord in the Province
of Sinano, who lives in the Lordship of Ina, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000
Koncky Nargato, a Lord in the Province of Ische, who lives in the Lordship of
Toba, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000 Arima Seymonose, a Lord in the Province of
Nicke, who lives in the Lordship of Accanda, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000
Outafiaba, a Lord in the Province of Iamatta, who lives in the Lordship of
Outa, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000 Matsendairo Dewadonne, a Lord in the great
Province of Ietsenio, who lives in the Lordship of Chibatta, fifty thousand
Kockiens. 50000 Minoskyts Fokey, a Lord in the same great Province of Ietsenio,
who has also his Habitation in the said Lordship of Chibatte, fifty thousand
Kockeins. 50000 Inaba Minbou, a Lord in the Province of Boungo, who lives in
the Lordship of Ousisiro, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000 Croda Caynocomy, a
Lord in the Province of Sinano, who lives in the Lordship of Coniro, fifty
thousand Kockiens. 50000 Matsendairo Souodonne, a Lord in the Province of
Isumy, who has his Residence in the Lordship of Kisnowodda, fifty thousand
Kockiens. 50000 Touda Sammon, a Lord in the Province of Tsounocouny, who lives
in the Castle of Amangasac, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000 Stotsijaganni
Kennots, a Lord in the Province of Iche, who lives in the Castle of Kangou,
fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000 Fonda Ichenochamy, a Lord in the Province of
Mikawa, who lives in the Castle of Ockasacka, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000
Matsendayro Iammayssiro, a Lord in the Province of Tamba, who lives in the
Lordship of Sassejamma, fifty thousand Kockiens. Mory Cainocamy, a Lord in the
Province of Inga, who lives in the Lordship of Sourosada, fifty thousand
Kockiens. 50000 Fonda Notanocamy, a Lord in the Province of Farima, who lives
in the Lordship of Fimoys, fifty thousand Kockiens. 50000 Akito Chionoske, a
Lord in the Province of Fitayts, who lives in the Lordship of Cichindo, the
like sum. 50000 Assano Oevi^me, a Lord in the Province of Chiono, who lives in
the Lordship of Cassama, the like sum. 50000 Neyto Ceinocamy, a Lord in the
same Province of Chiono, who lives in the Lordship of Acandate, the like sum.
50000 Catto Skibbodonne, a Lord in the great Province of Ochio, who lives in
the Lordship of Ains, the like sum. 50000 Soma Daysiennocamy, a Lord in the
same Province of Ochio, who lives in the Castle of Soma, the like sum. 50000
Toyda Iamatta, a Lord in the Province of Toysima, who lives in the Lordship of
Is^us, the like sum. 50000 Ouckobo Cangato, a Lord in the Province of Mino, who
lives in the Castle of Canuo, the like sum. 50000 Neito Boysen, a Lord in the
Province of Dewano, who lives in the Lord of Iodata, the like sum. 50000 Inaba
Aways, a Lord in the Province of Tainbo, who lives in the Lordship of Fo^ckuit
Syamina, forty thousand Kockiens. 40000 Cammet Deirick, a Lord in the Province
of Iwamy, who lives in the Lordship of Mongamy, the like sum. 40000 Catnayngiri
Ismou, a Lord in the Province of Iammatta, who lives in the Lordship of Tatsta,
the like sum. 40000 Fonda Findanocamy, a Lord in the great Province of
Ietsegen, who lives in the Lordship of Maroka, the like sum. 40000 Itakoura
Sovodome, Governor for his Majesty, in the great City of Miaco, has of yearly
revenue in the Province of Iamayssiro, forty thousand Kockiens. 40000
Matsendairo Bongo, a Lord in the Province of Iwamy, who lives in the Lordship
of Nacksmia, the like sum. 40000 Fonda Naykie, a Lord in the Province of
Farima, who lives in the Lordship of Fimeis, the like sum. 40000 Matsendairo
Tango, a Lord in the great Province of Ochio, who lives in the Lordship of
Sucki, the like sum. 40000 Canna morti Isoumo, a Lord in the Province of Finda,
who lives in the Lordship of Oumory, the like sum. 40000 Chiongock Chiury, a
Lord in the Province of Tango, who lives in the Lordship of Tannabe, thirty six
thousand Kockiens. 36000 Outagiobo, a Lord in the Province of Mino, who lives
in the Lordship of Istnoday, thirty thousand Kockiens. 30000 Matsendairo Ietso,
Governor of the Castle of Iondo, in the Province of Iamayssiro, thirty
thousand Kockiens. 30000 Matsendairo Ouckon, a Lord in the Province of Farima,
who lives in the Lordship of Ocko, the like sum. 30000 Minsonija Ichenocamy, a
Lord in the Province of Cooske, who lives in the Lordship of Chinotayins, the
like sum. 30000 Iammasacka Kainocami, a Lord in the Province of Bitchiou, who
lives in the Lordship of Narse, the like sum. 30000 Matsendayro Iamatto, a Lord
in the Province of Ietsesen, who lives in the Lordship of Catsiamma, thirty
thousand Kockiens. 30000 Iunofiabo, a Lord in the Province of Cooske, who lives
in the Lordship of Anna, the like sum. 30000 Matsendairo Tonnemon, a Lord in
the Province of Micamua, who lives in the Castle of Iussimda, the like sum.
30000 Akysucky Nangato, a Lord in the Province of Nicco, who lives in the
Lordship of Summino, the like sum. 30000 Sua In^ba, a Lord in the Province of
Sinano, who lives in the Lordship of Takaboys, the like sum. 30000 Singamoma
Ouribe, a Lord in the Province of Totomy, who lives in the Castle of Sese, the
like sum. 30000 Simaas Oemanosce, a Lord in the Province of Nicko, who lives in
the Lordship of Sandobarra, the like sum. 30000 Kinostay Iemon, a Lord in the
Province of Bongo, who lives in the Lordship of Fius, the like sum. 30000
Sonotsiussima, Lord of the Island of Tziussina, the like sum. 30000 Koynde
Inuano, a Lord in the Province of Tonga, who lives in the Lordship of Okoda,
the like sum. 30000 Fonda Simosa, one of the most valiant persons of all that
Empire, and Governor of the Castle of Nissewo, in the Province of Micauwa, the
like sum. 30000 Gorick Setsnocanny, a Lord in the Province of Micauwa, who
lives at the Castle of Fammamats, the like sum. 30000 Chinsio Surago, a Lord in
the Province of Litaeits, who lives in the Lordship of Tsuitoura, the like sum.
30000 Sakuma Fisen, a Lord in the Province of Sinano, who lives in the Lordship
of Irajamma, the like sum. 30000 Todo Toyisina, a Lord in the Province of Mino,
who lives in the Lordship of Cannajamma, the like sum. 30000 Fonda Isumi, a
Lord in the Province of Fitaeyts, who lives in the Lordship of Mina^gaw, the
like sum. 30000 Tongauwa Tosa, a Lord in the Province of Bitchiou, who lives in
the Lordship of Ni^kys, the like sum. 30000 Matsendayro Tosa, a Lord in the
Province of Ietsesen, who lives in the Lordship Conamatta, the like sum of
thirty thousand Kockiens. 30000 Sangii sarra Tokii, a Lord in the Province of
Fitaytes, who lives in the Lordship of Oungouri, has the yearly revenue of
twenty thousand Kockiens. 20000 Kinostay Counay, a Lord in the Province of
Bitchiou, who lives in the Lordship of Courosi, the like sum 20000 Matsendayro
Koyssiro, a Lord in the Province of Farima, who lives in the Lordship of
Firamma, the like sum. 20000 Inasacka Tzounacamy, Governor of a Castle
belonging to the King in the Province of Onosacka, the like sum. 20000
Matsendaro Kennots, a Lord in the Province of Iamba, who lives in the Lordship
of Comme-jamma, the like sum. 20000 Mastay Saske, a Lord in the Province of
Ochio, who lives in the Lordship of Sanbonmaets, the like sum. 20000 Oumoura
Minbou, a Lord in the Province of Fisen, who lives in the Lordship of Daymats,
the like sum. 20000 Matsendayro Isumy, a Lord in the Province of Mino, who
lives in the Lordship of Iwamoura, the like sum. 20000 Matsendayro Conocamy, a
Lord in the Province of Sonnocomy, who lives in the Lordship of Fyannori, the
like sum. 20000 Minsnofaito, a Lord in the Province of Micauwa, who lives in
the Castle of Caria, the like sum. 20000 Nito Tatewakie, a Lord in the Province
of Chiono, who lives in the Lordship of Iwaystowa, the like sum. 20000
Ongasaware Wakasa, a Lord in the Province of Simosa, who lives in the Lordship
of Sekijada, the like sum. 20000 Fischicatta Cammon, a Lord in the Province of
Chiono, who lives in the Lordship of Mauwaro, the like sum. 20000 Iwaky
Sirrosy, a Lord in the Province of Chiono, who lives in the Lordship of
Iedoura, the like sum. 20000 Reckongo Fingo, a Lord in the Province of Dewano,
who lives in the Lordship of Jury, the like sum. 20000 Tackenacke Oenieme, a
Lord in the Province of Bongo, who lives in the Lordship of Fo^nay, the like
sum. 20000 Mouri Ichenocamy, a Lord in the Province of Boungo, who lives in the
Lordship of Ounays, the like sum. 20000 Wackebe Sacjow, a Lord in the Province
of Totomy, who lives in the Lordship of Onuso, the like sum. 20000 Itsifoys
Insanocamy, another Lord in the same Province of Totomy, who lives in the
Lordship of Cosioys, has in like manner a yearly Revenue, of twenty thousand
Kockiens. 20000 There are, besides the forementioned, many other Lords, who
have very considerable Revenues; as namely, Sangoro Saffioye, and Fory
Mimasacka, who have each of them a Revenue of twenty thousand Kockiens. 20000
There are also others, not much inferior to these in point of Revenue, whom
we shall not think much particularly to mention. Qua jamma Sammon, has a
yearly Revenue of fifteen thousand Kockiens. 15000 Fossacauwa Gemba, as much.
15000 Sackina Daysen, as much. 15000 Matsendayro Daisien, the like. 15000 Gotto
Aways, Lord of the Island of Gotto, near Tirando, the like sum. 15000
Cattaingiri Iwami, the like. 15000 Crussima Ietsingo, the like 15000 Coubori
Totomy, the like. 15000 Takangi Mondo. 15000 Miake Ietsingo. 15000 Sackay
Ouckon. 15000 Conda Iwamy. 15000 Nasua Ieuts. 15000 Oudaura Bisen, the like
sum. 15000


Besides all these, there are yet some five or six and twenty, who have each of
them ten thousand Kockiens of yearly Revenue. But we shall forbear the naming
of them.

It remains then only, that we give an account of the Revenues of those Lords
who are actually attendant on the Court, which are so considerable, that they
may well deserve a place by themselves. Deyno Oiedonne, The Revenues of the
Ministers of St^te.
has a yearly Revenue of a hundred and fifty thousand Kockiens. 150000 Sackay
Outandonne 120000 Nangay Sinnanodonne. 100000 Sackay Sannikodonne. 90000 Audo
Oukiondonne. 60000 Inoie Cawaytdonne. 50000 Inaba Tangodonne. 40000 Sackay
Auwadonne 30000 Sackay Iamaissoradonne, the like. 30000 Neyta Ingadonne. 20000
Tsmitsia Nimbodonne, the like. 20000 Nisiou Oukioudonne, the like. 20000
Matsendayro Iemondonne, the like sum. 20000 Immanguyts Taytemadonne, the like.
20000 Matsendayro Insdonne. 15000 Abobongodonne, the like. 15000 Anwajamma
Oukoradonne, the like. 15000 Cio^gock Sensindonne, the like. 15000 Itacoura
Neyseindonne, the like. 15000 Narsye Insdonne, the like. 15000 Akiamonta
Taysimadonne, the like. 15000 Forita Cangadonne, ten thousand Kockiens. 10000
Minra Simadonne, the like. 10000 Maynda Gonoskadonne, the like. 10000 Missona
Iamatta, the like. 10000 Fory Its^ocamy, the like. 10000 Miury Omonaskadonne,
the like. 10000 Fonda Sanjandonne, the like sum. 10000


Now the Revenues of the Princes and Lords of whom we have given this account,
consists altogether in Lordships and Demesnes: for some are rich in Corn and
Cattle, others in several Mines, as Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Quicksilver,
Iron, etc. Others are wealthy in Woods, Flax, Cotton, or Silk; of all which the
Emperor has a certain knowledge, by the secret informations sent him by those
Secretaries whom he places about them to manage their Affairs; for he
recommends to every one of them a Secretary, with a Letter to this effect. The
Emperor of Japan's policy.
Well-beloved, I know you have many Vassals and Servants, and that the
occasions wherein you are to employ them are very great; therefore I send you a
person, whose assistance may in some measure ease you of the burden which lies
upon you, and of whose fidelity you may be assured, in as much as I commend him
to you, as one who has been brought up at my own house: Make use of him, and
take in good part the care I have of your person and affairs. These indeed, for
the most part, are such as have served the Emperor in their youth, in his
three Chambers, and of whose abilities, prudence, and judgment he is satisfied,
assuring himself of their fidelity, besides the expressions he might find
thereof during the time of their service, by an act signed with their blood: in
so much that there is not ought done in the Provinces, whereof he has not, by
this means, a perfect account. For these Secretaries keep an exact Journal of
whatever they observe in the life and actions of the Princes whom they are sent
to, who undertake nothing without their advice, nor do any business wherein
they are not consulted, which gives them great authority in the Provinces, and
makes the Princes themselves look on them as such, whose favor they stand in
need of to keep a fair correspondence with the Court. On the other side, these
Princes are glad to have able and understanding persons about them, such as may
observe the miscarriages of their Government, and have the confidence to be
their Remembrancers thereof; as choosing rather that a faithful Servant should
acquaint them therewith, that so they may be seasonably reformed, then that
they should become the discourse of the people, or any should take occasion
thence to do them ill Offices about the Emperor.

The great Lords, The Lords have three names.
who govern the chiefest Provinces, have three names; to wit, their own proper
Name, that of the Family, and the Surname, which they take from their Province,
and which they commonly give the Castle where they live; and they are the more
willing to be called by the name of their Family, Slaves dye with their Masters.
then their own, upon this account; that, as they say, the Family was before
them. But it is withal to be observed, that there is not any man but has his
name changed thrice; for the name which had been given him in his Infancy,
being not fit for him when he is become a man, at the age of twenty years there
is another given him; and when he comes to that of fifty five or sixty, he
receives a third name, such as was not fit for youth or a less advanced age.

The departure of great Lords is commonly attended by the voluntary execution
of twenty or thirty Vassals or Slaves, who rip up their bellies and die with
their Masters. These are obliged to this by an Oath, and it is done partly by
way of acknowledgment of the particular kindness which their Lords had for
them. Having acquainted their Lord, that they are willing to be obliged to
sacrifice themselves in that manner when occasion shall require, they entertain
him with a short discourse to this purpose; Most mighty Sir, you have many
other slaves and servants, of whose affection and fidelity you are assured; who
am I, or what have I deserved, that you should honor me with your favor above
any of the rest? I resign up this life to you, which is already yours, and
promise you, I will keep it no longer then it shall be serviceable to yours.
Then the Lord and the Vassal take off, each of them, a Bowl of Wine, which is
the most Religious Ceremony they have among them, to confirm their Oaths, which
thereby become inviolable.

To do this execution upon themselves, Their mann^r of ripping their bellies.
after the death of their Lord, they get together all the nearest of their
Kindred, who conduct them to the Mesquite or Pagode, where they sit down upon
Mats and Garments, wherewith they cover all the floor, and having spent some
time in making good cheer, they rip up their bellies, cutting them cross, so as
that all the guts come out; and if that does not dispatch them, they thrust
themselves into the throat, and so complete the execution. Nay, there are some,
who coming to hear that their Masters intend to build some Edifice, either for
himself or the Emperor, will desire him to do them the honor, that they may
be laid under the Foundations, which they think are made immovable by that
voluntary Sacrifice; and if their request be granted, they cheerfully lay
themselves down at the Foundation, and have great Stones cast upon them, which
soon put them out of all pain. But it is for the most part Despair which puts
them upon this resolution; in as much as these are of that kind of Slaves, who
are so cruelly treated, that death were more supportable to them then the
wretched life they lead.

All their Pagodes or Mesquites are of Wood, Their Mesquites.
raised three or four foot from the ground, and about seven or eight fathom
square; They have on the outside many Turrets, having lights on all sides, and
gilt all over, but very narrow, and set out with certain fantastic Figures,
but wretchedly done, as to proportions. They have also Statues in their
Pagodes, whereto they address their Prayers, and bestow on them, by way of
Alms, a certain number of Caxias, which the Priests make their advantage of.

But their Castles are much better built. The Cities of ^apan are not walled*
His Majesty has belonging to him many spacious and fair ones, but the most
considerable are those of Osacca and Iedo. The Princes and great Lords have
also very handsome Castles, but those which are fortified are obliged to
receive a Garrison from the Sovereign. The Cities have not any Fortifications
at all: for, some few only excepted, which lie between Firando and Iedo, and
have only simple walls; the rest have not any at all, but the Streets are
straight, and of the same breadth and length, that is, sixty Iekiens, which
make about fourscore and ten fathom. Every Street has two Gates, which are
shut up in the night, and a Watch kept at them: as also two Officers, who are
accountable for the disorders committed in their Quarter, and speak to the
Judge, about any thing wherein the Inhabitants of the Streets, whereof they
have the oversight, are any way concerned; there being, it seems, such order
taken, that all persons are not permitted to present themselves indifferently
before the Magistrate, but they would have it done by such as know what respect
they owe to their Superiors.

The Cities or Towns have no particular Revenue, No Impositions in Japan.
nor any sums of Money in bank, whereof they have the disposal; for all the
Deme^ne belongs to the Sovereign, who bestows the Revenue thereof on the
Princes and great Lords before mentioned, and permits not the raising of any
Impositions or Taxes, of any nature whatsoever. Nor is it to be feared that the
mildness of the Air of that Country should breed any of those Grasshoppers,
which consume, wherever they come, all the Fruit which the Hail has left on
the Trees, in so much that they leave not any verdure on them. They only pay a
small chief Rent for their Houses, which the great Lords receive yearly, but it
amounts not to above thirty shillings for the greatest, those of the middle
sort ten, and the ordinary ones twenty pence. The Inhabitants are, besides
these, obliged to certain days works, and to find a man for their Lord, to do
what business he has to put him upon; but this happens not above twice or
thrice a month, and is but for an hour or two, or at most but for half a day.
By this means the Lord lives upon his Demes^e, the Soldier by his Pay, the
Merchant by his Traffic, the Tradesman by his Trade, and the Husbandman by his
Labor.

One of the most considerable parts of these Lords Revenues consists in
Fishing, especially that of the Whale, which the Emperor gives them. There are
taken every year about two or three hundred upon the Coasts of Iapan, but they
are not so big as those taken toward the North, and have, at most, not above
seven or eight inches of fat, but much flesh, or meat, which the Iaponneses
feed upon.

There is no Lord, The power of Masters over their Servants.
nor indeed any Citizen, or Merchant, but may put his Vassals and Domestics to
death, and that by way of Justice, he himself being the Judge; but to others
Justice is administered, all over the Country, in the Emperors name. Gentlemen
and Soldiers have the privilege to be their own Executioners, and to rip up
their bellies themselves: but others are forced to receive their death from the
hands of the common Executioner. They allege, as a reason for this proceeding
of theirs, that Merchants are, in some respect, infamous, in as much as they
are, for the most part, Liars, and deceive those that trust them. Tradesmen
they slight, as being only but public servants; and the Peasantry is
contemptible, by reason of the wretched condition they live in, which is little
better then that of Slaves. Only the Gentlemen and Soldiers are best
respected, and live at the charge, and upon the labor of others.

No offense, Gaming a Crime.
though never so small, but is punished with death, but especially Theft,
though it were but for a Penny. Gaming, whether that which depends upon chance,
or requires skill, is capital among them, if it be for money; and he who kills
another, though innocently, and in his own defense, is to die without mercy;
with this only difference, that such as kill in their own defense, as also they
who commit such Faults or Offenses, as would not here be punished with death,
die only themselves, but other Offenders involve all their Kindred in their
misfortune; All the Relations of Offenders die with them.
so that for the Crime of one single person, the Father, Brethren and Children
are put to death, the Wives and Daughters are made Slaves, and the Estate of
the whole Family is confiscated. And this happens so frequently, that there are
Commissioners expressly appointed for the administration of what is so
confiscated; yet does not the money raised thereby go to the King, but is
employed in the building of Pagodes, and the repairing of Highways and
Bridges.

The torture Thieves are put to, A particular Punishment for The^t.
for want of evidence, makes rather the unfortunate then the guilty to be
condemned. They take a piece of Iron, about a finger thick, and a foot square,
and make it red hot, and as soon as the redness is gone, and the Iron returned
to its own color, they put it to the hands of the party accused, upon two
sheets of Paper, which immediately flame, and if the accused person can cast
the piece of Iron upon a little Hurdle standing near him, without burning
himself, he is dismissed; but if his hands are ever so little touched by the
Fire, he is sentenced to die. This Crime is punished with a particular kind of
death. The Criminal is tied with a Straw-rope, by the Neck, to a great Cane,
overthwart which they put two other Canes, much after the manner of a
Lorrain-Cross, whereto they fasten the Feet and the Hands, and then the
Executioner runs him through with a Pike, from the right Side up to the left
Shoulder, and from the left Side to the right Shoulder: so that being twice run
through the heart, he is soon dispatched. Sometimes they only fasten the
Malefactor with his Back to a Post, and they make him stretch forth his Hands,
which are held out by two Men, and then the Executioner, standing behind him,
runs him in at the Neck, and so into the Heart, and dispatches him in a moment.

The Lords have such an absolute power over their menial Servants, that there
needs but a pretense to put them to death. An example of this happened not long
since; a Servant had the insolence to address himself to a Gentleman, to
proffer his service to him, but asked greater Wages then he knew the other was
able to give, purposely to abuse him. The Gentleman, perceiving the impudence
of the Raskal, was a little troubled at it, but smothered his indignation, and
only told him, that his demands were very great, but that he had so good an
opinion of him, that he must needs be a good Servant. Accordingly he kept him a
while; but one day charging him with some neglect, and reproaching him, that
when he should have been about his business, he had been idling about the City,
he put him to death. The Gentlemen and Souldi^rs are for the most part very
poor, and live miserably; by being highly conceited of themselves, most of them
keep Servants, though only to carry their Shoes after them, which are indeed
but as it were a pair of Soles, made of Straw or Rushes, having a hole toward
the toe, which keeps them on their feet.

The Crimes for which all of the Family or kindred are put to death, The Crimes
for which all the Kindred are put to death.
are Extortion, Coining, setting of Houses on fire, ravithing of Women,
premeditated murder, etc. If a Man's Wife be guilty of any Crime her Husband is
convicted of, she dies with him, but if she be innocent, she is made a Slave.
Their punishments bear no proportion to the Crimes committed, but are so cruel,
that it were not easy to express the barbarism thereof. To consume with a
gentle Fire, or only with a Candle, to crucify with the Head downwards, to
boil Men in seething Oil or Water, to quarter and draw with four Horses, are
very ordinary punishments among them.

One who had undertaken to find Timber and Stones for the building of a Palace
for the King, and had corrupted the Officers appointed by his Majesty to
receive and register what he should send in, was crucified with his head
downwards. The officers were condemned to rip up their bellies; but the
Merchant was put to the foresaid death. He had the repute of an honest man, and
was one that had had occasion to obliege several Persons of Quality; in so much
that some resolved to petition the Emperor for his pardon, though these
intercessions for condemned persons be in some sort criminal; and indeed the
Emperor took it so ill, that the Lords, who had presented their Petition for
him, had no other answer thereto, but the reproaches he made to them of their
imprudence.

It happened in the year 1638. A horrid execution.
That a Gentleman, on whom the King had bestowed the Government of a little
Province, near Iedo, so oppressed the Country people, that they were forced to
make their complaints thereof to the Court, where it was ordered, that the said
Gentleman, and all his Relations, should all have their bellies ripp'd up on
the same day, and as near as might be at the same hour. He had a Brother, who
lived two hundred forty and seven Leagues from Iedo, in the service of the
King of Fingo; an Uncle, who lived in Satsuma, twenty Leagues further; a Son,
who served the King of Kinocuni; a Grandson, who served the King of Massamme,
a hundred and ten Leagues from Iedo; and at three hundred and eighty Leagues
from Satsuma, another Son, who served the Governor of the Castle of Quanto;
two Brothers, who were of the Regiment of the Emperors Guard; and another Son,
who had married the only Daughter of a rich Merchant near Iedo; yet were all
these persons to be executed precisely at the same hour. To do that, they cast
up what time were requisite to send the Order to the farthest place, and having
appointed the day for the execution there, Orders were sent to the Princes of
all the forementioned places, that they should put to death all those persons
upon the same day, just at noon, which was punctually done. The Merchant, who
had bestowed his Daughter on that Gentleman's Son, died of grief, and the Widow
starved her self.

Lying is also punished among them with death, Lying punished with death.
especially that which is said in the presence of the Judge.

The forementioned punishments are only for Gentlemen, Soldiers, Merchants,
and some other persons of mean quality: but Kings, Princes and great Lords are
ordinarily punished more cruelly then if they were put to death. For they are
banished into a little Island named Faitsensima, which lies fourteen Leagues
from the Province of Iedo, and is but a League about. It has neither Road nor
Haven, and it is so steepy all about, that no doubt it was with the greatest
danger imaginable, that the first who got up to it made a shift to do it. Those
who first attempted to climb it up, found means to fasten great Poles in
certain places, whereto they have tied ropes, with which they draw up those
that are sent thither, and make fast the boats, which otherwise would split
against the Rocks with the first Wind. There grows nothing in all the Island,
but a few Mulberry-trees, so that they are obliged to send in provisions for
the subsistence of the Prisoners. They are relieved every month, as is also
the Garrison kept there, but they are dieted very sparingly, as being allowed
only a little Rice, some roots, and other wretched fare. They hardly afford
them a lodging over their heads, and with all these miseries, they oblige them
to keep a certain number of Silkworms, and to make a certain quantity of
Stuffs every year.

The expense which the Emperor of Iapan is at every year in his Court, The
Emperors expense.
and what relates thereto, to wit, the sallaries and allowances of the Officers
and Counselors, amounts yearly to four millions of Kockiens, and the
sallaries of Governors of places and Military persons, together with the
Pensions he gives, amount to five millions of Kockiens.

They who speak of the Sovereign Prince of all Iapan, give him the quality of
Emperor, in as much as all the other Lords of the Country, on whom they bestow
that of King, depend on him and obey him, not only as Vassals, but as Subjects,
since it is in his power to condemn them to death, to deprive them of their
Dignities, to dispossess them of their Territories, to banish or send them to
some Island, for very petty Offenses.

The Castle of Iedo, Jedo Castle.
which is the place of his ordinary residence, is near two Leagues in compass,
and is fortified with three Walls, and as many Moats, very deep, and built of
Freestone, but so irregular, that it is impossible to assign it any certain
Figure. Within less then three hundred paces, a Man must pass through eight or
nine Gates, not one of them standing opposite to another; for being come within
the first, he must turn on the right hand to go to the second, and being come
within that on the left hand to go to the third, and so alternately till he
comes to the last. Just within the last Gate there is a Magazine of Arms, for
three or four thousand men, on which about all the Streets, which are fair and
broad, having on both sides many magnificent Palaces. The Gates are done over
with great Iron bars, and over every Gate there is a House, wherein two or
three hundred Soldiers may be lodged. The Emperors Palace stands in the midst
of the Castle, and has belonging to it many Appartments, Halls, Chambers,
Closets, Galleries, Gardens, Orchards, Groves, Ponds, Rivers, Fountains,
Courts, etc. and several particular Houses, for his Wives and Concubines.

At your coming out of the Palace, you go into that quarter, where the Princes
of the Blood, The Palaces of the Kings.
and Counselors of State live, and thence into another quarter, where are the
Palaces of the Kings and great Lords of Iapan, which are all gilt both within
and without; and the more sumptuously built out of this respect; that there is
a certain emulation amongst them, who shall be at greatest expense to please
the Emperor. In the next quarter to this, there live other Princes and Lords,
who are not so powerful as the former, yet have their Palaces gilt, and so
richly furnished, that a Man would think, at his first coming in, he met with
Mountains of Gold. In this quarter there live some of the Wives and eldest Sons
of those Princes, whom the Emperor has brought up in the sight of the Court,
as so many Hostages of their Fathers fidelity: so that this Castle, though as
big as a considerable City, yet is so full of people, that the Streets can
hardly contain them.

When the Emperor goes out of his Palace, The Emperors Retinue.
he either rides on horseback, or is carried in a Palanquin, open of all
sides, and he is accompanied by a great number of Lords, whom they call the
Emperors Camarades. These Lords are of great quality, and very rich, yet do
they not think it any dishonor, to apply themselves to such things as are
either necessary or delightful. Some are skilled in Music, some in Physic,
some are excellent at Writing, or Painting, others study eloquence and the
mannagement of Affairs. Next them there goes a part of the Guard, which
consists altogether of persons culled out among the Children of younger
Brothers, Cousins, or Kinsmen of great Lords, among whom there are also some
natural Children of such as either actually are in employments, or may, upon
presumption of their Birth, pretend thereto. Then follow the ordinary Guard,
commanded by their Colonels and other Officers, who so dispose thereof, that
two or three thousand march before the Emperor, and as many after him. Among
so many Soldiers, there is not one but there has been some trial made of his
courage, nor any that has not gone through all the necessary exercises, in
order to such a kind of life, and whose countenance and demeanor is not
answerable to the employment they are put into. They leave a space between them
and the Emperor for a great number of other great Lords, who are about his
Majesty's person, who must needs make a strange show, among five or six hundred
Men, all clad in black, some on horseback, some afoot, all marching with such
gravity, and so orderly, that there is not only any one man to be seen out of
his rank, but a man hears not so much as a word spoken. The Streets are swept,
and strewn with Sand or Gravel, and the doors of all the houses standing open:
yet is there not a person to be seen, either in the shops, or at the windows;
or if it happen there be, the Guard makes them kneel till such time as the
Emperor is passed by.

Once every five year, The Dayro
the Emperor goes to Meaco, to do reverence to the Dayro, who is the true
Prince of Iapan, and still has the quality, but without any function. There is
a whole year spent in making all things ready for that journey, whereof we
shall hereafter give a particular description, and Orders are issued out to the
Lords who are to follow, and who accordingly come at the day appointed to the
places where they are to meet the King; dividing themselves so, as that some go
before, to relieve such as come from the Court, so to prevent the disorder and
confusion, which were unavoidable among so great a number of Princes, who are
all obliged to make their appearance upon this occasion, with all the bravery
and magnificence they can.

From the City of Iedo, to that of Meaco, there are a hundred and twenty five
Leagues, and within every three or four Leagues there is a considerable City,
The Emperors magnificence.
able to lodge the whole Court; yet has the Emperor caused to be built
between those two places, at an equal distance one from the other, eight and
twenty fair Houses, of which there (...) twenty great Castles, and in every
House there is a Retinue, and (...) else befitting a Kings Court, as Gentlemen,
Guards, Horses, Officers, and Servants, with Provisions necessary for the
subsistence of the whole Train. They who go along with the Emperor, from the
City of Iedo, leave him to the care of those whom they find in the first House;
These accompany and conduct him to the second; and so from one to another, till
he comes to the City of Meaco; in his return from whence, he observes the same
order, being attended from one House to another, till he comes to Iedo.

The Emperors of Iapan build many of these Castles, and have them finished in
so short a time, that they will have a Structure completed in six months,
which in Europe would take up as many years. We have an Instance of it in the
Castle which the Emperor had built in the year 1636. in the Province of Nicko,
four days journey from the City of Iedo. It is fortified with a double Moat,
and a double Rampire, and both of Freestone, and it is so spacious, and
consists of so many particular Palaces, for the Grandees of the Court, and so
many Appartments, Gardens and Fountains for the Emperor himself, that the best
Architect in Europe would not have finished it in several years; yet was this
great building completed in less than five months: there were so many Masons,
Carpenters, Joyners, Stone-cutters, Gilders, Painters, etc. employed about it.
This Castle is so far within the Country, that the Emperor lodges there but
once a year, when he goes to do his Devotions at his Father's Sepulcher, which
is thereabouts, upon which occasion he stays there two nights.

His Treasures are so great, His Treasures.
that it is impossible to give any thing near an exact account of it, inasmuch
as the Gold and Silver is locked up in Chests, and disposed into the Towers of
the Castle, besides what is in several places, up and down the Country, where
it increases almost to infinity, since the Revenue of two months, will defray
the charges of a whole years expense. The late Emperor, Father to him who now
reigns, lying on his deathbed, called for his Son, and told him, That the
Kingdom, and all the Treasures would beer long at his disposal, but he
recommended to his particular care certain Chests and Cabinets, where he should
find the ancient Chronicles of the Kingdom, and several excellent Books of
Morality, as also the Crown-jewels, exhorting him highly to esteem them, as
himself and his Predecessors had done, The pieces he had so much recommended
to his Son, were, one kind of Cymitar, called Iejuky Massamme; another Cymitar,
of a kind called Samoys; one other lesser Cymitar, called Bongo Doyssiro; A
little Pot for Tsia, or The, called Naraissiba; another greater Tsia Pot,
called Stengo, and a Manuscript, entitled AVC KOKI KINDOI. He left his elder
Brother, the King of Ouwary, a Picture called Darma, which was to be looked on
only of the one side, and a Cymitar, called Massamme. To his second Brother,
the King of Kino^onny, a Cymitar, called Iessa Massamme, and a Picture, wherein
were represented a great number of Frogs; and to the third Brother, King of
Mico, a Cymitar, called Sandame, and a Manuscript, named Sinche. And though his
six Pieces are not to be compared to those he bequeathed his Son, yet not any
one of them but was valued at above a thousand Oebans of Gold, which amount to
forty seven thousand Thayls, or crowns. The Legacies he gave several Princes
and Princesses of the Blood, and other Lords and Ladies, as also to some of the
Soldiery, and his Servants, amounted to thirty six millions.

The Emperor who now reigns, The Emperor of Japan is a viceroy.
was not married when he came to the Crown upon the death of his Father, which
proceeded from his detestable addiction to Sodomy; insomuch that the Dayro,
perceiving the aversion he had conceived for women was such, that the State
would in all likelihood come to be without a Governor, made choice, among his
nearest kindred, and the best qualified Princesses of the Kingdom, of two young
Ladies, of extraordinary beauty, whom he sent to the Emperor, i^treating him
to take one of them, and honor her with the quality of Miday, which is that
they give the Emperors lawful wife. He was so compliant as to marry one of
them; but his brutality had so debauched him, that he treated her with such
indifference, that it brought her into a melancholy which had almost cost her
her life. Her Nurse troubled to see her in that condition, took one day the
freedom to tell the King, that she could not comprehend, how he could slight
one of the greatest beauties in the world, to pursue those irregular
enjoyments, Con^ines hi^ Wife to a Castle,
which cannot be had without violence to nature. The Emperor, who before was
merry and in a good humor, was so troubled at this discourse, that going
immediately into another room, he sent for several Architects and Undertakers
of Buildings, and commanded them to build a Castle fortified with several Moats
and Draw-bridges, and very high Walls, in which he confined his Wife, with her
Nurse, and all the Women and Maids belonging to them. The Emperor's own Nurse,
who had a greater influence upon him, then his Mother, perceiving that there
would be a want of Heirs to inherit the Crown, bethought her of a course to
remedy that inconvenience, which was, to get to Court all the handsomest young
maids in the Kingdom, whom she produced, as often as the Emperor's good humor
gave her occasion or encouragement to do it. Of all she brought, only the
Daughter of an Armourer insinuated her self into his affection, and was got
with child by him; but the other Ladies troubled to see a maid of so mean
quality preferred before them, found means to corrupt the midwife, and to kill
the child, so secretly, that the Emperor never had the least knowledge thereof.

We have it from the Chronicles of Iapan, How the Emperor of Japan came to the
Crown.
that that great State has always been governed by a Monarch, whom in their
Language they call Dayro, and that his Subjects had so great a veneration for
their Prince, that they thought it a crime to b^ wanting in point of respect
toward him, so far were they from taking up Arms to disturb the Peace of the
Country. His person was accounted so sacred, that they would not have it touch
the ground, or that he should be uncovered abroad. Whence it came, that when
the other Princes were engaged in a war one against another, there was a
General named, who acted in the Dayro's name, and reduced the Rebels to their
duty. They have still the same respect for the Dayro, insomuch, that they
permit not that his hair or beard should be cut, or his nails pared, nor his
meat to be dressed in Pots that had been used before. He has twelve Wives,
which are bestowed on him with extraordinary Ceremonies and Magnificence. When
ever he goes abroad, his twelve Wives follow him in so many Coaches, which are
gilt and enriched with their Arms and devises. They are lodged in twelve great
Palaces, built in the street which goes to the King's Palace, and having
adjoining to them several other fair houses for his Concubines. Not one of
these Women, but has a great Supper made every night at her Palace, at which
there is Music, and the Women-dancers; but as soon as the King is gone into
that Palace where he intends to pass away the night, they all send in their
suppers, and have their divertisements at that Ladies Lodgings, whom the King
is pleased to honor with his presence.

One of the greatest Ceremonies and Magnificences to be seen in Iapan,
Ceremonies at the choic of a Nurse for the Dayro's son.
is that performed at the birth of a Prince, who is to inherit the dignity of a
Dayro For, to choose a Nurse for the Child, they get together fourscore of the
handsomest young Women in the Kingdom, whom they present to the Twelve Wives
of the Dayro, and to nine of the greatest Lords of the Country, and of nearest
kin to the Dayro, who, for want of Issue male, might succeed him. These Princes
and Ladies receive those designed for this employment, give them extraordinary
Titles, and treat them a whole day together. The next day the foresaid number
is reduced to the moiety, and one half is dismissed, with very great Presents.
The next day, they add to the Titles of those who stay, with great Ceremonies,
and their number is reduced to ten, and afterward to three, the rest being
still dismissed with Presents, and at the end of three days, they make choice
of one of these three, on whom they bestow, besides several other Titles, the
quality of the Prince's Nurse. In order to her establishment in that Function,
she is brought into the Prince's Chamber, whom she finds in the arms of one of
the chiefest Ladies of the Country, by whom he had been kept from the time of
his birth; and after the Nurse has spurted a little of her milk into the
Childs mouth, he is delivered up to her. All these Ceremonies, as also those
performed at the ordinary Feasts, are very great, and they are at this day
performed with the Dayro, who still enjoys a very considerable Revenue,
sufficient to defray all the charge, and continues the same grandeur his
Predecessors have been possessed of, though the force of the Empire has been
devolved into other hands, as we shall now relate.

The charge of General of the Army was heretofore the greatest of any in the
Kingdom, A revolution in Japan
as is that of Constable, in France; and it was invested ordinarily, though
contrary to the rules of good policy, in the second Son of the Dayro. About a
hundred and twenty years since, it happened there was a Dayro, who having a son
he exceedingly doted on, would needs out of an imprudent compliance he had for
the Mother, consent that he should participate of the Royal Dignity; and it was
ordered that it should pass alternately from one to the other, every three
years. But the son willing to make his advantage of the occasion, found means
so to insinuate himself into the affections of the great Lords and the
Soldiery, during the three years of his Reign, that he resolved to continue it,
contrary to the exhortations of his Father, who too late repented him of his
devesting himself of an authority which indeed is not communicable. This was
the first disturbance that ever had been seen in Iapan, inasmuch as both Father
and Son being equally invested with the quality of Dayro, the people conceived
they might, without any crime, take up Arms for either: However most of the
Lords detesting the ingratitude of the Son, joined with the General, whom the
Father had appointed to reduce his Son to obedience, who was defeated and
killed in that Civil war. The General, finding himself well established in his
charge, followed the example of the Prince, and abusing the lawful power,
whereof he was seized, made his advantage of it to settle himself in the
Throne, after the Dayro's death, yet leaving the lawful heir, with the quality
of Dayro, all the outward appearance of his former greatness. This demeanor of
the Generall's occasioned a second Civil war, which was thought the more
just, out of this respect, that in this the people took up Arms against an
Usurper, who had not the quality of Dayro, nor consequently the Character, for
which the Iaponnesses have so great a veneration. Accordingly, this war had the
same success with the former; A Soldier of Fortune gets to be General of the
Army.
for the Usurper was defeated and executed. But this second General took the
same course as his Predecessor had done, so that by this second Usurpation,
the Country was reduced to an absolute Anarchy, wherein all were Masters;
there being no Prince, nor Lord, nay hardly a Village, but was engaged in war
against some other. These disorders gave occasion to a Soldier of Fortune,
named Taycko, to appear at first, in the head only of fifty men, with whom he
did such exploits, that he soon improved that handful to a very considerable
Army.

His first adventures were the taking in of several Castles and small Cities;
but within a while after, his thoughts flew much higher, and he proved so
fortunate in his designs, that within less then three years, And Sovereign.
he became absolute Master of the whole State. He left the Dayro the external
part of his former greatness, and thought it enough to be in effect, what the
other was only in appearance. The Dayro, on the other side, perceiving it was
impossible for him to prevent that establishment, complied therewith, and
changed the quality of General of the Army to that of Emperor. Taycko, who
could not expect much quietness in his newly acquired fortune, if he removed
not those Lords of whom he conceived any jealousy, resolved to keep them at a
distance from the Court; and to that end, he sent the chiefest of them with an
Army of sixty thousand men, into the Country of Corea, with order not to
return thence till they had conquered that Province. They there met with such
resistance, that they were near seven years reducing that Nation to obedience:
Taycko in the mean time feeding them with fair hopes, and animating them to
prosecute a design of so great concernment to the State. They were forced to
obey; but being impatient to return to their own habitations, they committed
such exorbitances as made the Inhabitants of Corea desperate; insomuch, that
not able any longer to endure the burning of their houses, the murders, and
other violences done them; they sent an Ambassador to the Court, I^ poisoned.
who to deliver his Country out of the miseries it had suffered for so many
years, made a shift to poison Taycko, who some days after dyed. The Army in
Corea was immediately disbanded, and the Lords who had the command of it,
returned to their several homes.

Taycko being on his deathbed, Besto^ the Regency on one of the Lords.
and considering with himself that he could not hope to derive the succession
to his Son, who was but six years of age, if he made not some powerful Person
Protector, during his Minority, sent to Ongosschio, one of the greatest Lords
of the Country, desiring him to undertake the tuition of that young Prince.
Ongosschio accepted it, and to give Taycko the greatest assurance he could
expect, that he would be faithful to him, promised him, by an act signed with
his blood, that he would deliver up the Crown to Fidery, (so was the young
Prince called) as soon as he were come to the fifteenth year of his age, and
that he should be Crowned Emperor, by the Dayro. The disorders of the late
Civil Wars were yet fresh in every man's memory, so that there was a general
joy conceived, to see the Regency in the hands of a person, excellently
qualified for the execution thereof. Ongosschio was indeed a person of very
great endowments, but he had withal too much spirit and ambition to be reduced
to a private life, after he had been possessed of the Sovereign Power for so
many years. He had obliged Fidery to marry his Daughter, yet could not so near
an alliance smother so that predominant passion in him. Whence it came that he
immediately gave out, that Fidery was grown so distrustful of him, that he was
forced to stand upon his guard, and to raise an Army to oppose that which
Fidery was going to get together against him. He gave out also that Fidery
would needs be treated as Emperor, and discharge the Functions thereof, before
the Dayro had acknowledged him to be such, or Crowned him in that quality.
Accordingly he took his march with a powerful Army, raised in the Kingdom of
Suruga, toward the City of Ozacka, where Fidery lived, and after a siege of
three months, reduced him to so great extremities, that Fidery sent his Wife,
who as we said before, was Ongosschio's daughter, to entreat her Father to
grant him his life, and to sign him such Lands in any Province of the Kingdom
as he should think fit, where he might live privately: But Ongosschio would not
see his daughter, and continuing his siege, he became at last Master of the
Castle.

The unfortunate Fidery being got, Puts to death the Heir of the Cown.
with his wives, and several other persons of Quality, in one of the Palaces;
Ongosschio ordered it to be compassed about with great piles of wood, which
being set on fire, the Palace and all within was reduced to ashes. He put to
death all the Lords who had sided, or held any correspondency with Fidery, and
by that means established himself the sole Monarch of that State, as Taycko,
his Predecessor, had done before him. Ongosschio died the year following, and
left the Empire in quiet, to his Son Combo, or Combosamme, the Father of
Chiongon, who now Reigns.

It is no hard matter for the Emperor of Iapan to raise and keep an Army on
foot, The Emperor of Japan raises h^^ Armies upon the charge of h Subjects
in regard all his Subjects are obliged to bring in and maintain a certain
number of Soldiers, proportionably to their Revenue. For he who has a thousand
Kockiens, or four thousand Crowns per annum is obliged to maintain twenty foot
and two horsemen; and according to this account, the Lord of Firando, (where
the Dutch made their first establishment) who has sixty thousand Kockiens of
yearly Revenue, was taxed at twelve hundred foot, and one hundred and twenty
horse, besides the servants, slaves, and what else is consequent thereto. So
that by this means, according to the Revenues of the Lords we mentioned before,
which amount to eighteen millions, and four hundred thousand Kockiens, the
Emperor of Iapan may raise an Army of three hundred sixty eight thousand foot,
and thirty eight thousand eight hundred horse, Can raise 368000. foot, and
38800. horse.
not accounting the hundred thousand foot and twenty thousand horse, which he
is able to maintain out of his own Revenue, and which he keeps as a standing
Army, for the defense of his Castles and strong places, and for his Guards.

Most of these Lords find it no great trouble to make their Levies, for there
are few of them but ordinarily maintain twice as many Soldiers, out of an
humor they have to make great shows, especially upon those occasions wherein
they expect to give some assurances of their courage or zeal they have for the
service of their Prince.

Their Cavalry is armed with Corselets, Their Arms.
but the Foot have only Head-pieces. The offensive Arms of the Horse are a sort
of Firelocks, not much longer then our Pistols, half-pikes, Bows, Arrows, and
Cimitars. The foot wear every man two Cimitars, and have Muskets, Pikes, and
Nanganets, or half-pikes, and every man has about him a very broad Knife.
Their Companies consist but of fifty Soldiers, who are commanded by a Captain,
a Lieutenant, Their Companies and Regiments.
and ten Corporals, to wit, a Corporal for every five Soldiers. Five Companies
make a Body, which is commanded by another Officer, and every fifty Companies
have their Colonel. The Emperor of Iapan has the same course taken, to know
every year how many persons there is in his Kingdom. For every quarter of a
City or Village is divided into Cantons, consisting of five houses, which are
commanded by a certain Officer, who keeps a Register or Catalogue of all those
who die or are born within the five houses under his jurisdiction, and reports
the same to his superiors, who give an account thereof to the Prince or Lord
of the Province; and these last to two Counselors of State, who are appointed
for that purpose.

The Council of State consists of several Lords, The Council of State.
who have each of them his particular function, excepting only the four
chiefest, who are every day punctually at Court to give the Emperor an account
of affairs. All the rest are so powerful and rich, that some among them have
above two millions of yearly Revenue, others three or four hundred thousand
Crowns, others but forty or fifty thousand. They are very reserved in the
advice they give the Emperor, to whom they speak not, even of affairs, if they
find him not in a good humor to hear them: but none will presume to speak to
him twice of the same thing, or renew his entreaties, after a refusal. This
Council consists of such Lords as the Emperor may be the more confident of, in
regard they have commonly their education at the Court. These have the
management of all public affairs, but with such dependence on the Sovereign's
pleasure, that they do not only never resolve on any things of themselves, but
indeed they never speak to the Prince, till he gives them some occasion to do
it, and that they have first consulted his eyes, and studied his countenance,
to find what his sentiments are. They ever approve what he says, though never
so prejudicial to himself, even to the loss of a whole Province; for the least
contestation would cost them their fortunes, if not their lives.

From what we said before, The expenses of great Lords.
it is evident, that the Reyenues of these Lords are very great; but their
Expenses are as great. For, first, not one of them but is obliged to live one
half of the year at Court, and, during that time, to keep house in the chief
City of Iedo, where he who lives at the highest rate is most in favor with the
Emperor. The first six months in the year, those Lords who have their
Principalities and Lordships in the Easterly and Northerly Provinces of the
Kingdom, continue at the Court, and the other six months, those that live in
the Western and Southern Provinces. At their coming to the Court, and their
departure thence, they make very considerable Presents to the Emperor, and
great Entertainments among themselves. Their Journeys and their Expenses at
Court, whither some Lords bring a Retinue of five or six thousand persons, lie
very heavy on the richest, and ruin the rest. The Lord of Firando, who, as we
said, was one of the meanest, had in his Family, above three hundred men, and
maintained in the two houses he had at Iedo, above a thousand persons,
comprehending in that number the Women and Concubines he kept, as did also the
other Lords, in one of his two houses.

Provisions are dear enough all over Iapan, Provisions dear.
but at an excessive rate about the Court, by reason of the abundance consumed
by so great a number of persons of quality. Another way to exhaust their
Estates is, their magnificence in Building, there being still somewhat wanting
in their appartments, either as to Painting or Gilding, or the like. Most of
their Domestics go in Silk, especially their Women, and those of their own sex
that wait on them: so that there is hardly any Lord but spends more then his
Revenue amounts to. But what helps to ruin them, is the Order they receive
from the Emperor, to supply him, ever and anon, with men and money, to carry on
the public Buildings, which he does rather to drain the Purses of these Lords,
then out of any necessity obliging him thereto.

The greatest Lords, when they build a Palace, do ordinarily make two Gates
thereto, one for their own use, The (...) of the (...) in their buildings.
and the other for the Emperors passage into it. The latter is much larger
then the other, and made all of Joyner's work, excellently varnished, carved
into branch-work, and gilt. As Soon as it is h^ish'd it is covered with boards,
against the injury of the weather, and is not uncovered, till near the time of
the Emperor intends to honor the house with his presence, to dine there; and
as soon as he is departed thence, it is shut up, and so kept ever after, out of
this respect, that having served for a passage to the Emperor's Sacred
Majesty, it were a profanation, if any private person should pass through it
after him. It is also to be observed that the Emperor never dines above once
in any house belonging to another man, and that they are three whole years in
making all things ready for his Entertainment. Accordingly he has notice of
it, three years before, and in the mean time all the furniture of the house is
made and marked, Three years requisite to (...) an entrance for the Emperor.
as is also all the Plate, with the Arms and Characters of the Emperor; and
after that time they are never more used, but kept very safe, as things not to
be employed in any thing, after they have once served the Sovereigns person. So
that this Expense, and that which they are at in the Entertainment, which the
Master of that House is obliged to make for the whole Court, for three months
together, were enough to beggar an ordinary King.

Another thing lies heavy on these Lords, is, the Presents which the Emperor
makes them. For upon his return from his ordinary Hunting, which is that of the
Crane, a bird there very highly esteemed, he is wont to send some of those he
has taken, to such as he has most kindness for. But that Present costs him at
least half a years Revenue, in Feasts, Presents, and other public
Entertainments, which he is obliged to make in acknowledgment of the favor
done him by his Majesty, in sending him a Bird taken by a Hawk put off from his
Sacred Hands. It is not long since, that the Lord of Zatiuma treated the
Emperor at a Dinner, in a Palace which was then but newly finished; but he got
well by the expense he had been at. For the Emperor made him a Present for his
Horses, (so they call the Gratifications he makes his Favorites) by an
addition to his former Revenue, of two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns per
annum.

The Grandees never take any Wife, The Emperor marries all the great Lords.
but what they have from the Emperors hands; and it is of her alone who is
given by him, that the Children are to be born, who are to inherit their
Estates. Accordingly, they look on her and respect her as the person from whom
they expect Heirs for the propagation of their Family, and upon that account,
recommended to them by the Emperor. He who expects to have this honor done
him builds a Palace purposely for her reception, furnishes it very richly, and
allows her a Retinue consisting of a great number of Women and Maids, to
accompany her, and wait on her.

Women go not abroad but once a year, The women kept in restraint.
to give their Relations a Visit, and then they are seen in the streets, with a
Retinue of thirty, forty, or fifty close Palanquins, wherein are carried so
many Maids of Honor, accompanied each of them by their Waiting Gentlewomen,
and other Women, marching in a File on both sides of the Palanquins, which are
varnished over and gilt. All the remainder of the year, the women stir not out
of their houses, into which there are not any men permitted to enter, save only
some of the Wives nearest Relations, who sometimes have the freedom to see
them, but very seldom, and that in their Husbands presence. It is his business
on the other side to make the restraint as little burthensom as may be to them,
by allowing them all the divertisements and recreations, which honest women can
take; finding them Gardens and Parks for walking, Ponds for fishing, keeping
all sorts of living Creatures for their pleasure, and entertaining them every
day with Music and Plays. But they must expect to end their days in this
restraint, and renounce the conversation of men, inasmuch as the least
suspicion is here as unpardonably punished with death, as any other manifest
crime; not only in the person of the Lady, but also in all about her. Her
Attendants are commonly some of the handsomest young Gentlewomen in the
Province, who always stand before the Master and Mistress with such respect,
that they study to answer, laugh, and hold their peace, upon the least sign
made them. They are ordinarily distinguished into Bands or Companies,
consisting of sixteen Gentlewomen, who have each a Governess over them. They
are clad in Silk, flowered painted, or embroidered, of different colors or
liveries. For one Band is in a red livery, with girdles and head-cloathes of a
green color; another, white, with girdles and head-cloathes red; another,
yellow, with girdles and head-cloaths of a sky-colour, and so of the rest. The
Gentlewomen, who are received into the service of these Princesses, at fifteen
or twenty years of age, oblige themselves, most of them, for the remainder of
their lives; but such as are taken into it while they are yet children, are
sometimes afterward married to Gentlemen, Soldiers, or others of the menial
Servants, who have some Office about the House, and whose Allowances are upon
that Account augmented: but such as are not married at thirty, must not expect
to change their condition, otherwise then by being advanced to some more
honorable Employments among the women.

It is the custom of the Country, Women never talk of business.
that Women should be instructed betimes, not to meddle with any kind of
business whatsoever, insomuch that they never speak of any such thing to their
Husbands. These, on the otherside, make it their brag, that they are enabled
with such a strength of parts and understanding, as to leave all serious
thoughts behind them, at their own Lodgings, when they leave those to go into
the appartment of their Wives, where their discourse is altogether of mirth and
divertisement. If a Woman should trouble her Husband with the least discourse
about business, she would immediately put him out of humor, make him change
his countenance, and oblige him to retire, without so much as speaking to her.
But this she will be sure to avoid, though out of no other motive then this,
that another might not have those enjoyments of him, which she by her
imprudence would deprive her self of. For they affirm, that a woman is bestowed
on man mearly to serve, and divert him, and to mind the education of his
Children, and that herein consists all her duty, and that there are but too
many Examples of the mischiefs happening through the excessive freedom
heretofore allowed to women.

The Wives of Iapan have the reputation of being extremely faithful to their
Husbands, and so modest and reserved, that none any where else come near them.
Of this many instances might be produced: but confining our selves to the
relation of a particular man's Travels, wherein these digressions must needs be
thought tedious, we shall here produce only two or three, of many others, that
happend much about the time we speak of.

The King or Prince of the Province of Fingo, The generosity of a ^aponnese
Wife.
hearing that a Gentleman of the Country had a very handsome woman to his wife,
got him dispatched out of the way, and having sent for the Widow, some days
after her Husband's death, acquainted her with his desires. She told him, that
though she had much reason to be glad, and think her self happy, in being
honored with the friendship of so great a Prince, yet was she resolved to bite
off her Tongue, and murder her self, if he proffered her any violence; but if
he would grant her but one favor, which was to spend one month in bewailing
her Husband, and then give her the liberty to make an Entertainment for the
relations of the deceased, to take her leave of them, he should find how much
she was his Servant, and how far she would comply with his affection. The
Prince, who thought himself sure enough of her, made no difficulty to do what
the Gentlewoman desired of him, and having provided a very great dinner, at the
place where she desired it might be, all the kindred of the deceased came
thither, but it was only to be witnesses of the fidelity which she expressed to
her husband after his death: For the Gentlewoman perceiving the King began to
be warm in his wine, out of the hope he was in to enjoy what had been promised
him, desired the liberty to withdraw into an adjoining Gallery to take the Air;
but as soon as she was come into it, she cast her self headlong down, in the
presence of the King, and all her husbands Relations.

Much about the same time, An example of modesty in a (...).
it happened that a young gentlewoman, being on her knees at the end of a Table,
waiting on her Master, in the appartment of the Women, and overreaching her
self to take a flaggon that stood a little too far from her, she chanced to let
wind backwards, which she was so much ashamed of, that putting her Garment over
her head, she would by no means show her face after, but with an enraged
violence taking one of her nibbles into her mouth, she bit it off with such
fury, that she died in the place.

Another Lord, Another example of modesty.
having had an exact search made for all the handsome young Damsels in his
Province, to be disposed into his Ladies service, there was among the rest
brought him one whom he was so much taken with, that he made her his Concubine.
She was the Daughter of a poor Soldiers widow, who hoping to make some
advantage of her daughters good fortune, took occasion one day, to write her a
large letter, wherein she expressed what a necessitous condition she was in,
and how she was forced to sue to her for relief. While the Daughter was reading
her Mother's Letter, her Lord comes into the room; but being ashamed to
discover her Mothers poverty, she endeavors to hide the Letter from him, yet
could she not convey it away so, as that the other did not perceive it. The
disorder he observed in the Gentlewoman's countenance, made him suspect there
might be some design in it, insomuch, that he pressed her to show him the
Letter; but the more importunate he was, the more unwilling she was to satisfy
him; so perceiving there was no way to avoid it, she thrust it into her mouth,
with so much precipitation that thinking to swallow it down, it choked her.
This so incensed the Lord; that he immediately commanded her throat to be cut,
whereby they discovered only the Mothers Poverty, and the Daughters innocence.
He was so moved thereat, that he could not forbear expressing it by tears; and
it being not in his power to make any other Demonstrations of his affection to
the deceased; he sent for the Mother, who was maintained among his other
Ladies, at the time we speak of, with all imaginable respect.

They are generally so reserved in their conversation, The reservedness of
their conversotien.
that their discourses are not only far from being guilty of any obscene or
impertinent expression, but also they will not so much as talk of marriage, or
ought relating thereto, even in honorable terms, in the presence of young
people, who, when there is any such thing spoken of, immediately rise and go
out of the Room. The Children have a great tenderness and respect for their
Parents, as being persuaded there is no sin more severely punished by the Gods,
then the disobedience of Children. They have also a certain veneration for
their memory after their decease; for they religiously observe those fasting
days they impose upon themselves of their own accord, abstaining from whatever
has had life, upon those days of the month, on which their Parents departed
this World.

As they are very severe in restraining their Wives and Concubines of even the
least liberty, They are jealous.
so are they excessively cruel in punishing those which are not careful to
preserve their honors, or give the least suspicion of their inclinations to be
dishonest. It is not long since that the Lord of Firando caused three Ladies to
be put into so many Chests, through which there were Nails struck in of all
sides, one, for having prostituted her self to a Gentleman, who ripp'd up his
own belly as soon as their familiarity was discovered; and the other two,
because they had been privy to their Loves, and had not acquainted him
therewith. He who finds a Man locked up in the same Room with his Wife, may
kill them both; and in the Husbands absence, the Father, Brother, or any other
Kinsman, nay, any one of the menial Servants may do as much: and by this means,
they so avoid those scandals, which are but too frequent elsewhere, that a man
seldom hears of Adultery among them; in so much that I do not remember I ever
heard of any more then one Example, which being a remarkable one, I shall not
think it much to insert it here.

A certain Merchant, Adultery severely punished.
who had some reason to suspect his Wife, pretended to go into the Country, but
returning soon after, surpised her in the very act. The Adulterer he killed,
and having tied his Wife to a Ladder, he left her in that half-hanging posture
all night. The next day he invited all their Relations on both sides, as well
Men as Women, to dine with him at his own house, sending them word, that the
importance of the business he had to communicate to them, excused his
not-observance of the custom they have, to make Entertainments for the Women,
distinct from those of the Men. They all came, and wondered not much that the
Mistress of the house was not to be seen, in regard her Husband told them that
she was busy in the Kitchen: but dinner being well-nigh past, and the Guests
perceiving the Woman appeared not, they entreated him to send for her, which he
promised to do. Whereupon rising from the Table, and going into the Room, where
she was tied to the Ladder, he unbound her, put a Shroud about her, and put
into her hands a Box of Lacque, wherein were the Privy-members of her Gallant,
covered with Flowers, charging her not to open the Box, and saying to her, Go
and present this Box to our common Relations, and see whether I may, upon their
meditation, grant you your life. She came in that equipage into the Hall where
they sat at dinner, and falling on her knees presented the Box, with the
precious Relics within it, to the Kindred: but as soon as they had opened it,
she swounded. Her Husband perceiving it, went to her, and to prevent her
returning again, now that she was going, cut off her Head; which raised such an
horror in the Friends, that they immediately left the Room, and went to their
several homes.

To prevent these disorders, Fornication permitted.
they have in their common Inns upon the Road, as also in certain places in
Cities, the convenience of furnishing Travelers with a kind of Women, who are
for the most part Slaves, but very well clad in Silk, and make no difficulty to
proffer themselves to keep men company all night. These have the Custom of
Masters of Ships and common Seamen that are Foreigners; but if they will bid
at a little higher Game, and be more sure of their enjoyments, they may buy a
concubine, with whom they contract for the time they are to stay in the
Country; allowing them five or six pence a day toward their diet, a Garment or
two, certain pair of Shoes of Cordevant, and about eight or ten Crowns, for
the Father, or Master, who lets her out.

We are so far from charging this Nation with being over-superstitious, They
have no Devotion.
that on the other side, we affirm, that there is no mark of Devotion to be
observed among them. Those who are conceived to have very much, go once a
month to their Pagodes, and pronounce several times the word Nammanda, which
is the name of one of their Gods; but they are never seen praying to God,
neither morning nor evening, nor at any time of the day. There is a certain
Sect among them, which has Priests, who preach thrice a year, to which Sermons
all those of the same persuasion resort. There are also some who make use of
another kind of Ecclesiastics, especially in their long diseases, wherein they
have prayers made, which last twenty four hours, with such a noise, that they
stunne such as come near them, who yet cannot understand one word they say; not
only in regard they pronounce ill and confusedly; but hence, that whatever they
compose, as well in matter of Religion as Medicine, and the other Sciences, is
couched in such high and obscure terms, that many times they understand them
not themselves.

Notwithstanding this irreligion, Their Pagodes and Priests.
there are in Iapan an incredible number of Pagodes or Mesquites, some of which
have fifteen or twenty Priests belonging to them. They are distinguished from
the Laics in that their Heads are shaved, as also by their clothing, in as
much as they go in a kind of Cassock, made like the Frocks worn by some Country
people: but upon Holidayes they go in a sort of long Garments, which they sold
up under the left Arm, like a Cloak. Their principal employment is to pray
before their Gods, and to bury the dead, or at least the ashes of such bodies
as have been burnt. They are divided into several Sects, and consequently have
so many different ways of doing their Devotions, especially on the Anniversary
days of the deceased, which they call Bom, on which the Priests are employed
in praying and singing Letanies, in making Processions about a Chapel set
about with Wax-lights, much after the same manner as is done in some parts of
Europe. Their Sepulchers are near their Pagodes, covered with great Stones, two
or three foot high, on which such as go to do their Devotions there cast
Flowers, or branches of Trees, and put into a little Pit, made in the ground,
some fair Water and a little Rice, which is taken away thence by the poor.
Persons of Quality erect a little Pillar near their Sepulchers, and grave
thereon their names, with a certain Elogy, which serves for an Epitaph.

Their Ecclesiastics are divided into twelve principal Sects, Distinguished
into several Sects.
of which eleven eat not of any thing that has had life, and make a Vow of
Chastity, with so strict an Obligation for the observance thereof, that if they
break it, though in never so small a point, they are put to the most cruel
death that ever was heard of. For the Priest who has broken his Vow is put
into the ground up to the Waste, A cruel kind of death.
near the Highway; and all that pass by, who are not nobly descended, are
obliged to give a little stroke upon his Neck with a wooden Saw, which being
very blunt makes the Wretch languish three or four days together. This course
is taken with them, upon this account, that being permitted to use Sodomy, they
may forbear Women.

The Priests of the twelfth Sect live after another rate. For it is lawful for
them to feed on any thing that Earth or Water affords, as also to marry: and
yet this Sect, which they call Icko, whence the Priests, whereof it consists,
are named Ickois, is accounted the holiest, and most perfect of them all. He
who is Head of this Sect, is also Supreme Head of all the Clergy of the
Country, and is in so great veneration among his followers, that they do not
only carry him in a Palanquin, but indeed do him such honors as are almost
Divine. All the Priests depend on the Dayro, who still has the same power over
the Ecclesiastics, as he had heretofore, jointly, with the secular power. Only
such Pagodes as belong to these last have a settled Revenue, and enjoy many
Privileges and Immunities granted them by the Emperors. All the other Pagodes
are maintained by what is given them, either by way of Alms, or the
Gratifications that they get from those who employ them about Prayers for the
dead, wherein the main part of the exercise of their Religion consists.

Some among them believe, Their opinion concerning the Soul.
that the Soul is immortal, that the Body is reduced to its first Principle,
and becomes Dust and Ashes, but that the Spirit is either raised to eternal
joy, or condemned to an endless grief, and that at its return into this World,
it shall find good or evil, according to what it had done during this life.
Others make no distinction between the Souls of Men and those of Beasts, and as
they have no knowledge of the Worlds Creation, so are they ignorant that there
is a time appointed for its dissolution. The most zealous among them make no
scruple to convert their Pagodes into Drinking-houses; for, as they make choice
of the most delightful places of the Country, for the Pagodes, so they walk in
them, and divert themselves, in the presence of their Gods, and have the
company of their Priests, drinking and debauching themselves to that height,
that it proves the occasion of many consequent disorders.

A man shall never, No disputes about Religion.
in this Country, meet with any Controversies about Religion, nor ever find
that a Iapponese conceives himself any way obliged to instruct his Neighbor,
or show him his Error: but on the contrary, their indifference for these
concernments is generally so great, that some among them will not stick to
change their Religion for a hundred Crowns.

They have so irreconcilable an aversion for the Christians, They have
Christians.
that, perceiving they went cheerfully to their deaths, when they only cut off
their Heads, and crucified them after their death, they have since found out
such exquisite torments, to procure their more painful departure, that, though
they had resolution and constancy enough to endure them; yet could they not
express that insolence and insensibility, as to receive so grievous a death,
with the same alacrity they had discovered at the ordinary Executions. There
were indeed some who sung amidst the Flames; but it would have been somewhat
above humanity, if they should not have groaned in the torments they endured,
when they were broild, with a gentle Fire, upon Gridirons, or suffered to
languish ^or several days together. Yet did not all these courses much
diminish the number of those Wretches; in so much that these Monsters of
barbarism, perceiving that Death little frightened those who looked on it but
as a passage to a better life, Diabolical inventions to put Christians to death.
bethought themselves of other courses to be taken with them. Young Maids, of
any Quality, they caused to be stripped stark naked, to be publicly violated,
made them go on all four through the Streets, and dragged them through rugged
and uneven places, till their hands and knees were cut, and their bodies torn
in several places, and after all put them into Vats full of Serpents, which
entered into their bodies at all the open places, and so put them to a very
painful death: yet was this done with less horror, then when they filled the
privy parts of a Mother or a Daughter with Match done over with Gunpowder, and
bound about those of a Son or a Father with the same, and forced the Son to set
fire to that of the Mother, and the Father to that of his Daughter. 'Twas a
kind of favor shown them, when they covered their bodies all over with Turfs,
and incessantly poured ^eething Water into their privy parts, till they expi^'d
amidst those torments, which commonly dispatched them not in less then three or
four days. They drove great companies of them up and down the Country, and
into Forests, stigmatized in the foreheads, with prohibitions, upon pain of
death, that any should give them any sustenance or entertainment. Some were put
into Cages upon the Seaside, that the Tide might come up to their chins, and
at the return of the water they might recover their spirits a little, to endure
the greater torment at the next Flood. They bound the Fathers and Mothers to a
Post, and hood-winked them, while they put the Children to inconceivable
torments, which they being not able to endure, entreated their Parents with the
most importunate expressions they could imagine at that age, to deliver them
out of their pains, by renouncing. This was one of the most insupportable
punishments of any they invented, and which brought many to death and
abjuration. Another torment they had for those poor Children was, to pluck off
their Nails, and to prick them with Bodkins in the tenderest parts of their
bodies. To make a discovery of Christians, they ordered, that all the
Inhabitants should once a year protest before their Pagodes, and sign a certain
Instrument, whereby they renounced Christian Religion; and by this means there
passed not a year, but a great number was discovered. Such as were hung up by
the feet, and were continued in that posture for ten or twelve days, endured
the greatest torment of any, in regard the anguish of this punishment still
increasing, there is no pain, not even that of fire it self, comes near it.

These persecutions must needs have much diminished the number of Christians in
Iapan; but what most contributes to the destruction of Christian Religion, is a
course they have taken, to put the Christians to death, even though they
proffer to renounce; so that there is no way for any to avoid death, but by
discovering another Christian, who may endure it in their stead, and by that
discovery they escape. However, there is an exact Register kept of these
Renegadoes, out of a design, as it is conceived, one time or other, to rid the
Country of them, when the Executions must cease for want of Christians.

About the same time there was a search made for Christians in all the
Hospitals for Lepers, where they found three hundred and eighty Christians,
whom they sent away in two Ships, to the Philippine Islands, as a Present to
the Portuguez. The Leprosy is so common a Disease in Iapan, that a man shall
meet there with many, whose fingers and toes are so rotted, that they fall off.

The Christians, who are conducted to punishment, are tied; but the Priests,
whether Castilians, Portuguez, or Iaponneses, are otherwise treated. They shave
off one half of their Heads and Beards, which they paint over with a red
color, put a Gag into their Mouths, and a Halter about their Necks, which is
tied to the Horse-tail, on which they are brought to the place appointed for
their execution.

Most of their Houses are built of Wood, Their Houses.
slightly enough, in regard the Country is very much subject to Earthquakes.
They are all raised three or four foot from the ground, boarded and matted, and
very handsome within, especially those Rooms where they reveive their Visits.
They are, for the most part, but one story high, in which they live, and the
rest serve for Corn-lofts. They have places distinct from their Houses, where
they keep their Merchandises, and what else they most esteem, in regard their
Houses are so apt to take fire, that they are forced to have Fats full of Water
always ready against such Accidents, which are very frequent among them.

The Houses of Gentlemen and Soldiers are divided into two partitions, whereof
one is taken up by the Wife, who is never seen, and the other by the Husband,
who has his Chambers and Halls for the reception of his friends and his
business. The Wives of Citizens and Merchants appear in the Shops, and have a
care of the House; but they are treated with so much respect, that none durst
let fall a free or equivocal expression in their presence, nay, a licentious
one were criminal. Instead of Tapistry, they have a kind of Scenes or Shutters,
which serve them also for Pictures, whereof they cover the closures with Paper
painted and gilt, and so neatly pasted on, that the whole piece seems to
consist but of one sheet. These Shutters are made of very thin boards, and fall
one into another, so as that of two or three small Chambers, they can of a
sudden make a very fair Hall. All these little Rooms make^ a kind of Gallery,
which serves equally for both the Appartments of the Husband and Wife, and
leads to a common Door to go into the Garden, which Door is ordinarily opposite
to the Hall-windows. In the midst of the Room there commonly stands a Cabinet,
on which they set a Pot of Flowers, which are there to be had all the year
long. They are very curious about their Gardens, and make them as pleasant as
may be, with Groves, Fountains, Orchards, and especially one kind of Tree,
which is as green in Winter as in Summer.

There is not much Household Stuff to be seen in their Houses, in regard they
bestow on their Wives, the Trunks and Cabinets of Lacque, their rich Tapistry,
and the like, or they dispose them into some private Rooms, into which they
admit only their most intimate Friends. They are very expensive in their Pots
for Cha, or Tsia, as also in Pictures, Pieces excellent for the writing, and in
Arms.

They are civil, They are civil.
and entertain such as visit them with great Complements. Persons of Quality
make such as come to see them sit down, and present them with Tobacco and Tsia.
If the Master of the house has a particular esteem for the Friend who visits
him, he will treat him with Wine, which is brought in a varnished Cup; and it
were an incivility in him, to whom this honor is done, to refuse it. They are
not so reserved, but that sometimes they will take a little more then they are
well able to carry away; but seldom to that height, as to do ought whereof they
may repent the next day, or quarrel in their Drink; for the perpetual
apprehension they have of the unavoidable Death that would follow, keeps them
in, and sends them to bed with whole Skins.

In Cities, and upon the Highways, there are Inns, for the entertainment of
Travelers and Passengers, but otherwise there is not a Tipling-house, or
Cooks-shop, in all Iapan. No drinking houses in Japan.
For though there are great lovers of good cheer, and company keeping, yet have
they not any public places for that purpose, but they meet at one another
houses, and there spend the time in good fellowship and drinking, and have a
kind of Music, which is not very harmonious. Their Music.
They have but few Musical Instruments, and that most used among them, and
which they are most taken with, is a kind of Lute, the belly whereof is above a
footsquare, with a long and narrow neck, as being made only for four strings,
which are of Silk, and they strike them with a Peg of Ivory, about the bigness
of a Man's singer. They sing to it, but the voice is as immelodious as the sound
of the Instrument.

Their Wine they make of Rice, Their Wine.
putting thereto some Sugar or Honey, and they call it Moursack, or Saltse. It
is a kind of Hydromel, rather then Wine, yet it is as strong as the best Sack,
and makes a Man drunk much sooner.

As for Tsia, Tsia, how prepared.
it is a kind of The or Tea; but the Plant is much more delicate, and more
highly esteemed then that of The. Persons of Quality keep it very carefully in
Earthen-pots well stopped and luted, that it may not take wind: but the
Iaponneses prepare it quite otherwise then is done in Europe. For, instead of
infusing it into warm water, they beat it as small as powder, and take of it as
much as will lie on the point of a Knife, and put it into a dish of Porcelane
or Earth, full of seething Water, in which they stir it, till the Water be all
green, and then drink it as hot as they can endure it. It is excellent good
after a debauch, it being certain there is not any thing that allayes the
Vapors, and settles the Stomach better then this Herb does. The Pots they make
use of about this kind of Drink are the most precious of any of their
Household Stuff, in as much as it is known, that there have been Tsia-pots,
which had cost between six and seven thousand pound sterling.

Their Marriages are solicited only the Relations, Their Marriages.
who have some superiority over those that contract them. The Father and Mother
find out the party, and propose that alliance* and for want of them, others of
the Kindred; so as that the young Couple know nothing of what is done, in so
much that the persons who are to be married never see one another till the
Marriage is to be consummated. This is the more easily effected, in that it is
in the Husbands power to keep what number he thinks fit of Concubines, nay, may
prosecute his enjoyments among common Prostitutes, whereas the least suspicion
of the Woman's dishonesty would cost her her life. They have also the
convenience of Divorce, and may send their Wives back to their own Friends, yet
conceive it no disparagement to them. True it is, that only Persons of mean
condition use it, as Merchants, Tradesmen, and common Soldiers; and that
Persons of Quality take another course, out of a respect to the Birth and
Relations of the Woman; and in case of disagreement they still maintain them
according to their Quality. Which hinders not but that they also are most
liberal of themselves among their Concubines, little it seems troubled at the
discontent they give their Wives, whom they see but when they please
themselves. For, certain it is, that the Women only are married, and that the
Men are as much at liberty after, as they had been before marriage. Common
Brothel-houses are allowed, and there are some Masters who buy Slaves only to
drive that trade; it being their persuasion, that to avoid a greater scandal,
this may be permitted.

They bring up their Children with extraordinary indulgence and mildness, Their
education of their Children.
never beating, and very seldom chiding them; out of this consideration, that
knowing they are not come to the use of their reason, they conceive they are
not to be made capable thereof before the time, and that things are to be
instilled into them, according to their weak capacity, with mildness, and that
they ought to be instructed rather by good Examples then many Precepts. It is
to be imagined that the little correction they give them in their Childhood,
strengthens that obstinate disposition, which is remarkable in all the
Iapponneses: but it is to be confessed withal, that this noble and mild kind
of education much heightens that vivacity of Understanding and Judgment, which
is discernable in them, while they are yet very young; in so much that Children
of seven, eight or nine years of age, have more piercing Wits, and are more
searching and inquisitive, then our youth is at seventeen or eighteen years of
age.

They are not sent to School till they are seven or eight years of age, Go not
to School till seven or eight years of age.
upon this account, that, as they affirm, Children are not capable of
instruction before that time, and that they are apt to learn only naughtiness
and unhappy tricks one of another. The Masters, when they meet with dull Boys,
never either chide or beat them for that, but teach them to read and write by
degrees, by raising an emulation in them to do as well as others; and by this
course they improve them much better, then if they treated them harshly, it
being to be observed, that it is an incorrigible Nation, expecting to be mildly
treated, and seldom to be bettered by soul means and blows.

They never swath the Children, Not swathed.
but as soon as they are brought into the World, the Midwife having washed them
in cold Water, thrusts them into the Sleeves of their Iaponneses, and by that
means they so harden them against heat and cold, that many times such as scarce
have the use of their legs, will crawl stark naked of all four about the House,
and into the Fields.

The eldest Son being come to Man's estate, the Father resigns his charge to
him; or, if he be a Merchant, makes over his Trade to him, with the better half
of his Estate, assigns him the best Lodgings in the House, and goes with the
rest of the Family to another part of it; or if he be a person of ability, he
resigns the whole House to him, and takes another, mannaging what he has
reserved of his Estate, for the advancement of his other Sons, if so be he has
any. The Daughters have no part of the Fathers Estate, no not even when they
are married, in regard they would not have Wives to make any advantage of their
Dower; so that if the Brides Father should on the Wedding Day send a sum of
Money to the Bridegroom, he returns it back again with great Complements, and
sends word, that he would not have his Father-in-Law think, that his Addresses
to his Daughter proceeded from any other motive then the desire he had of his
alliance, and consequently that he expected not to make any advantage of his
Estate.

They are so ambitious and highly conceited of themselves, The Japonneses
tender in point of honor.
that it is seldom seen a Iaponnese does any thing wherewith he might be
reproached: but on the contrary, they would rather lose their lives then betray
their honor. Of this I shall here insert an illustrious Example.

In the time of the War between Fidery, An Example of it.
and his Guardian, the King or Prince of Cocora, who had discovered some
inclination to the contrary party, was forced to leave his Wife and Children as
Hostages with Fidery, who hearing that the Prince of Cocora had openly declared
for his Adversary, sent word to his Wife, that his pleasure was, she should
come and live within the Palace. She would have excused her self, by
representing to Fidery, that she was a Wife, and as such, owed the Prince her
Husband the same obedience, as her Husband owed to the Emperor; so that if his
Majesty expected she should do what he would have her, his best course were to
apply himself to her Husband, that he might command her to do it. Fidery seeing
her constancy, sent her word, that if she came not, he would have her brought
thither by force. But the Princess considering with her self, that if she left
her House, it would be a dishonor both to her and her Husband, withdrew her
self with her Nurse and Children, and some of the menial Servants, who
proffered to dye with her, to a Chamber, into which she caused Gunpowder and
Wood to be brought, and having made her Will, and writ a Letter to her Husband,
she put both into the hands of a trustly Person, with order to depart as soon
as he had seen the Powder set on fire, and by this means gave an extraordinary
Demonstration of her constancy.

They are also very punctual in the performance of what they had promised
those, Are good Friends.
who desire their assistance or protection. For no Iaponnese but will promise
it any one that desires it of him, and spend his life for the person who has
desired him to do it; and this, without any consideration of his Family, or the
misery whereto his Wife and Children may be thereby reduced. Hence it comes,
that it is never seen a Malefactor will betray or discover his Accomplices; but
on the contrary, there are infinite Examples of such as have chosen rather to
die with the greatest torment imaginable, then bring their Accomplices into any
inconvenience by their confession.

Iapan is so rich and abundant in all things, What Forraigners trade thither.
that, some few Merchants excepted, who trace into the Indies, there is hardly
any Iaponnese, who meddles with the venting of any foreign Commodities. The
greatest Commerce which is carried on there is that of the Chinese, who have
continued theirs in this Country ever since the Island was first peopled. The
Spaniards and Portuguez have traded thither these six or seven score years; and
the English had no sooner begun, but they gave over their trading into those
parts, by reason of the small advantage made thereby. Those of Siam and
Cambodia were wont to send thither yearly two or three Ionques; but this is
also given over, especially since the Dutch bring them the Commodities of Iapan
at a lower rate, and with less danger then they could fetch them themselves.
The chief Trade is at the City of Meaco, whither most of the Merchants, as well
foreigners as those of the Country, bring all their Commodities, and where
they have their Agents and Factors, to distribute them over all the Island.

The Commodities which Foreigners bring to Iapan are, The occasion of the
rupture between the Chinese and the Japonneses.
about four or five thousand Picols of Silk, and abundance of Stuffs, of Silk,
Cotton, Thread, etc. above two hundred thousand Deer skins, about a hundred
thousand other Hides, Hemp, Linnen-clothes, Wool, Garments, Cotton,
Quicksilver, all sorts of Gums and Medicinal Drugs, Spices, Cloves, Pepper,
Sugar, Musk, a sort of Wood called Sappan, and Calambac, Purcelan, Camphir,
Borax, 'Elephants Teeth, Coral, and all kind of Mercury, which the Chinese
bring.

The Chinese and Iaponneses have heretofore lived in very good correspondence,
in so much that there hardly passed a year, but the Kings of those two powerful
States visited one another by reciprocal Embassies. This friendship continued
till the Iaponneses, who lived in China, became so insolent, as to ransack a
whole City, and to ravish all the Women and Maids that fell into their hands.
The Chinese resented the affront as they ought, and killed all the Iaponneses
they met withal. The King of China, considering of how dangerous consequence
it was to afford refuge to a sort of people, who had the insolence to commit
such an action in the time of peace, banished them his Kingdom for ever,
ordering the Decree to be graven in golden Letters upon a Pillar, which to that
purpose he caused to be erected upon the Seaside, and forbidding his Subjects,
upon pain of death, to trade into Iapan. These Prohibitions are still so
strictly observed, that the Chinese, who go thither, give out, that they carry
their Commodities to some of the neighboring Islands of the Indies; in regard
they are sure they would be confiscated, if it were known they carried them to
Iapan; but the Iaponneses treat the Chinese otherwise, and give them the
egress and regress of their Country.

It is happily from these Prohibitions of the King of China, Japan was not
peopled by Chinese.
that some have taken occasion to affirm, that Iapan was peopled by certain
Exiles, whom the King of China had sent thither, upon a Conspiracy they were
engaged in against his person; since the Histories of neither Iapan nor China
speak of any such thing, and that otherwise there is so great a difference in
their Clothing, their Ceremonies, manner of Life, Language and writing, that
it is impossible that the same Nation should have contracted, even in the
sequel of many Ages, such contrary Habits. Some affirm, that the Iaponneses
have made this change, in revenge for the ill treatment they received of the
others; but besides the unlikelihood there is, that a whole Nation should, of a
sudden, conceive an aversion for what they loved before, there is yet a greater
improbability, that it should so change its language and manner of writing, as
that there should be no rapport between the one and the other. The Chinese
never cut their Hair, but tie it up together upon the Crown of the Head; the
Iaponneses, on the contrary, shave the forepart of the Head down to the Ears,
and tie up the rest of their Hair in their Neck behind, with a String made of
Paper. The latter do also shave their Beards, whereas the Chinese suffer
theirs to grow to their full length: whence it may be imagined, that they were
rather Tartars, who first got into this Island, then Chinese.

The Iaponneses, being thus banished China, began to establish their Commerce
at Tayouan, in the Island Fermosa, whither the Chinese came with their
Commodities; but the King of China hearing of it, forbad his Subjects ^o trade
thither, by which means the Iaponneses were frustrated of that Navigation.
Which so troubled the Emperor, that he would not permit his Subjects to trade
out of the Kingdom without his express Commission and Pasports; as well out of
this consideration, that he would not have any Arms transported out of the
Country, as the experience he has that the Iaponneses are a stout and daring
People out of their own Country, and being extremely conceited of himself, he
would not have any affront done them, which it should not be in his power to
resent, or that any other then himself should chastise their insolence, as it
happened to them, not long since in the Kingdom of Siam, upon their Attempt
against the Kings person there, and at Nayouan, upon their assaulting the
Governor of the place.

There is no Custom or Duty paid upon any Commodities in Iapan, No Custom paid
in Japan.
either to the Emperor, or any other Prince or Lord, so that the whole
advantage comes in to the Merchant; but in regard all drive some Trade or
other, and that the Country is extremely populous, the profits are very small.

Since the Rupture between the Chinese and Iaponneses, the Emperor of Iapan
has not held any correspondence with any foreign Prince. No correspondence
between the Emperor of Japan and other Princes.
The King of Siam, the Pope, and the King of Spain, sent very considerable
Embassies to him, which were all very kindly received by him; but the Emperor
of Iapan never sent to visit or complement them.

There is, all over Iapan, but one Language, which is so different from that of
China, Corea, and Tunking, that the Inhabitants of these four Countries,
understand one another no more then we do the Arabic. There is also the same
difference between their Characters, and yet they have all four a sort of
Characters, by which they understand one the other, so that those among them,
who have studied, understand and express in their particular Language, what the
others would have expressed in theirs, by means of these common Characters.
They write with Pencils, and that so fast, that they spend very little time in
writing the Notes, by which they do most of their Messages, rather then by word
of mouth. They endeavor to express themselves in few words, especially when
they either speak or write to Persons of great Quality; so that the Letters and
Petitions they address to their Superiors are couched in few words, that it is
no great trouble to afford them the reading.

They have not the way of keeping Accounts as the Merchants in our parts have;
Their Arithmetic.
but they can count with certain little Bowls, which they thread upon little
Sticks on a square Board, as fast as our ablest Accountans by all the Rules of
Arithmetic, even that of Three.

They have many Books, and some great Libraries, but of these not so great a
number as we have in Europe.

The Dayro is the person who keeps Memorial of whatever passes, The Day^ro
writes the History of the Country.
and writes the Chronicle of the Country. It is also only he, and the Lords and
Gentlemen of his House, who are in number above eight hundred, as also the
Lords and Ladies descended from him, who have the privilege to write any
Books. These only have all the Learning among themselves, and are so proud of
it, that the advantages they make thereof are equal to those they derive from
their Birth, which is no doubt more noble then that of the Emperor. Thence it
comes that they slight all others so far, that they shun their conversation,
live in a quarter of the City distinct from the rest, and will have no
communication with the ignorant.

There is but one kind of Measure all over the Country, The Money of Japan.
and all the Money is at the same rate and value. The Gold is in its
excellency, but the Silver not so good, so that to reduce it to the rate of
that of France, there will be a loss of 22. or 23. in the 100. They have three
sorts of Gold Coins, whereof one weighs six Spanish Ryals, and is worth forty
eight Tayls, accounting every Tail at about five Shilling Sterling. Ten of the
second kind weigh a Ryal and half a quarter, and are worth one Tail, and a
fifth part each of them: and ten of the third sort weigh a Ryal and a half and
half a quarter, and are worth, each of them, the sixth part of Tail. The Silver
Coin, which is made in the form of a Lingot, is of no certain weight; but it is
so ordered, that as much of it as amounts to fifty Tayls is to be of a just
weight, which they dispose into Rolls of Paper, in each as much as comes to
twenty Crowns, and so they dispatch their Payments with little trouble. They
have besides this a lesser Coin of Silver, made much like French Beans, which
also is not of any certain weight, save only in gross, or when it amounts to
such a sum, from the value of seven pence to six shillings, or better. There is
also a great difference in the value of the Caxias; for of some of them, a
thousand are worth but Crown, whereas of others the same number may amount to
three Crowns and a half. Much about the time of our Travels the Emperor had
ordered them to be carried down, intending to have a new Money made of Brass,
and that the poorer sort might not be ruined thereby, he caused the bad Money
to be called in, and made good the value of it to such as brought it in.

This Country wants not any kind of Cattle, Japan well stored with Cottel and
Fowl.
but is so much the more abundant therein, out of this respect, that they do
not geld any Creature. Thence it comes they are well stored with Houses, Bulls,
Kine, Swine, Deer, wild Boars, Bears, Dogs, etc. as also with all sorts of
Fowl, as Swans, Geese, Ducks, Herns, Cranes, Eagles, Falcons, Pheasants,
Pigeons, Woodcoocks, Quails, and all the other sorts of small Birds, that we
have in these parts.

There are also in this Country several sorts of Mineral Waters, very good
against diverse Diseases. Some have the taste and qualities of Copper, others
that of Saltpeter, Iron, Tin, Salt; and there is, among others, a Source of hot
water which has the taste of Tin, and issues out of a Caye, which is about ten
foot diameter at the mouth, and has both above and below several picked
Stones, like Elephants teeth, so that it somewhat resembles that figure, by
which some would represent the Jaws of Hell. The Water, which comes out of it
in great bubbles day and night constantly, is not so hot, but that it may be
endured as soon as it is out of the Source, so that there is no need of mixing
any other water therewith.

There is in this Country, in a spacious Plain, at the foot of a Mountain, not
far from the Seaside, another Source, which gives Water but twice in four and
twenty hours, and that during the space of an hour at each time, unless it be
when the East Wind blows, for then it gives water four times a day. This water
comes out of a hole, which Nature has made in the ground, and which they have
covered with several great Stones; but when the time of its flood, as I may
call it, is come, the water is forced out with such violence amidst the Stones,
that it shakes them all, and makes a cast twenty or twenty four foot high, with
such noise as would drown that of a great Gun. It is so hot, that it is
impossible fire should raise ordinary water to so high a degree of heat, as the
earth gives this; for it immediately burns the stuffes on which it falls, and
keeps its heat much longer, then the water that has been boiled over the fire.
The Well is enclosed with a high Wall, having at the bottom thereof several
holes, through which the water runs into certain Channels, and so is brought
into the houses, where they bath themselves, reducing it to such a degree of
warmth as may be endured.

Some affirm that their Physicians are so able, Their Physicians.
that there is no Disease which they cannot discover by the Pulse. They are
perfectly well skilled in the virtues of Simples and Drugs, especially those of
the Radix Chinat, and Rhubarbe, whereof they make use in their Recipe's, which
for the most part consist in Pills, with very good success. They are also very
fortunate in the curing of ordinary Diseases; but Surgery is not as yet
known among them.

The Mineral Waters we spoke of before, The riches of Japan.
are a sufficient demonstration, that there are in Iapan Mines of all sorts of
Metals. Accordingly, there is found Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron and Lead.
The Country brings forth also Cotton, Flax and Hemp, wherewith they make very
fine Clothes. It produces also Silk, and affords abundance of Goat and Deer
skins, the richest Works of Wood and Lacque of any in the World, all sorts of
Provisions and medicinal Drugs. They have, among others, a particular Invention
for the melting of Iron, A particular way of melti^g Iron.
without the using of any fire, casting it into a Tun done about on the inside
with about half a foot of Earth, where they keep it with continual blowing, and
take it out by Ladles full, to give it what form they please, much better, and
more artificially then the Inhabitants of Liege are able to do. So that it may
be said, Iapan may live without its Neighbors, as being well furnished with
all things requisite to life.

The Portuguez came to the knowledge of Iapan, by means of the Trade they drove
in the Kingdom of Siam and Cambodia. They found it no hard matter to settle
themselves there, in as much as the Iaponneses had not, at first, any aversion
for their Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, The Roman Cathol^^^ Religion planted in
Japan.
so that in a short time the Roman Catholic Religion got such footing there,
that they were permitted to build Churches in several places of the Kingdom,
and particularly at Nangasacky. But the Spaniards too soon discovered the
Design they had to establish themselves there, and had not the reservedness to
smother that haughty humor, which would reign all over the World: which
occasioned the Iaponneses first to set upon, and afterward, The Spaniards
ba^ished it.
to burn their Ships, in so much that in the year 1636. they banished them the
Country, with Prohibitions, upon pain of Death, not to return into it.

The Dutch have traded thither ever since the year 1611. and still continue it,
so much to their advantage, The Dutch established there.
that their Commerce to Iapan is worth what they carry on all over the rest of
the Indies. They affirm in the Relation of the Voyage they made thither in the
year 1598. that the City of Meaco is one and twenty Leagues about, but that it
had been much ruined by the precedent Civil Wars. That Ossacks, and Boungo, are
Cities, which, for Wealth, may be compared to any other in the Indies. That the
Emperors of Iapan were ordinarily interred in the City of Coyo, of if they
made choice of any other place for their Sepulture, yet were some of their
Bones carried thither, though it were but a Tooth. That the City of Piongo,
eighteen Leagues from Meaco, was in some part ruined during the Civil Wars of
Nobananga, who was defeated by Faxiba, the Predecessor of Taicko, and that
what remained of it was partly destroyed by an Earthquake that happened in the
year 1596. and partly by the fire which consumed the wretched remainders of it,
some time after. The Cities of Sacay, Voluquin, Founay, Tosam, and several
others, are also very considerable ones.

The Air is good and healthy, The Air of Japan.
though more inclined to cold then heat, and yet the Iaponneses sow their Corn
at the beginning of May, but cut not the Rice till September.

They have neither Butter nor Oil, and have an aversion against Milk, out of an
imagination, that the Souls of Beasts reside in it, and that it is blood in
effect, though of a different color. They do not eat the flesh of either Bulls
or Kine, nor that of any tame beast, but love wild Fowl and Venison, and are
much addicted to the hunting thereof. They have Cedar-trees, which are so big,
that they make Pillars of them for their greatest Edisices, and Masts for their
Ships.

Poverty is not so criminal or infamous in Iapan, Have many good qualities.
as it is in several places of Europe, where the rich are only accounted
virtuous. They hate Calumniators, Swearers and Gamesters; but they have also
their Vices, which much eclipse their other good parts.

They are rather of a brownish Complexion then white, strong and well set,
enduring paints taking, and the inconveniences of the Seasons, with incredible
patience. They endure hunger and thirst, heat and cold, without any trouble,
and are no otherwise clad in Winter then they are in Summer.

The Iaponneses are distinguished into five Orders. Are distinguished into five
Orders.
The first, is that of Kings and Princes, and such as have civil or military
Charges and Employments, who are all called by a common name Tones. The second
is that of Ecclesiastics, whom they call by a general name Bowzes. The third
is that of Gentlemen and Merchants. The fourth that of Tradesmen, and such as
relate to the Sea. And the fifth that of Laborers, and such as work by the day.

The general administration of Affairs is in the hands of three principal
Ministers of State; the first whereof, The principal Ministers of Japan.
superintendency is over Ecclesiastical affairs, has the quality of Zazo; he
who has the disposal of Charges and Offices is called Veo, and he who has the
oversight of things relating to the War is called Cabacama.

There could not be hitherto had any true account of the Emperor of Iapan's
Revenue: but it is certain that he makes above two Millions of Gold of the
Rice, which his own Demesne affords him every year. It is also certain, that
the Emperor of Iapan is so powerful, that Taicko, whom we spoke of before,
finding himself well settled upon the Throne, had a design to pass over into
China, with a Fleet of two thousand Vessels, for the building whereof he had
already cut down Timber, which he might have done with the more ease, upon this
account, that the Iaponneses are incomparably a more warlike Nation then the
Chinese.

But in regard there is not any thing makes a greater descovery of the
greatness of this Monarch, then the Ceremonies of the Interview between him and
the Dayro, whereof we promised before to give here a short description, we
think fit to that purpose to insert in this place the Extract of a Relation
made by the Director of the Dutch Commerce in Iapan, who was at Meaco in the
year 1626. This Author says, that being at the Emperors Court in the month
of October, in the year aforesaid, with some others of the Deputies of his
Nation, he was desirous to see the Procession, which was made there on the 25.
of the said month. To that end they went the 24. and with the retinue took up
a house, which they had hired near the Dayro's Palace, in regard the next day
it would have been impossible for them to pass the Streets.

On the said 25. of October, The Procession of the Dayro and Emperor.
as soon as it was light, they found the Streets and tops of Houses full of
people. The Streets were railed in on both sides, from the Dayro's Palace to
the Emperors, having files of Soldiers all along, and the middle of the
Street strewn with white Sand, all laid so even, that nothing should retard
the Procession, or disturb its Order. These Soldiers, who were part of the
Dayro's Guards, part of the Emperors, were all clad in white, having on their
Heads Casks of black Lacque, by their sides two Cymitars, and in their Hands a
Nauganet, that is, a Iaponnese Pike.

The first appearance was that of a great number of the Domestics of these two
Princes, The Dayro's baggage.
going to and fro, as also that of several Porters or Sedan-men, who carried in
great square Chests, which were of black Lacque and gilt, the baggage of the
Dayro to the Emperors Palace.

Then followed, The Ladies of Honor.
in forty six Palanquins, carried each of them by four men, so many Maids of
Honor belonging to the Dayro's Wives, who went in that equipage to the
Emperors Palace. The Palanquins were of a fine white Wood, painted with
Verdure, garnished with brass Plates, very neatly made, and five or six foot
high.

After them there came one and twenty other Palanquines of a kind, which they
call Norrimones, varnished with black and gilt.

Next them there came twenty seven other Norrimones, 27. Lords of the Dayro's
Retinue.
of the same bigness with the precedent, but made with Wickets and Windows, for
so many Lords of the Dayro's Retinue, who were carried in them to the Emperors
Palace, having every one before him a gilt Umbrello, covered with very fine
Cloth. They had about them a hundred and eight Pages clad in white, 24.
Gentlemen.
and behind them four and twenty Gentlemen, armed as if they were ready to
engage in a fight. These had on their Heads a kind of Bonnets of black Lacque,
with a little Plume of Feathers of the same color, and under their Iaponnesses
they had long and narrow Breeches of Satin, of several colors, embroidered
with Gold and Silver, with Buskins varnished with black, and gilt at the
extremities. By their Sides they had Cimitars, the Hilts whereof were gilt, and
Bows and Arrows at their Waste, and over their Shoulders Scarfs richly
embroidered, the ends whereof hung down on the Cruppers of their Horses. No
doubt, they had culled out the goodliest persons in the Country of this
Ceremony; for they were all the handsomest persons, both as to Body and
Countenance, that could be seen. Their Saddles were varnished over and gilt,
the Seats embroidered and covered with Tigers and Lynxes Skins; their Trappings
were of Crimson Silk twined, and the Horses had their Mains tied up with Gold
and Silver Thread, and they had on the Breast and Crupper a kind of Network of
twined crimson Silk, and instead of Shoes their Hoofs were done about with
plain crimson Silk. Every Horse was led by two Lacquies, and two other Lacquies
carried two great Umbrelloes, covered with a very fine and transparent cloth,
and upon that a covering of Scarlet fringed with Gold. Another Lacquie carried
a Nanganet, or Pike, the top whereof was also covered with a piece of red and
black cloth. Every Horsman had eight Pages clad in white, and armed with two
Cymitars, according to the mode of the Country.

This body of Horse served for a Guard for the three chiefest of the Dayro's
Wives, The Dayro's three Wives.
who followed it in three Coaches of so extraordinary a making, that we shall
not think it much to afford them a short description. They were at least twenty
or twenty five foot in height, ten or twelve in length, and five or six in
breadth, having on each side three, and before, two Windows with embroydered
Curtains. Before and behind they were made like the Front of a House, as was
also the Door at which they went in, which was made behind at the back. The
Wheels were of Iron, and the Coach was varnished all over with black, so that
the Wheels might be seen turning as it were in a Looking-glass. The Roofs of
them, which were built Arch-wise, had drawn thereon the Dayro's Arms, within a
great Circle of Gold. The Pillars, as also the inside of the Coach, was
enriched with Figures of beaten Gold and Mother of Pearl, and all the
extremities were garnished with Gold. Two great black Bufflers, covered with a
Network of Crimson Silk, drew each of them, and they were guided by four
Halberteers clad in white. Every Coach was valued at seventy thousand Tayls,
which amount to twenty thousand pounds Sterling.

These Coaches had also their Foot-guard, and many Pages marching on both sides
of them.

Twenty three of the chiefest Servants belonging to these Ladies were carried
next to them in so many black Norrimones, The chief Servants of those Ladies.
adorned with Brass plate, having each of them marching before him a
Halbertier, who carried an Umbrello, on each side two Pages, and behind them
sixty eight Gentlement of the Dayro's, clad and armed as those we mentioned
before. 68. Gentlemen.
These marched two a breast, and were followed by a great number of Pages,
Halberteers, and Slaves.

After them there were carried. Two gilt Stools, with Plates of Gold at the
extremities. A great Fire-work. A great and very rich Sea-Compass. Two great
Golden Candlesticks. Two Pillars of Ebony. Three Cabinets of Ebony, garnished
with Gold plates. Four other Cabinets, bigger and richer then the three
precedent. Two great Gold Basins carved. A pair of Pantofles varnished.


After these, The Emperor and his Word.
there followed in two Coaches of the same making as the three first, the
Emperor and his Ward, having before them a hundred and sixty Gentlemen, armed
with two Cymitars and a Nanganet, serving for a particular Guard about their
Majesty's persons. These Guards they call Sambreys, and they are chosen out of
the most valiant and most active persons in the Kingdom. Immediately before the
Coaches there marched four Men with Umbrelloes, four others with great Iron
Rods to make way, two light Horses magnificently covered, and with very rich
Trappings, accompanied each of them by eight Men, armed with Bows and Arrows,
and two great Pikes.

The Emperors Brethren followed next on Horseback, accompanied by all the
Princes and Lords of Iapan, who were also on Horseback* all armed, and
sumptuously clad, 164. in number.

The Chiefest of these Lords were, The greatest Lords of Japan.
Owaruy Camny Samma, the Emperors Brother. Quiney Deymangon samma, another
Brother of the Emperor. Mittot Chonango samma, a third Brother of the
Emperor. Massummenamoet Nocammi samma, a fourth Brother of the Emperors.
Matsendairo Thoy quese Nocammi samma, Lord of Canga. Matsendairo Moutsnocammy
samma, Satsumadonne, that is, Lord of Satsuma. Matsendairo Iondonne.
Mansendairo Symouts quedonne. Matsendairo Quonenoch, Wacchoo; and Turogan^
Deynangono Cammy samma.


These marched all in a File, having each of them a long train of Pages,
Lacqueys, Hal^erteers, Guards and Slaves.

The other Lords, among whom were Ouwaydonne; and Woutadonne, the ehiefest of
the Emperous Council, marched two a breast, he of the greater quality taking
the left hand, which among them is accounted the more honorable.

After them marched four hundred of the Guards of the body, and in the same
order, in white Liveries.

Next them, The Dayro's Concubines.
in six fair Coaches, came the Dayro's Concubines; but these Coaches were not
so large as the former, and were drawn each of them by a single Buffer.

Then followed sixty eight Gentlemen on Horseback, attended by a great number
of Lacqueys and Slaves.

The Dayro's Secretary, He Sacretary.
accompaied by thirty seven Gentlemen on Horseback, followed next in a Coach,
and immediately preceded forty six Lords of the Dayro's House, who were carried
in Norimonnes, whereof fifteen were of Ebony, beautified with Ivory, thirteen
varnished with black and gilt, and the other eighteen were only varnished with
black. There were carried after them forty six Umbrelloes suitable to their
Norimonnes.

Then followed the Dayro's Music, His Music.
which consisted of fifty four Gentlemen, very odly, but very richly clad, who
played on their Instruments, which were only Tabours, Timbrels, Copper Basins,
Bells, and that kind of Lute we spoke of before, which was not heard by reason
of the confused noise of the rest.

Yet was this distracted kind of Music delightful to the Dayro, who
immediately followed it. The Dayro
He was sat in a little wooden Structure made like a Sedan, but much larger,
as being about seven or eight foot high, and as many Diameter, having windows
on all sides, with embroidered Curtains. The Roof of that little Structure was
arched, and had in the midst, upon a great Button, a Cock of massy Gold, with
his Wings spread in a Field Azure, with several Stars of beaten Gold about the
Sun and Moon, which appeared there with a luster coming near the natural. This
Machine was carried by fifty Gentlemen of the Dayro's retinue, all clad in
white, with Bonnets on their Heads. Forty other Gentlemen went before it, and
represented the Guard for the Dayro's person. These were clad after a
particular fashion, much like that of the ancient Romans, carrying each of them
a gilt Nouganet. The Captain of the Guard marched alone on Horseback, behind
the Dayro's Chair, armed with a Target, stuck through with several Arrows, and
had carried after him forty Umbrelloes for the Guards.

Next were carried thirteen varnished Chests, and in the close of the
Procession came four hundred Soldiers clad in white, who marched six a breast,
and by that means hinder the crowds of people to interrupt that Order. This
Ceremony took up the whole day, so that night coming on upon us at the place
where we were, we thought it not safe to venture home at so unseasonable a
time, by reason of the many Robberies, Murders, and other Violences committed
in the Streets during the disorder, which proved so great, that the next
morning there were found a great number of dead persons, some whereof had been
killed and robbed, and others had been smothered in the throng. The Dayro staid
three days at the Emperors Palace, who during that time waited on him in
person with his Brethren, and had the charge of his Table, for that time
defrayed by Sugadonne, chief Judge of the City of Meaco, Ivocamosamma,
Cob^ritot homy Samma, Macamora, Mockiemon samma, and Mannosa Fr^yemon samma.
There were brought to his Table at every meal, a hundred and fourteen dishes of
meat.

Ouwaydonne, the President of the Emperors Council, Ivemondonne, one of the
Counselors of State, Farimadonne, Quiniem Ondonne, Sioyserodonne, and
Chirotadonne, provided for the Table of the Dayro's three chiefest Wives.

The Emperors Present to him were. Two hundred Marks of Gold. A hundred
Garments of Watte, of the best. Two great Silver Pots, full of Honey. Five
Catties of the Wood of Calambae. Two hundred pieces of Crimson Serge. Five Pots
of Silver, full of Musk; and Five excellent Horses with very rich Trappings.
The young Emperor gave him. Three thousand pieces of Silver amounting each to
four Tayls and three Mases. Two fair Cymitars set forth with Gold. Two hundred
rich Garments after the Iaponnese fashion. Three hundred pieces of Satin. A
piece of Calamba^-wood, three Else and a half in length, and above two foot
thick. Five great Vessels of Silver, full of Musk; and Ten excellent Horses
with rich Trappings.


These shall suffice for an account of the Kingdom and people of Iapan.

The Island FERMOSA.
WE said elsewhere, that when the Iaponneses were banished China; there were
also Prohibitions made, that none should trade with them, and that the
Chinese, to avoid the confiscation of their goods, which they might carry to
Iapan, made choice of the Island of Tayovang, for the continuance of their
Commerce. The Iss^ of Tayovang
This example encouraged the Dutch, in the year 1632. to make use of the
convenience of the same place, in regard the Chinese had deprived them of all
hope of Commerce with them, if they came not out of their Country, and settled
not themselves in a place where they might give no occasion of suspicion.

There is not in all the East, a more convenient haven for the Trade of China,
and for the establishment of a Communication with Iapan, and all the rest of
the Indies, then this Island affords. For ships may come thither at all times
of the year, so as that they need not stay for the Moussons, or convenience of
the general winds, which in all other places last six months of the year.

About that time the Dutch built there a Fort, The Dutch settle there.
with four Bastions, all of freestone, upon a Down, or Sandy assent, within
half a League of the great Island Fermosa. Within three hundred paces of the
Fort, there passes a Channel, which serves for a Haven, though, even at high
water, there be but thirteen or fourteen foot water; but the ships that Anchor
there may defy any wind. They have made a redoubt of Stone, very well flanck'd
upon the Channel, where they have a little Garrison of twenty five or thirty
men, which are enough to defend the entrance of it; and they have found the
situation of it so advantageous, that they have given it the name of new
Zealand.

The Island Fermosa, And (...) new Zealand, Fermosa.
that is, the Fair Island, called by the Chinese Paccande, lies at 21. Degrees
on this side the line, within 32. Leagues of the River of Chineheu, and the
Island of Quemoy in China, reaching in length from South-west to North-east, as
far as 21. Degrees and a half.

It is about a hundred and thirty Leagues in compass, An Anarchy.
and contains many Villages, and an infinite number of men, who acknowledge no
King nor Sovereign, and have no other Superiors over them, then such as they
create among themselves, after the manner we shall give an account of
hereafter. Its Rivers are excellently well stored with Fish; Its Forests well
furnished with all sorts of wild-Fowls and Venison; and its Fields, which are
for the most part Meddows, in a manner covered with Cattle. They have Dear,
Wild-Goates, Hares, Conies, Pheasants, Partridges, Pigeons, etc. and besides
these a kind of horned Horse, by the Inhabitants called Olavang, whose horns
are like those of Dear, and the flesh very delicate. They have also Tigers,
and another kind of Animal, which they call Tirney, made like a Bear, but much
stronger. The skin of this Beast, they account one of the most precious things
that the Island produces.

The ground here is fat and fruitful, but so poorly cultivated, that there are
very few Fruit Trees, and the little Fruit that is, so bad, that though the
Islanders eat it in some delight, yet cannot other Nations so much as taste of
it. There grows some Ginger and Cinnamon in this Island, which they say has
Gold and Silver Mines, whereof the Chinese have sometimes made trial; but it
is more then the Dutch could ever discover.

The parts thereof which these last mentioned have most frequented are, The
places possessed by the Dutch.
Sinkan, Mandanw, Toulang, Taffacang, Tifulucang, Teosang, Tefurang, which are
all within a small distance of the Fort Tayouang; so that they may be all gone
to in two days, save only the Village of Tefurang, which lies in the Mountains,
at a day and a halfs journey at the least, from the habitation of the Dutch.
The rest lies as it were upon the Seaside, and have all the same manner of
life, the same Religion, and almost the same Language.

A man would take the Inhabitants at the first sight, The Inhabitants of
Fermosa.
to be Barbarians, and Savages. For the men are strong and hardy, much bigger
then any of the Europeans, and coming somewhat near the stature of the Giants.
Their bodies are hairy all over, and they are of a brown complexion, inclining
to black, as most of the Indians are. The women are somewhat less, but fat
enough, and, for the most part, well shaped. They make a greater discovery of
shamefacedness then the men, in that they have somewhat of clothing about
them: but both men and women strip themselves, when they bath, which they do
twice a day, in warm water* for then, the latter are not ashamed to be seen by
men, nor care much whether they have ought about them.

This People, which in appearance seems to be so barbarous, is in effect, good
natured, faithful and obliging, Are civil and good natured.
entertaining strangers with much kindness and civillity, and communicating to
them such good cheer as nature affords them. It has never been found that they
were desirous to get what belongs to any other by indirect ways, but on the
contrary, they have often returned to the owners what they found mis-laid or
lost; though the Inhabitants of the Village of Toulang have a very ill report,
as to this particular. They are constant and faithful in their friendship, and
religiously observe, as well the Treatises they make among themselves, as those
made with Foreigners. Treachery is a thing they are so unacquainted withal,
Are ingenious.
that there is no misfortune which they would not suffer rather then any
reproach should be made them of unfaithfulness. They want neither ingenuity nor
memory, but easily apprehend and retain what is said unto them. It Is true, they
have an humor of impudently begging any thing they see; but they are denied
with the same freedom, and are satisfied with a small matter.

They live altogether by the little Husbandry they carry on, and the Rice they
get out of the ground. Not but that their Lands are very fruitful, and that the
Cantons we named before might produce, what were able to sustain above ten
thousand Families: but in regard they have no Ploughs, nor Creatures fit for
Tillage, they have no other way of digging the ground, then that of the Spade,
and that by the hands of Women; inasmuch as the men mind only War and Hunting,
and so their increase cannot be so great as that of those places where they
have better conveniences. Another employment of the women is, to transplant the
Rice, when it grows thicker in one place then another; which work takes up much
of their time, as does also their cutting of it when it is ripe. For instead of
reaping it by handfulls with a Hook, they cut it Corn by Corn, some four or
five fingers below the Ear, so put it up in the house, and never beat it but
when there is occasion, in order to their subsistence, that is, every day. The
woman of the house sets overnight two or three little bundles of it a-drying
in the Chimney-corner, and rising the next morning two hours before day, she
beats it in a Mortar, and makes as much clean Rice as is requisite for the
Family that day, and no more. And thus they live all the year long.

They sow also two or three sort of Fruit, (...)
which they call Ptingh, Quach, and Taraun, which are somewhat like Millet, as
also a kind of Pulse much like the French Bean. They (...) also several sorts
of Roots, which they may use instead of Bread, and which in effect (...) able
to sustain them, though they had no Rice nor any other kind of Fruit or Corn.
They have Ginger, Cinnamon, Sugarcanes, Bannanan's, Lemmons, abundance of
Areea, and several other sorts of Fruits, Simples, and Pulse, not known in
Europe, such as it would be no easy matter to describe.

Though they have no Cocos-wine, Their Wine.
nor any other natural drink, yet have they found out a way to make a kind of
Beverage, which is as strong, and intoxicates a man's brains as soon as the best
Sack. Their way of ordering it is thus. They set a soaking in warm water a
certain quantity of Rice, which they afterward beat in a Mortar till it be
reduced to a Paste. Then they chew some Rice-meal in their mouths, which they
spet into a Pot, till such time as they have got a Quart of Liquor, which they
put to the Pas^e instead of Leaven, and after they have kneaded all well
together, till they have brought it to Dough, such as that of the Bakers, they
put it into a great Earthen Pot, which they fill up with water, and so let it
remain there for two months; and by this means they make one of the best and
most pleasant Liquors that a man need drink. This is their Wine, which is
stronger or weaker according to the time it remains in the Pot; and the older
it is, the better and sweeter it is; insomuch that sometimes they keep it five
and twenty or thirty years. What is toward the mouth of the Pot is as clear
as Rock-water, but at ^he bottom there are only dregs, such as were able to
turn a weak stomach; and yet the Islanders make it one of their delicacies, and
eat it with Spoons, having first stirred at about, with a little water put to
it. When they go into the Country, they carry along with them a Pot of this
stuff, and a Gourd-bottle full of water, and so they are furnished as to (...)
and drink. They make use of the upper part of this Beverage, as of Aqua-vi^ae,
to comfort the heart, and they eat what is in the bottom, ordered as we said
before; whence it comes that they spend most part of their Rice in this
composition.

When the women have no work to do about their Grounds, Their women go afishing.
and particularly to get Oysters, which the Islanders prefer before all meat
whatsoever. They have a way of salting the Fish slightly as soon as it is taken,
with the shell, and whatsoever is within it, and they eat them with all the
filth, nay with the worms, which sometimes are bred within them for want of
Salt.

The men, How the (...).
especially the younger sort, to the age of twenty four or twenty five years,
do nothing at all: but when they are come to forty, they help to do somewhat
about the grounds, where they continue night and day with their Wives, in
little Huts, and return not to the Village till some necessity or divertisement
calls them thither.

They have several kinds of Hunting, Their hunt^^g.
and use, in their sport, Snares, slender Pikes, or Bows and Arrows. They
spread their Snares or Nets in the Woods, cross those Paths, which the Deers
and wild Boars are wont to make, and force those Creatures into them: or happily,
they spread them in the open fields, with the convenience of a great Cane, one
end whereof they plant in the ground, and the other is bowed down, and fastened
to certain little sticks, upon which they lay a Suare covered with a little
earth, which as soon as the wild Beast touches, the Carry is suddenly as it were
unbent, and has him by one of the feet. The Hunting with that kind of Pikes is
thus. There met together, at a certain place appointed, the Inhabitants of two
or three Villages, armed every one with two or three Pikes, and having divided
themselves into several parties, they send their Dogs into the Woods, and they
force out the Game into the Fields, where they meet, and make a great Ring, a
League or more in compass, within which when they have once gotten the Deer and
wild Boars, it seldom happens that any of them escape without being killed or
hurt. The Pike it self is of Cane, six or seven foot in length, having an Iron
at the top with several Hooks, so as that being entered into the beast, it is
beyond any man's strength to get it out: but the Iron is not made so fast to the
Wood but that it comes off at the first bush the beast runs into; and to the
end it may still annoy the Deer, there is a Cord fastened thereto, which holds
both, and at the top of the Iron there is a little Bell, whereby the Beast is
discovered wherever it goes. They destroy so great a number of Deer by these
kinds of Hunting, that being not able to spend all they take themselves, they
sell the flesh of them to the Chinese, for little Garments, Sweet Wood, and
other Commodities, eating themselves only the Umbles and Paunch, which they
salt with the filth in them, and indeed care not much for them, till when they
are thus corrupted. Sometimes while they are hunting, they cut off a piece, and
eat it immediately, so as that the blood runs about their mouths; and if they
find any young ones in the belly of the Female, whether come into any form or
not, they eat them with the skin and hair, as a thing very delicate.

Their Military engagements are as follows. The manner of their (...)
They begin not any War till they have first declared it against the Village by
which they conceive themselves injured, and then they go by small parties of
five and twenty or thirty men, and hide themselves near the place they are to
assault, till it be night, and then they run about the Fields, and if they find
any in the Huts, where aged persons are wont to keep, as we said before they
kill them, cut off their heads, and, if they have time enough, the hands and
feet, and sometimes they cut the whole body to pieces, that every one may carry
away his share, and show the marks of his courage at his return. If the Country
take the Alarm, so as they cannot quite cut off the Head, they think it enough
to cut off the hair, which they carry away as a noble Demonstration of their
Victory; which is accounted among them a very considerable one, though that in
an exploit of this nature there happens to be but one man killed. Sometimes
they venture so far as to enter into the Village, and break open some house;
but in regard that cannot be done without noise, they go upon such a Design
with so much precipitation, that lest they should be intercepted in their
return, they kill all they meet, and fly for it. They also use stratagems, and
make Ambushes according to their way, and sometimes they engage in the open
field, where they fight with great animosity: but the death of one man passes
among them for an absolute Defeat, and obliges those who have had that loss, to
an immediate Retreat.

The Pikes they use in the Wars are made of a different manner from those they
hunt withal: (...)
for the Iron at the top has no Branches nor Hooks, and is made fast enough to
the body of the Pike. Their Bucklers are so large, that they almost cover all
the whole body, and their Swords on the contrary, are short, but broad. They
use also Knives made like those of the Iaponneses, Bows and Arrows.

When several Villages make an Association among themselves to carry on a War
jointly against some other Villages, the Command of their Forces is not
bestowed on one Chief, who has Authority sufficient to force himself to be
obeyed: but such among them as have been so fortunate as to cut off diverse
heads upon several occasions, find Volunteers enough to follow them in their
military Exploits, out of no other Consideration, then that of participating of
the Glory of their Commander. Sometimes they engage in a War out of a pure
frolic, against the Inhabitants of the Island of Tugin, which the Dutch call
the Island of the Golden Lion, The Island of Tugin.
upon this account, that the Captain and Master of a Ship, of that name, were
there killed by the Islanders. The Inhabitants of this place permit not any
strangers to come within their Island; nay they suffer not the Chinese, who
come thither every year upon the account of their Commerce, to set foot on
Land; but they force them to stay in the Road, whither the Islanders bring the
Commodities they would truck with them; with so much distrust on their side,
that they never let go any thing out of one hand, till they have fast hold of
what they would have in the other. The Inhabitants of Fermosa, especially those
of the Village of Soulang, having a Design to surprise them, embarked
themselves not long since, to the number of sixty, disguised like China
Merchants, and being come near the Island of Tugin, sent to some of the
Islanders to come and meet them with the Commodities of the Country: but
instead of receiving them from his hands, who presented them therewith, they
laid hold of his arm, and drew him aboard their Vessel, where they cut him to
pieces. This was a great Victory to them; for they think it enough to bring
away the Hair, or happily a Pike of the Enemies, to make a solemn Triumph, and
appoint a day of public Thanksgiving. They carry the Heads in Procession all
about the Village, singing Hymns to their Gods, and, in their way, visit their
Friends, who make them drink of the best Arac, and accompany them to the
Pagode, where they boil the Head, till there be nothing left but the Bones, on
which they sprinkle some Wine, Sacrifice several Swine to their Gods, and feast
it for fifteen days together. They do the like when they have brought home only
the Hair, or a Pike, which, as also the Bones of their Enemies, they keep a^
^^^fully as we do Gold, Silver, or Jewels, inasmuch as when a House is a-fire,
they abandon all, to save their Relics. They tender so great respect to those
who have had the good fortune to bring home an Enemies Head, that no person
comes near him, but with a certain veneration, for above fifteen days after his
doing such an exploit, nor speak to him but with such extraordinay submissions,
as that a Sovereign Prince could not expect greater.

There is no Lord in all that Island, Their Magistracy.
that has a Superiority or advantage over the rest. Their condition is equal,
save that in every Village there is a kind of Senate, consisting of twelve
persons, which are changed every two years. The two years being expired, they
who are to quit their places pull of their Hair off their Eye brows, and on
both sides of their Heads, to show that they have been Magistrates. The
Senators are chosen out of persons much about the same age, which is that of
forty years: for though they have no Almanac, and cannot count their years,
yet do they remember well enough the course of the Moon, and take particular
notice of such as are born within the same Month, and about the same Year.

Not that this Magistrate has any Authority to force himself to be obeyed, Its
Authority.
or to put his Commands in execution; for all the power they have, is only to
give order for an Assembly to be held, concerning such Affairs as they think of
importance, to confer among themselves thereof, and to invite all the Heads of
Families, to meet in one of their Pagodes, where they propose to them how
things stand, discover what they think fit to be done, and endeavor to bring
the rest to be of the same judgment with them. All the Senators speak one
after another, and use all the Eloquence they have to press their Reasons the
more home: I say, Eloquence, for they really have of it. For they will speak
half an hour together in such high expressions, with so much ease, and with
such apt gestures, that what we are taught by Art comes not near what Nature
has bestowed on these People, who can neither write nor read. While one
speaks, all the rest are so exactly silent, that you shall not hear so much as
a Cough, though their Assemblies many times consist of a thousand persons. When
all the Senators have done speaking, the rest put the business to deliberation,
with an absolute freedom of either complying with the judgment of the Senate,
or opposing it, after they have considered the good or evil which may accrue to
them thereby.

All the power they have consists in causing what their Priestesses command to
be put in execution, Their punishments.
in preventing ought to be done which may offend the Gods, and in punishing
such as do offend them. They also give reparations to private persons who have
been injured by others: not by causing the offenders to be imprisoned or
punished with death, or other corporal punishment; but in condemning them to
pay a piece of cloth, a Deerskin, a certain quantity of Rice, or a pot of their
Aracque, by way of satisfaction, according to the quality of the crime.

There is a certain season of the year, wherein they go stark naked, and say
they do it out of this consideration, that were it not for that, the Gods would
not cause it to rain, and the Rice would not grow: insomuch, that if during the
said time, the Senators meet with any one that has ought about his waste, the
cloth or whatsoever it be, is confiscated, and he is adjudged to a penalty,
which at most, is but two Deer-skins, or a certain quantity of Rice amounting
to the same value. Whence it comes, that it is one of the principal Functions
of the Senators, to be during that time, morning and evening, about the
avenues of the Village, and to punish such as they find Delinquent. There are
other seasons wherein they are permitted to cover that part of the body, (which
is never uncovered in other places,) but with this restriction; that the
garment, or rather skarf, wherewith it is covered, must not be of Silk; whence
it also comes, that the same Senators are to take particular notice of it,
confiscate those Silk Garments, and adjudge the offenders to pay a penalty; as
they do also the women, who to make the greatest ostentation, upon days of
public Ceremonies, go otherwise then they are permitted to do.

The Senators on the otherside, are obliged to observe a certain manner of
life, about the time that the Rice grows ripe; for during that time, they are
forbidden drinking to excess, the eating of sugar and fat, and chewing of
Areca; out of a persuasion that the people would not only slight them, but also
that the gods would send the Deer and wild Boars into the Rice, to destroy it.

The Magistrate has no power to punish murder, The Magistrate has no power.
theft, or adultery; but such as are injured do themselves Justice. When the
theft is discovered, he who has been robbed, goes accompanied by his Friends,
to find out the person who has robbed him, and takes out of his house what he
thinks sufficient to make him satisfaction, by an accommodation he makes with
the other; but if he finds any Opposition, he declares open hostility against
him, till such time as he has made him satisfaction. He who finds himself
injured in his reputation, by Adultery committed with his Wife, revenges
himself another way; for he takes out of his house who has had to do with his
wife, two or three Piggs, as a satisfaction for the injury he has received.
The Friends and Relations on both sides compose the differences arising between
private persons, in the case of murder, and so regulate the civil concernment.

There is among them so great an equality of condition, that they are yet
ignorant of the names of Master and Servant. Yet does not this hinder, but that
they render great honor one to another, They have a respect for old Age.
and express a great respect and submission one toward another: not out of any
consideration of a more eminent dignity, or upon the account of wealth, but
only upon that of Age; which is so considered among them, that a young man is
obliged to go aside, to make way for an old man, and turn his back to him, by
way of respect, till he be passed, by continuing in that posture, even though
the old man should stand still to speak to him. No young man dares deny the
doing of what the other commands him, though he should send him three or four
Leagues upon some business of his. They are the ancient men who have the
chiefest places, and are the first served at Feasts.

As to their Marriages; The Age of the men in order to marriage.
the men are not permitted to marry till they be twenty or twenty one years of
age, which they call Saat Cassiu wang. Till they are sixteen or seventeen they
are forbidden to wear long hair, so that they cut it even with the tip of the
Ear; and in regard they have neither Cisers nor Rasors, to do that work, they
make use of a Parring, which is a kind of little chopping-knife, lay down the
hair upon a piece of wood, and cut it as exactly as the most expert Barbers
among us. They draw forth the hair of their faces with little Pincers of Brass
or Iron, or with the string of a great Cane which they double, and getting the
hair fast between it, they turn the string till the hair be taken out. Being
come to the seventeenth year of their age, they let their hair grow, and when
it is come to its ordinary length, they begin to think of marriage. Maids never
cut their hair, and they are married as soon as they are marriageable.

Their marriages are contracted and continued after a pleasant manner. Their
marriages
The young gallant who has an inclination to a Maid, sends his Mother, Sister,
or some Kinswoman to the relations of the Maid, to show them what he intends to
bestow on his Mistress. If they receive his addresses ki^rdly, and are
satisfied as to his estate, the marriage is immediately concluded, insomuch
that the young man may consummate it the night following. The wealth which the
most able among them send to their Brides, consists in seven or eight of these
skarfs of Silk or Cotton, wherewith the women cover themselves about the waste,
so many little wastcoats of the same stuff, three or four hundred bracelets of
Canes, ten or twelve Rings of Latten, or Deers horn, which are so broad that
they hide half the Fingers, and so thick, that when the Ladies have them on,
they are rather a trouble, then any ornament to them; four or five Girdles of
course Cloth, ten or twelve little Vestments, which they call Ethgrao, and are
made of Dogs-hair, twenty or twenty five Cangas or China garments, a bag of
Dogs-hair as big as a man can well carry, which they call in their Language
Ayammamiang, a kind of head-gear, made like a Mitre, of straw and Dogs-hair;
and lastly, in four or five pair of stockins of Deer-skin; so that all put
together may amount to about forty Crowns at most. Others who are not so rich,
give only three or four Bracelets, and certain Garments, all not amounting to
above two or three Crowns.

The marriage being thus concluded, A pleasant married life.
the young Gallant goes in the Evening to his Bride at her Fathers house, and
endeavors to get in by stealth, shunning both fire and light, lest he should
be seen, and so creeps into the bed, where the marriage is to be consummated.
This he does for many years after his marriage, coming thence before day, and
returning at night to his Wife* who still continues at her Fathers house,
concealing himself so from those of the household, that to call to his Wife for
Tobacco or ought else he stands in need of, he only hems, and permits her to
return to the company she was in before, as soon as she has done what he
desired. Of this carriage the reason is, that it were a shame for her to leave
her Relations, to go to her Husband. Their bed-steads are made of Bambus or
Canes; a baven serves them for a bolster, and a Dear-skin for bed and all
belonging threeto.

The women living thus with their Fathers, till the ground belonging to the
Family, while the Husband lives at his own house, and provides only for
himself. They never see one another in the day time, unless they appoint it to
be in some remote place, where they may not be seen speaking together; or
unless the young man goes to the house, when he knows there is none but his
Wife at home; yet will he not enter, till he has sent one to know, whether it
may be done without any inconvenience to her. If she think fit he should see
her, she comes to the door, and makes him a sign to enter; but if she desires
not his company, she sends him away. The children they have remain with the
Mother till they are thirteen years of age, The Women bear no children till 35.
years of Age.
and then the Father takes them home. The Women bear no children till they are
thirty-five or thirty six years of Age, but destroy in the womb such as they
conceive before that time. To procure abortion, they have one of their
Priestesses comes to them, who kneeling upon their bellies causes miscarriage,
insomuch that the Fruit of the Womb, is forced out before they leave kneeding
of them in that manner, with greater pain to the Woman, then if she were
naturally delivered. Not that they are wanting in point of kindness to their
Children, but prepossessed and befotted with the lewd impression they receive
from their Priestesses, that it were a great sin and shame for them to bear
Children before that Age.

The men live not with their Wives till they are forty years of Age. Then they
take their leave of the Pagodes of their quarter, forsake their own houses, and
go and live in the Wives; but being come to that Age, they spend most of their
time in the Fields, retireing in the night time into Huts, that they may be
near their work.

Notwithstanding this liberty, Divorce lawful among them.
which the men have to see their wives when they please themselves, and to
divert themselves elsewhere all day long, yet would they have also the
convenience of Divorce. As Soon as a man is weary of his wife, he leaves her,
and marries another; but with this difference, that if he puts her away without
cause, the presents he sent her shall remain hers; but if she be convicted of
Adultery, or chance to be so transported with passion, as to revile her husband
in words, or affront him otherwise, she is bound to make restitution. Divorce
is reciprocally free to both parties, so that Wedlock no more obliges the woman
then it does the men; and it often happens that both of them change their
conditions. They condemn Polygamy, though some of them marry two or three
wives. But in regard there is neither Law nor Magistrate to punish any Crime
wherein there is no Civil concernment, this remains unpunished, as well as
Adultery; for, provided they conceal it from their own Wives, and her Husband
whom they abuse, they may confidently, and without any scandal seek their
fortunes elsewhere. A man never finds any incestuous marriages among them, nor
that a man takes a wife within the fourth degree of Consanguity or Affinity.
Nor do they care a man should ask after their Wives, as how they do, whether
they be handsome or not, of what friends they come, etc.

Boys, from four years of Age and upwards, nay married men, when they do not
lodge with their Wives, lie not at their own houses, but in a Pagode or
Mosquite, where the Males of fourteen or fifteen Families meet in the Evening,
and lie there, upon little Couches or Bedsteds of Canes, made as we described
before.

Their houses are spacious, Their houses
and fairer then such as are ordinarily seen in the Indies. They are all raised
five or six foot from the Ground, and have four doors, one toward every
quarter of the Heavens. There are some have two of a side, and are three or
four stories high. They have no other ornament then what they derive from the
heads of Deer and wild-Boars, wherein they are covered both within and without.
You find in them only certain stuffs, wherewith they cover themselves, and
Deer-skins, which in their trade with the Chinese, is to them instead of money.
All the household stuff they have in their houses are only Spades to digg the
ground withal, Pikes, Bows, Arrows, and some other Arms. But what they account
most precious, are the heads or other Trophies taken from their Enemies*
Instead of dishes, they use little troughs of wood, such as among us are set
before Swine. Their drinking-pots are of Earth or Cane, and they also boil
their Rice in Earthen-pots.

Rice is their ordinary sustenance; and if they put thereto either fish, or
flesh, they eat not of it, till it be corrupted and full of worms. Their
sustenance.
Their drink is not ill, especially to such as have not over-weak stomachs, or
know not how it is made; but on the contrary it is wholesome and very pleasant.

They have no set day for either rest or devotion, Have no Festivals.
and celebrate no Festivals, yet do they meet on certain days to be merry, and
make good cheer; every quarter meeting, to that purpose, in its own Pagode,
whither the women also come, dressed in the richest things they have, and clad
after* such a manner as we cannot well describe, our Language not having terms
to express the odness of their habit. Their richest clothing is made of
Dogs-hair. Dogshair-stuffs.
For as we shear Sheep to make woollen stuffs of; so they have Dogs, whose hair
they cut once a year, and dying it red, make stuffs thereof, which they esteem,
as we hear do Velvet, or the best Scarlet.

The Ceremonies performed here upon the death of any one are happily as
remarkable as any the Reader shall find in this relation. Their Funerals.
Immediately after the departure of any one, they beat a Drum before his door
to acquaint the Village therewith. This Drum is made of the Trunk of a great
tree, so that it may be heard at a great distance, and upon that noise all the
people come to the door of the deceased. The women bring each of them a pot of
their Arac, and having sufficiently drunk to the memory of the Deceased, they
fall a dancing upon a great empty round Chest, so that their motion, which is
not very violent, makes a dull and doleful noise, suitable to the sorrow they
would express. There get upon the Chest, eight or ten women at a time, in two
ranks, who turn their backs one to another, and gently stirring their arms and
feet, they go several times about the Chest, till such time as being weary,
they think fit to make way for others; and this exercise lasts about two hours.
They neither bury nor burn the dead.
The next day, or two days after, they begin to think of the body, not in order
to burial, as we do, nor yet to burn it, as some of the forementioned Nations
are wont to do; but to dry it. To do that, they make in some part of the house,
a Scaffold of Canes, raised five or six foot from the ground, whereto they
fasten the body, by the hands and feet, and they make a great fire about it to
dry it, killing in the mean time a great many Swine, and feasting it for nine
days together. During which time they wash the body every day, yet does not
that hinder, but that it infects the whole house, nay indeed the Neighborhood.
After nine days, it is taken thence, to be wrapped up in a Mat, being in which,
they place it on another Scaffold, higher then the former, and compassed with
several garments like a Pavilion, and then they reiterate their dancing and
feasting. The body remains in the posture till the third year, and then they
take the bones out of it, and bury them in some part of the house, with the
same Ceremonies of feasting and dancing.

At the Village of Theosang, A mad ramedy against painful diseases.
they have a custom, which would hardly be observed elsewhere. They fasten a
Rope about their necks who suffer much pain in their sickness, raise them up by
force to a great height, and let them fall down with as much violence, as if
they intended to give them the strapado: by which means they are indeed put out
of all further pain.

As to Religion, Their Religion.
it may be said they have not any at all. Of all the Inhabitants, not one can
write or read, and yet they have certain Traditions, upon which they have
framed a certain shadow of Religion. For they believe the World has been from
all Eternity, and shall last Eternally. They believe the immortality of the
Soul, and thence it comes, that when any one dies, they build before his door a
little Hut of bows of trees, set Banners at the four corners, and within the
Hut a wooden Vessel full of water, with a Cane-spoon, out of a persuasion, that
the souls of the deceased return every day to the Hut, to purify themselves.
It Is true, most of them do it purely out of compliance with custom, and know
not the reason thereof: but aged persons are not ignorant of it. They believe
also, that Souls shall find good or evil in the other life, according to what
they have done in this, and affirm, that to go out of this World into the
other, they pass over a very narrow Bridge of Canes, under which runs a Channel
full of all kind of filth and nastiness, into which the wicked being fallen do
there languish eternally; but that the good Souls pass into a pleasant and
delightful Country, of which they speak, much after the same rate the Poets
speak of the Elysian fields. But there are very few comprehend these mysteries*
or think of any other life then the present.

Their sins are much different from ours. Their Sins.
Murder, Theft, Adultery, and other Crimes, are not so much as slight offenses
among them, and they make so little account of simple Fornication, that they
only laugh at it, reprove it not (...) their Children. They are forbidden
marrying before Twenty, or twenty one years of age, yet it is lawful for them
to cajol and debauch a neighbors Wife, so he know nothing of it. But it is a
great Sin among them, to have covered the privy parts at a certain season of
the year; to wear several Garments, or one only of Silk, at a time when they
should have worn them of Cotton; not to have destroyed Children in the Mothers
womb; and to have born any before thirty five or thirty six years of Age. These
are the sins, which in their judgment deserve eternal pains; all the rest is
only foolery.

They adore several pretended Divinities, Their Gods.
but among others two, one whereof is called Tamagisanhach, and the other
Sariahsingh. The former has his abode in the South, and contributes to the
generation of man, who receives from this God, only what is excellent and
acceptable, either in his body or mind. They affirm, that his Wife, whom they
call Taxankpanda, lives in the East, whence she is heard, when it thunders
toward that quarter, speaking to her Husband, Tamasgisanhach, and chiding him,
for suffering the Earth to be too long without Rain, and that thereupon her
Husband causes it immediately to Rain. The other God has his retreat in the
North, and destroys all the excellency which Tamagisanhach has bestowed on
man, by disfiguring his face with the Small Pox, and sending him several other
Inconveniences. Whence it comes they invoke them both, one, that they may not
be injured by him, and the other that he may prevent Sariasingh from doing them
any mischief. Besides these, they have two other Gods, who have the oversight
of War, named Talafula, and Tapaliape; but they are invocated only by men.

There is not any Nation, Women only employed about their Mysteries.
that falls within my knowledge at least, but makes use of Men in the Religious
Service of their Divinity, only this we now speak of employs only Women. They
call them Inibs, and all their Worship consists of Prayers and Sacrifices. The
Sacrifices and Offerings which they make their Gods, are Swine, Rice, Areca,
some of their kind of Drink, and Deer, and wild Boars heads. Having fed
heartily upon them, the Priestesses rise, and make a long Prayer, during which,
a man shall see their Eyes turning in their Heads, they fall to the ground, and
make dreadful cries and shrieks. After these efforts, they lie down all along
upon the ground, immovable as Statues, and become so heavy, that five or six
persons can hardly raise them. It Is while they are in this posture, as they
affirm, that their Gods communicate themselves to them, for an hour or better.
Then they get up on the top of the Pagode, go from one end of it to the other,
and there say their Prayers again; which being ended, they strip themselves
stark naked, show their privy parts to their Gods, smiting them with their
hands, and call for water to wash themselves, in the presence of a great number
of persons. It Is true, the men are not guilty of so much devotion as to come
often to these Assemblies; and the women, who most frequent them, make a shift
to get so drunk, that they hardly perceive what is done before their faces.

Every house has a particular place appointed for the devotions of the Family,
Their devotion ((...) Quakerisin)
where they invocate the Gods, and where the women make their offerings of what
is spent every day in the house: but in case of sickness and some other
misfortune, they call the Inibs to do that Service, which is performed with
many extravigant Ceremonies. They also foretell good and ill fortune, rain and
fair weather, and they have the power to drive away the Devil, after a very
ridiculous manner. They pursue him with a great noise, having a Iaponnese Knife
in their hand, and affirm, that by that means they drive him away so far, as
that he is forced to cast himself into the Sea, or at least into some River,
where he is drowned. There are to be seen also at Cross-ways, and upon great
Roads, a kind of Altars, laden with Offerings for their Gods, and many other
impertinent Devotions may be observed among them; which the Dutch endeavor to
abolish by degrees, by introducing Christianity into the Country, wherein they
have had hitherto good success.

CHINA.
THe great and vast Kingdom, The Kingdom of China.
which we call China, takes up the most Easterly part of all Asia. Marc Paulo
calls it Mangi; the Tartars term it Cathay, and there are some who name it also
Singely, or Tame. The Chinese themselves give it the name of Chunghoa, or
Chungque, whereof the former signifies the Middle Kingdom, in as much as they
believe they inhabit the midst of the Universe; and the other, the Middle
Flower, or Garden, and know not the names given it by Foreigners, save only
that they know the Tartars call them Mangin, that is, Barbarians.

We affirm it to be the utmost Province of all Asia Eastward; Its Frontiers.
for beyond it there is only the Sea, which the Chinese call Tung, that is, of
the East. It has toward the North great Tartary, from which it is divided by
a Mountain of many Leagues extent, and where that fails, the defect is supplied
by that admirable Wall, which reaches from the extremities of the Province of
Leaotung, to the River Croceus, upon the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Tibet,
being in length three hundred German Leagues. Toward the West, it has the
Kingdoms of Kiang, Vusucang, and Bengala; and toward the South and South-west,
the Conchinchine, and the Sea.

The Kingdom extends it self from the Tropic of Cancer to the fifty third
Degree of Latitude, Its extent,
and comprehends in its length all the Southern parts, which lie between the
hundred and thirtieth, and the hundred and sixtieth Degrees. But that we may
speak more pertinently of it, we shall, with them, affirm, that China is sixty
nine thousand five hundred and sixteen Diez, which make three thousand Spanish
Leagues, in compass, and eighteen hundred in length. This account is made
according to their Geometry and their Measures, which they distinguish into Ly,
Pu, and Cham. They call Ly such a space of ground as is of the extent of a man's
voice. Ten of these Ly's make a Pu, that is, about two Leagues, and ten Pu's
make a Cham, that is, a good days journey; and according to this Calculation,
they find the number of the Diez, which we laid down before.

It is divided into fifteen great Provinces, The Provinces whereof it consists.
six whereof, to wit, Peking, Xantung, Kiangnan, or Nanking, Chekian, Fokien,
and Quangtung, are maritime, and the other nine are mediterranean. Of the nine
last, those of Quangsi, Kiangsi, Huquang, Honan, and Xansi, are the more
Northerly; and those of Xensi, Suchuen, Queicheu, and Iunnan, the more
Westerly. It has, besides these, toward the East, those of Leaotung and
Corea; but these do not properly belong to China. There are accounted in it a
hundred forty and five great principal Cities, and twelve hundred sixty three
of a middle sort, such as might pass elsewhere for great Cities; in as much as
the difference of the Chinese names of Fu and Cheu, which they give their
places, proceeds only from their qualities, who have the command of them. For
they call Fu, such places as have a Governor in chief; and Cheu, or Hien,
those, where there is only a simple Mandorin; though the places are many times
of equal bigness.

The Cities are all built after the same manner, square, with good Brick-walls,
plastered over with the same Earth as they make the Porcelane of, which in
process of time grows so hard, that it will not be broken with a Hammer: which
makes them last so long, that it has been observed, some of them have stood
above two thousand years; yet is there not the least appearance of any change
to be seen in them. The Walls are very broad, and flanked with Towers, built
after the ancient way of Architecture, much resembling the Fortifications of
the Romans.

Two spacious Streets commonly divide their Cities into a perfect Cross, The
(...)
and they are so straight, that though they reach the whole length of the City,
how great soever it be, yet may a man see, from the middle, the four Gates of
it. Several other Streets abut upon these in diverse places of the City, where
they are disposed into Marketplaces, and other public conveniences. The
Houses are fair and well built, especially those of Persons of Quality, which
have their Gardens, Orchards, Groves, Fountains, Conduits, Duckingponds,
Aviaries and Warrens; and they are painted or whitened on the outside. They
have most of them three Doors all on the same side, whereof that which stands
in the middle is bigger then the other two, and they are for the most part so
neatly wrought, that it must be confessed, all we know of Architecture comes
not near their excellency in it: and they do all things the more magnificently,
in that they want neither excellent Workmen, nor Materials to embellish their
Structures.

There is no Kingdom or Commonwealth in the World, where they are so careful,
not only of repairing the Highways, but also in ordering all things so, as
that Travelers may not want any convenience, in so much that a man shall find
Mountains levelled, and ways cut through Rocks, yet more even and incomparably
better paved then our Streets, nay then even those of the City of Xuntien, the
Metropolis of this Monarchy, whereof we shall give a short account anon, when
we come to the description of its Provinces.

The Province of Peking is so called, The Province of Peking. Its Frontiers.
by reason of the City of Xuntien, where the Emperor of China ordinarily
resides; for the word signifies, a Northerly Palace, as that of Nanking, a
Southerly Palace, but the true name of it is Pecheli. It has toward the East,
the Gulf of Canghai, which divides it from Corea; toward the North-east the
Province of Leaotung; toward the North the Wall, which divides it from that of
Tartary which lies beyond the Deserts of Xamo; toward the West, the Province
of Xansi, from which it is divided by the Mountain of Heng; toward the
North-west, the Province of Honan, and the River of Croceus; and toward the
South and South-east, the Province of Xantung. It has eight great Cities, to
wit, Xuntien, Paoting, Hokien, Chinting, Xunte, Quanping, Its Cities.
Taming, and Iungping, which might pass for so many Provinces, since there are
under their jurisdiction a hundred twenty and seven Cities of a middle sort.
But what most think very strange, is, that though the more Northerly part of
this Province reaches not beyond the forty second degree, yet is it so cold
there, that from the midst of November to March, all the Rivers are frozen up.

The Register which the Chinese keep of their Country, The number of its
Families.
makes it appear that there are in this Province, a hundred and eighteen
thousand, nine hundred eighty nine Families, consisting of above three
millions, four hundred and fifty thousand persons, and that it pays yearly to
the Emperor, six hundred and one thousand, one hundred fifty and three Bags of
Rice, Its Revenues.
Wheat and Millet; two hundred twenty five pounds of Raw Silk, at twenty ounces
to the pound; forty five thousand, one hundred and thirty pieces of
Silk-Stuffes; thirteen thousand, seven hundred forty eight pound of Cotton;
eight millions, seven hundred thirty seven thousand, two hundred eighty four
Trusses of Hay and Straw for the Emperors Stables; and a hundred and eighty
thousand, eight hundred and seventy Quintals of Salt, accounting a hundred
twenty four pound to the Quintal; besides the Money which comes in by the
Customs: and yet this is one of the less fruitful Provinces of China.

As to the City of Xuntien, Xuntien described.
it is situated at the extremity of the Kingdom, toward the North, about
thirty Leagues from the great Wall. It owes its greatness, though in that
particular it comes short of Nanking, to Taicung, who lived at the beginning of
the fifteenth Age, and translated the Seat of the Empire from Nanking to this
City. It is more populous then that of Nanking, and must needs be more
sumptuous, by reason of the Court, and the great number of Soldiers which the
King maintains there, as well for the safety of the City, as that of his own
person. On the South Side it is encompassed with a double Ditch, and a double
Wall; on the North-side it has but one. This Wall is much higher then those of
any Cities in Europe, and so thick, that twelve Horse might ride abreast upon
it without touching one another. There is a Guard kept upon it in the
nighttime, with as much vigilance as if there were an open War; but in the
daytime, the Gates are kept only by Eunuchs, who stand there rather to receive
the Duties of Entrance, then for any safety of the City. This is the same City
which Marc Paulo calls Cambalu, and whereof the Tartars were possessed at that
time.

The Streets of it are not paved; The Palace.
so that in Winter a man goes up to the ankles in dirt; and in the Summer, he
is covered all over with dust: but this inconvenience has forced them to make
use of an invention, whence they derive much greater conveniences. For they all
cover themselves with a thin Lawn, from the head to the waste, and by that
means, not being known, they are not obliged to salute any they meet; and so
dressed they may ride undiscovered on horseback all about the City; which yet
is not very honorable in Persons of Quality, who, by this convenience, save
the charge it would be to them to be carried in Chairs, whereas they may have
Horses and Mules to hire at the corner of every Street, at a very easy rate,
three or four pence a day.

The Kings Palace is near a League in compass, and fortified with three good
Walls, and so many Ditches. It has four Gates, whereof that on the South Side,
which opens upon the great Street of the City, is the fairest. Persons of
Quality may go within the first Wall, and Lords of the Council go within the
second; but within the third there go only Women and Eunuchs who attend about
the Kings person. They say this Palace consists, within, of near eighty Halls,
and, of those, four, which are the richest in the World; besides the other
Appartments, which are almost innumerable.

The Province of Xansi is not so great as that of Peking, The Province of Xansi.
but more delightful, fertile and populous. It bears not much Rice, but in
requital, it affords the more Wheat and Millet, and breeds abundance of Cattle.
The Word Xansi signifies, Toward the West of the Mountain. Its Frontiers.
Accordingly, that of Heng divides it on the East Side from the Province of
Peking, as the great Wall of the Kingdom of Tanyu in Tartary does toward the
North. The River Croceus divides it, Westward, from the Province of Xensi, and,
toward the South, and South-east, from that of Honan.

It comprehends five great Cities, Its Cities
to wit, Taiyuen, which is the Metropolis, Pingyang, Taytung, Lugan, and
Fuencheu, and fourscore and twelve of a middle rate, which contain, disposed
into 589959. Families Revenue.
Families, above five millions of persons. It pays in every year 2274022 Sacks
of Grain, 50. pound of raw Silk, 4770. pieces of Silk-stuffs, 3544850. Trusses
of Hay and Straw, and 420000. Quintals of Salt.

The Climate and Soil of this Province is fit for the Vine, The qualities of
the Country.
and the Grape here is excellent; but the Chinese make no Wine. And there is
one thing particular here, not to be found elsewhere, which is, that as there
are in other places Pits and Wells of Water, there are here some of Fire. They
dam them up so, as that they leave only some Holes, on which they set their
Pots with Meat to be dressed. There are here also good store of Pit-coal, and
certain Minerals which serve for Firing.

The Province of Xensi is, The Province of Xensi.
no doubt, one of the greatest of all the Southern part of Asia. It has on the
North, the Deserts of Xamo; toward the West and North-west, the Kingdoms of
Cascar and Tebet; Its Frontiers.
toward the East, the River Croceus, which divides it from the Province of
Xansi; and toward the South, it is divided from the Provinces of Honan,
Suchuen, The number of its Families.
and Huquang, by a high Mountain: It comprehends, in eight great Cities, and a
hundred and seven of middle rate, 831051. Families, and near four millions of
persons. The great Cities are Sigan, Fungciang, Hanchung, Pingleang, Cungehang,
Linyao, Kingyang, and Iengan. Its Revenues.
It pays yearly 1929057. Sacks of Grain, 360. pounds of raw Silk, 9228. pieces
of Silk-stuffs, ^7^72. pounds of Cotton, 128770. pieces of Cotton-cloath, and
1514749. Trusses of Hay and Straw.

There are in this Province some Gold Mines, Gold Mines.
but there is a Prohibition made by the Laws of this Country, that no search
should be made into them, and yet there is abudance of it found in the Rivers
and Torrents, especially when the Rain brings down the Earth from the
neighboring Mountains. Rhubarb.
Rhubarb. grows here in great quantities, and it is ordered with great care.

This Province affords also Musk, Musk.
which is nothing but an Imposthume or Botch, framed at the Navil of a certain
Beast, of the bigness of a wild Goat, which the Chinese call Xe; whence comes
the word Xehiang (so they call the Musk) which signifies Scent of Musk. The
Reader may take this for certain, whatever those may endeavor to persuade
people, who have written concerning this Drug.

Though the Wall which divides China from Tartary enclose the three Provinces
we named before, The great Wall.
as also that of Leatoung, yet is it not of the length our Cosmographers assign
it; for from the Gulf, where the River Yalo falls into the Sea, and where the
Wall begins, to the City Kin, where it ends, there are not above twenty
Degrees, which make but three hundred German Leagues. This miraculous Structure
is continued without any interruption, unless it be near the City of Siven, in
the Province of Peking, where an inaccessible Mountain supplies its place, and
defends the Kingdom against the invasion of the Tartars, as well as the Wall it
self. It has Gates and Sluices for the passage of the Rivers which come out of
Tartary, and has Houses, Redoubts and Forts, from place to place, for the
quartering of the Soldiers appointed for the keeping of it; in which work the
Emperor of China employs a million of men. It is about thirty Cubits high, and
about twelve, and in some places fifteen thick. The Chinese call it Vanli
Ching, that is, a Rampire* or Wall of ten thousand Stadia, rather to express an
extraordinary work, then assign the just greatness of it, by any certain
measure: since that two hundred and fifty Stadia of that Country making a
Degree, it would follow that the said Wall must take up forty Degrees, that is,
more ground then all China does.

They say it was built by Xius, By whom built.
King or Emperor of China, chief of the Family of Cina, who having usurped the
Kingdom from the Princes of the House of Cheva, caus^d that Wall to be made, as
well to satisfy his own humor, which was to be magnificent in his Buildings,
as to prevent the Incursions of the Tartars, over whom he had many Advantages.
He began it in the year 1215. which was the 22. of his Reign, and employed so
many men about it, that it was finished in less then five years.

The Province of Xantung, The Province of Xantung. Its Frontiers.
has, toward the North, that of Peking, and the Gulf of Cang; toward the
East, the Sea; toward the South, the Province of Nanking, from which it is
divided by the River Croceus, and the Sea; and toward the West, the Channel of
Iun, which joins those two Rivers, and has twenty Sluices, as also the River
Guei. All these Rivers make this Province so fertile, that they say one year
brings forth as much as will sustain it ten years afterward, and that it may
communicate to its Neighbors, the Wheat, Millet, Rice, Barley, and Pulse,
which the Inhabitants cannot consume. Poultry and Eggs may be had there in a
manner for nothing: Feasants, Partridges, Quails, and Hares, are very cheap;
and for less then three pence a man may buy ten pound of fish.

But what this Province is most remarkable for, is Silk, Silks.
which here is not got by the pains people take in other places in keeping
Silkworms, but it grows in the fields, upon Trees, where certain Worms, like
Caterpillars, blow it, not in a Cod, but in white threads, which are found upon
the Hedges, and may be used as advantageously as the ordinary Silk, though it
be somewhat courser.

It has six great Cities, Its Cities and Families.
to wit, Cinan, Yenchen, Fungchang, Cingcheu, Teugeheu, and Laicheu, seventy
two other considerable ones, and comprehends, in 770555. Families, near seven
millions of persons.

It contributes yearly 2812179. Sacks of Corn, Its Revenue.
54990. pieces of Silk-stuffs, 52449. pounds of Cotton, and 3824290. Trusses of
Hay and Straw; besides the duties paid there, which amount to above ten
millions of Gold.

The Province of Honan derives its name from its situation, The Province of
Honan.
it being seated toward the South of the River Croceus, for the word Honan
signifies, toward the South of the River.

It has on the East, Its Frontiers.
the Province of Nanking; North and North-east, those of Xantung and Peking;
North-west, that of Xansi; toward the West, that of Xensi; and toward the
South, the Province of Huquang.

This Province lies in the middle of this great Territory, Its Cities and
Families.
and is so delightful, that the Chinese say, it is in China, what Italy is in
Europe, and Tourain in France. It comprehends in eight great Cities, and a
hundred less considerable ones, 589296. Families, consisting of above 5000000.
of persons. The eight Cities are Caifang, Queite, Changte, Gueiho^i, Hoaiking,
Its Revenui.
Honan, Nanyang, and Iuning. It contributes yearly 2414477. Sacks of Corn,
23509. pound of raw Silk, 9959. pieces of Silk-stuffs, 341. pieces of
Cotton-stuffs, and 288744. Trusses of Hay and Straw.

The Province of Suchuen, The Province of Suchuen. Its Frontiers.
that is, four waters, is one of the greatest of all China; and in regard it is
a Frontier-Province toward the Indies, it thence comes, that the Inhabitants
are somewhat of the humor of the Indians. It has toward the East, the
Province of Huquang; toward the South-east, that of Queicheu; South, that of
Iunnan; West, the Kingdom of Tibet; and toward the North and North-west, the
Province of Xensi, and the people whom they call Coning^angi, and Kiang.

It has eight great Cities, Its Cities and Families.
which are, Chingiu, Paoning, Xunking, Siuscheu, Chunking, Queicheu, Lunggan,
and Mabu, one hundred twenty four lesser Cities, besides other four which are
fortified, and contains in 464129. Families, above 2200000. men.

It pays 6106660. Sacks of Rice, Its Revenue.
6339. pound of Silk, 749117. Quintals of Salt.

The true Radix Sina, Radix Sina.
which the Chinese call Folin, as also the wild kind of it, is found only in
the Province of Suchuen, and grows there under the Earth, much like
Toad-stools, or rather as that fruit which the Indians call Patatas, or
Potatoes. Some are of opinion, that it is bred of the Gum which falls from the
Pine-trees, which taking root, forms a fruit of the bigness of the Indian Nut
(or Cocos) having a white meat within, which the Chinese use with good success
in Medicine. This Province brings forth also the best Rhubarb, and great store
of yellow Amber.

The Province of Huquang, The Province of Huquang. Its Frontiers.
that is, extended Lake, derives its name from the Lake of Tungting, and has
toward the North, the Province of Honan; on the North, that of Nanking,
toward the East, that of Kiangsi; toward the South, that of Quangsi; toward
the South-west, that of Queicheu; and toward the West, that of Suchueu.

It comprehends in fifteen great, and a hundred and eight less considerable
Cities, 531686 Families, Its Families.
and near five millions of persons. Its great Cities are, Vuchang, Hanyang,
Siangyang, Tegang, Hoangcheu, Kingcheu, Yocheu, Changxa, Paoking, Hengcheu,
Changte, Xincheu, Iuncheu, Chinthieu, Chingyang. It contributes yearly,
2167559. Sacks of Rice, and 17977. Its Revenue.
pieces of Silk-Stuffs.

The Province of Kiangsi, The Province of Kiangsi: Its Frontiers.
has toward the East those of Nanking and Fokien, toward the South, part of
the same Province of Fokien, and of that of Quantung; toward the West, the
Province of Huquang; and toward the North, part of that of Nanking. This
Province is so populous, and the people thereof multiplies so strangely, that
it in a manner supplies all the Provinces of the Kingdom, for which reason the
Chinese call them Kiangsois, Rats.

It has twelve great Cities, Its Cities and Families.
and sixty seven lesser ones, wherein are numbered above 1136659. Families, and
in them above 6550000. persons. Its chief Cities are called, Nanchang, Iocheu,
Quangsin, Nankang, Kienkiang, Kienchang, Vucheu, Linkiang, Xuicheu, Iuvencheu,
Cancheu and Nangan.

It contributes yearly 1616600. Sacks of Rice, Its Revenues.
8230. pound of raw Silk, and 10^516. pieces of Silk-Stuffs.

What is particular to this Province is, Porcelane made in Kiangsi.
that here is made most of the Porcelane, which is carried all over the rest of
the world. There is but one Village, and that under the jurisdiction of the
City of Feuleang, where these Vessels are made, of a kind of Earth brought
thither from the City of Hoeicheu, in the Province of Kiangnan, or Nanking, yet
so, as that the Inhabitants of that place cannot make any Porcelane, or that
any reason can be given, why the same Earth should receive, in a strange
Province, the form which cannot be given it at home. It is white as Chalk, and
it is laid a soaking certain days, to be reduced to a Paste; and to give it a
color, they put thereto some Woad, which grows in abundance, in most of the
Provinces of China.

The Province of Nanking, The Province of Nanking.
which has not been called Kiangnan, but since the Tartars became the Masters
of it, is no doubt the chiefest of all the Provinces of China, though the Seat
of the Empire was sometime since translated into Peking, by reason of the
vicinity of the Tartars.

It has toward the East and North-east, Its Frontiers.
the Sea; toward the North, the Province of Xangtung; toward the North-west,
that of Honan; toward the West, that of Huquang; toward the South-west, that
of Kiangsi; and toward the South, that of Chekiang. It comprehends in its
extent fourteen great Cities, Its Cities.
to wit, Kianquing, which is the Metropolis, Fungyan, Sucheu, Sungkiang,
Chancheu, Chinkiang, Yangcheu, Hojaigan, Lucheu, Ganking, Taiping, Ninke,
Chicheu, and Hoeicheu, and a hundred and ten less considerable ones, wherein
there are 1969816. Families, Its Families and Revenue.
out of which may be taken near ten millions of men. It contributes yearly
5995034. Sacks of Rice, 6863. pound of raw Silk, 28452. pieces of Silk-Stuffs,
2077. pieces of Linen Cloth; (the Cotton is converted into money) and 705100.
Quintals of Salt, and 5804217. Trusses of Hay and Straw.

But what will startle the belief of the Reader, The prodigious Revenue of one
Provinc^.
is, that besides all mentioned before, this Province pays in yearly into the
Exchequer, above sixty millions of Crowns. This is the Province, if any in the
Kingdom, which is most inclined to civility, and where there are most Learned
men.

The Province of Chekiang, The Province of Chekiang. Cities.
is the most considerable of all the Provinces of China, next the last named,
and that of Peking. It has eleven great Cities, to wit, Hancheu, Kiabing,
Hucheu, Niencheu, Kinhoa, Kiucheu, Cheucheu, Xaoing, Ningpo, Taicheu, and
Vencheu, and sixty three of a middle sort.

It has toward the East, the Sea, and Iapan; toward the South and
South-west, the Province of Fokien; and toward the North and North-west, the
Province of Nanking. The number of its Families amounts to 1242135. and may
comprehend 4525470. persons. Families.


It pays yearly to the Emperor 2510299. Sacks of Rice, Its Revenue.
370299. pounds of raw Silk, 2574. pieces of Silk-stuffs, besides such Stuffs
as are wrought with Gold and Silver, which are brought thence four times in the
year by the Kings Ships, to be distributed among those, whom his Majesty
permits by an express privilege to wear thereof; 444769. Quintals of Salt, and
8704491, Trusses of Hay and Straw. Besides all this, it sends into the
Exchequer, the yearly sum of above thirty millions.

There are in this Province whole Forests of Mulberry trees, Its abundance in
Silk*
which maintain such abundance of Silk worms, that it is only this Province, in
a manner, which supplies the Indies, and all Europe, with that kind of Silk
which is called China-Silk. They cut and order the Mulberry-trees there, as the
Vine is dressed in France; the Inhabitants having found it by experience, that
the least and tenderest Leaves produce the finest Silk. Nay, they can so well
distinguish the Silk of these Worms that have been kept with the first Leaves,
from that which comes from the second Leaves, that the price of the one is much
below that of the other.

In this Province is the City, The City of Quinsay.
which Marc Paulo calls Quinsay. The name of it then was Lingan, and it is
called in the Chinese Language Kingsu, that is, a Royal Seat, upon this
account, that Koakungkin, Emperor of China, retreated thither, when he was
pursued by the Tartars, who were entered his Kingdom. Now it is called Hangcheu,
and if we correct in some things what the foresaid Author says of it, we shall
find it comes not much short of the greatness he assigns it.

For what he says of the ten thousand Bridges that are to be seen there, Marc
Paulo justified.
is very certain, if we comprehend in that number those which are about the
City; as also the triumphal Arches, which in regard of their being vaulted, are
numbered among the Bridges. The Lake he speaks of is not properly within the
City, but so near it, that there are so many Bridges built thereon, and the
sides of it are covered with so many Pagodes, and other public and private
Structures, that it may well be accounted part of the City.

What the same Author says further of the Mountain of Chinghoangh, which is
within the City; of the Tower, wherein the hours are measured by an Hourglass,
and are marked with Golden letters a foot and a half in length; The greatness
of the City of Hangcke^.
of its Streets being paved with Freestone; of its situation in a Fenny place;
of the great number of its Rivulets, and of the River Cientang's, being a
Germane League in breadth, is very certain; as also what he affirms of its
compass, to wit, that it is above a hundred Italian Leagues about, taking in
all its Suburbs; which included, it may be fifty Stadia in length, and so much
at least in breadth.

There are numbered within the City at least fifteen thousand Priests, sixty
thousand persons, whose Profession it is to work in Silk, and so vast a number
of people, that it is reported there are spent there every day ten thousand
Sacks of Rice, and above a thousand Hogs, besides the Cows, Goats, Sheep, Dogs,
Fowl, and other Creatures; though most of the Inhabitants believe the
transmigration of Souls, and abstain from Flesh.

The Province of Fokien, The Province of Fokien:
which Marc Paulo calls Fugui, has on the East and South, the Sea; on the
South-west, the Province of Quantung; West and North-west, that of Kiangsi; and
North, that of Chekiang.

It has nine great Cities, Its Frontiers. Cities.
to wit, Focheu, which is the Metropolis, Civencheu, Cancheu, Kienning,
Ienping, Tincheu, Hinghoa, Xaoun, and Foning, and forty eight less
considerable ones; 509200. Families, Families and Revenues.
and near two millions of men. It pays yearly 883115. Sacks of Rice, 194.
pounds of raw Silk; 600. pieces of Silk-stuffs.

But its greatest Revenue consists in the Customs that are paid upon
Commodities; it being certain, that excepting only Macao in the Province of
Quantung, where the Portuguez drive a great Trade, all the Musk, Precious
Stones, Silk, Quicksilver, Silk-stuffs, Linen Cloth, Cottons, Iron and Steel,
and all those other Commodities, which the Chinese carry by Sea into Iapan,
Fermosa, the Philippine Islands, Celebes, Iava, and other places in the Indies,
The Inhabitants of Fokien trade most out of the Kingdom.
come only out of this Province. There is such abundance of Ships in Fokien,
that it is reported, that heretofore when the Emperor of China intended a war
against the Iaponneses, the Inhabitants of this Province proffered to furnish
him with as many Boats as would make a Bridge between that Island and the
Continent of China. Every City almost of this Province has its particular
Language, and that so different from what is spoken in any other City, that
they can hardly understand one the other; nay they are ignorant of the common
Language of the Country, which all persons of any quality speak in the other
Provinces.

The Province of Quantung, The Province of Quantung.
is also one of the most Maritime Provinces of all China. It has toward the
West-north-west, the Kingdom of Tunking; North-west, the Province of Quangsi;
North, those of Huquang and Kiangsi; and North-east, that of Fokien. All the
rest of it lies upon the Sea. Its Frontiers.
It has ten great Cities, Cities.
to wit, Quangcheu, Xaocheu, Nanbiung, Hoeicheu, Chaocheu, Chaoking, Kaocheu,
Kiencheu, Luicheu, and Kiuncheu, and seventy two lesser ones, and among the
rest that of Macao, whereof we shall have somewhat to say elsewhere: Families.
Revenue.
There are numbered in it 443360. Families, and near two millions of persons;
and it contributes 1017772. Sacks of Rice, and 37380. Quintals of Salt, besides
what it pays in ready money.

The Chinese affirm, The richest Province of China.
that there are in this Province three things which are not to be seen
elsewhere; to wit, Mountains without Snow, Trees perpetually green, and Men who
spit blood, in regard their Spittle is of a reddish color, occasioned by their
continual chewing of Bettele and Areca.

To this may be added, The industry of the Inhabitants.
that there is no other Province in all China so rich in Gold, Pearls, Precious
Stones, Silk, Tin, Quicksilver, Sugar, Copper, Iron, Steel, Saltpeter,
Calambac-wood, etc. as this is. It has this further particularity, that the
Musket and Pistol barrels made in that Province, never break, though never so
much overcharged, but only open, to make way for what cannot get out at the
mouth.

The Inhabitants are more industrious in imitation then invention: but they are
so excellent at the former, that no Manufacture or rarity can be brought
thither out of these parts, which they will not do as well as the Europeans;
and among others, they are so great Masters in all Goldsmiths work, that what
is done in Europe comes not near theirs.

The City of Macao or Amagao, that is, Good Haven, is famous on this account,
that only the Portuguez trade thither, excluding all others; and that it is the
Episcopal Seat of all those parts. Their particular trading is with the City of
Quancheu, whither they are permitted to come twice a year to the Fair, at which
time they put off thirteen hundred Chests of Silk-stuffs, Sattins, Damasks,
etc. Every Chest containing a hundred and fifty pieces, and carry thence for
them, two thousand five hundred Wedges of Gold, of ten Toels each, that is, a
hundred and thirty Crowns; eight hundred pound of Musk, and abundance of Gold
Thread, Silk, Pearls, precious Stones, and several other Commodities, which
they carry to Malacca and Goa, to be thence distributed into other parts of the
World.

The Province of Quangsi is not so large nor so fertile as the forementioned;
The Province of Quangsi.
yet has it eleven great Cities; Its Cities.
to wit, Queillen, the Metropolis, Lieuchou, Kingyen, Pinglo, Gucheu, Cincheu,
Nanning, Taiping, Suming, Chingan, and Tienchen, which have under their
jurisdiction ninety nine lesser ones. Frontiers.
It has East and North-east, the Province of Quantung; North, that of
Queicheu; South and South-west, the Kingdom of Tunking or Gunan; and West, that
of Iunnan. They number in it 186719. Families, Families and Revenue.
and above 1500000. men; and contributes 431359 Sacks of Rice.

The Province of Queicheu is the least considerable of all the Provinces of
China, The Province of Queicheu.
as containing but eight ordinary Cities; Its Cities.
to wit, Queiang, Sucheu, Sunan, Chiniven, Xecien, Tunggin, Liping and Tucho,
which have four other lesser Cities under them. It has but 45305. Families,
and about 200000. men. The Country is hilly and uneven; so that it yielding but
little Corn, Revenue.
it contributes but 47658. Sacks of Rice, and 5900 pieces of Linen Cloth. But
there is not any Province affords more Quicksilver, or breeds better Horses,
then this does.

Heretofore this made not a Province by it self, Frontiers.
but depended partly on that of Suchuen, partly on that of Huguang; whereof the
one is toward the North and North-west of it, and the other, North-east. The
Province of Quangsi is its Frontier toward the South and South-east; and that
of Iunnan toward the West.

The Province of Iunnan is the most Westerly Province of all China; The
Province of Iunnan*
for it has East and North-east, the Provinces of Quangsi and Quincheu; North,
that of Suchuen; North-west, Its Frontier*
the Kingdom of Tibet; South-west, that of Mien; and South and South-east, that
of Laos, Its wealth.
and part of Tunking. This is, no doubt, one of the richest Provinces of the
Kingdom, and there would be more Gold found in it, if the Veins of the Earth
were a little more opened. It affords also yellow Amber, Rubies, Saphirs,
Agats, Musk, Silk, Benjamin, excellent Horses, Cities.
Elephants, etc. It has eleven great Cities, to wit, Iunnan, Tali, Lingan,
Cubiung, Chinkiang, Munghoa, Quangnan, Quanst, Chinisien, Iungning, and
Xunning, under which are eighty four lesser Cities. Families and Revenue.
There are numbered in it 132958. Families, and about 1433000. men, and it
contributes 1400568. Sacks of Rice, and 56965. Quintals of Salt.

By the vast extent we have assigned the Kingdom of China, There are both black
and white Chinese.
it may be judged, that its Provinces lying in so different Climates, it must
follow, that the Qualities of its Air and Soil are also different. Accordingly,
there is so vast a difference between the Inhabitants of the Island of Hainan,
which is in the Torrid Zone, and part of the Province of Quantung, which comes
near it, and those of the Province of Peking, which is the more Northerly of
all China, that a man might take the one for the Moors of Fez in Barbary, and
the others for Germans or Suedes. I speak as to their color; for these are
white, those black; and there are some more or less swarthy, according as the
Provinces they live in are more or less Southerly and Northerly.

The same difference is to be observed in the Fruits. The difference of Fruits
in China.
For the more Southerly Provinces bring forth Cocoes, Bannana's, and such other
Fruits as grow only in hot Countries; and others bring forth Figs, Apples,
Pears, Chestnuts, and such Fruits as are common in Europe. But it may be said in
general of China, that there is not any other Country more pleasant or more
fertile then it. It Is true, it is much obliged to Nature, from whose liberality
it has Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Musk, Silk, Salt, and all sorts of
precious Gums and Drugs; but it must be confessed withal, that it is the
labor and industry of the Inhabitants, and the mildness of its Government,
which occasions this abundance of provisions, and consummates the felicity
wherein they live.

The Country is so populous, that to maintain so strange a number of people, it
is but necessary, The Chinese hate idleness.
that all the Ground it takes up should produce somewhat or other. They have a
natural aversion for idleness; but if they had not, the Laws have made such
provision, in this particular, that there is not any Crime punished with
greater infamy then this Vice. Another humor of theirs is, that they are
lovers of good Cheer, and pride it much in wearing good Clothes, and having
their Houses well furnished, so that, to live handsomely, they are obliged to
take pains. Hence comes it, that a man shall not see a Mountain but is planted,
not a Hill but is cultivated; no Plain, but is sown; no Fen, but some advantage
is made thereof; nay, to use the common expression, not an inch of Ground, but
brings forth somewhat or other, to requite their labor, who bestow their pains
on it.

This Country breeds all sort of living Creatures, China Fruits better then
ours.
and brings forth all the Fruits and Simples we have in Europe, but all much
better in their several kinds then any we have; as may be seen by those
Oranges, the Plant whereof was brought thence into Portugal, and the Fruit
whereof is so highly esteemed every where. The like may be said of Melons, and
other Fruits, especially Plums, which are most excellent there, and so
wholesome, that they never burden the Stomach, though a man eat never so many of
them. There is such abundance of Honey and Wax, Wax and Honey.
that whole Fleets come thence laden therewith; and Sugar is so cheap that
when it is dearest, Sugar.
the Quintal, that is, a hundred twenty four pound, may be bought between
twenty four and thirty shillings sterling. A man may judge of the quantities of
Silk it produces, by the Stuffs which the Provinces pay in yearly to the King,
besides the Stuffs and raw Silk which are carried into all other parts of the
World. The high Grounds bring forth Wheat, Barley, Oats; and the low Grounds,
Rice, but in such abundance, that, when most dear, it is sold at a Crown the
Coom, or four Winchesters.

Fowl are sold there by the pound, Flesh very cheap.
and when the Feathers are off, the ordinary rate is three half pence a pound,
and all other Flesh proportionably: for there is so much Cattle, that a fat Cow
is not worth above ten shillings; a Buffer a Crown; a Hog, the flesh whereof is
very delicate, Spice.
twenty pence. Nay, even Spices are so cheap there, that under a Crown a man
may buy four hundred Nutmegs, and for half a Crown two pound of Cloves; which
proceeds hence, that Provisions yielding in a manner nothing in the Country,
the Chinese truck them with so much profit to the Moluccas and the other
neighboring Islands, that they can afford these Drugs cheaper then they may be
had at the places where they grew. The Sea, which encompasses a great part of
this vast Territory, and the Rivers which are as it were so many Veins and
Arteries to this vast Body, supply it with such abundance of Fish, that it is
to be had in a manner for nothing.

For there is hardly any City that has the convenience of a River, but the
Inhabitants keep a great number of Cormorants, Their fishing.
which they make use of in order to fishing. They are kept fasting one day, and
the next they carry them to the waterside, near several Boats half full of
water, whereto they are fastened with a Cord tied under their Wings, and having
bound them about their Necks a little above the Stomach, they let them go into
the River, where they fill, with Fish, that Skin which stretches like a bag
under the Throat, and come and disburden themselves, of what they had taken, in
the Boat whereto they are fastened. This they do several times, at least till
such time as the Master thinks they have taken enough; and then he unties the
String which ties up their Necks, and permits them to go a fishing for
themselves, and to feast themselves for two days: and by this means they take
more Fish then they are able to consume.

There is no Creature so common all over China as the Duck, How they breed
Ducks.
in regard they have a way for the breeding of them, not known in other parts.
They are kept in great Cages, made of Canes, and set at the Sterns of great
Boats, the Cages being so large, as they are able to contain three or four
thousand of them, How hatched.
and they hatch the Eggs, in the Summer time, in Cow Dung, or happily in the Dung
of the Ducks themselves, which is very hot, leaving them therein, till the
generation be completed, and then they break the Shells one against another,
to make way for their young ones to come out, with such a slight, that it
seldom happens that any one of them miscarries.

In the Winter, they heighten the natural heat of the Dung by Fire, making a
Bed of Canes, raised three or four foot from the ground, upon which they set
the Eggs between two layers of Dung, and there is a Fire made under, to give
them that degree of heat which is requisite for the hatching of them. As soon
as they are hatched, they dispose them into the Cages, where they keep old
Ducks, which receive them under their Wings, and breed them up. When they are
grown big enough to shift for themselves, they give them in the morning a
little Rice, but only so much as rather sharpens then satisfies the Appetite,
and then they open the Cages, to let them go over a kind of Hurdle of Canes to
the shore, where they suffer them to feed among the Rice, out of which they
pick the Weeds with so much ease and advantage to the Owner, that he who breeds
the Ducks is sufficiently recompensed for his pains. In the evening, he gets
all his Ducks together, and makes them return into the Boat, with the noise of
a Whistle or little Bell, which they observe so exactly, that, though there are
many times twenty or five and twenty thousand of them together, yet will they
all get very orderly into their Cages: and by this kind of breeding, they are
so cheap, that a man may have two or three for a penny.

As to the Inhabitants, The Inhabitants.
they are well shaped, and for the most part of a good stature. The Men have
large Faces, are small Eyed, and flat Nosed, wearing little or no Beard. They
never cut their Hair, nor pare the Nails of the left Hand, out of a persuasion,
that their Nails may be serviceable to them in climbing, when they shall be
taken up into Heaven by the Hair.

They are all clad after the same fashion, Their clothing*
save that in the more Northerly Provinces, they use Furs, and in the more
Southerly, they go for the most part in Silk. Persons of great quality have
their Cassocks embroidered up to the Waste, but others have only a little Gold
or Silver about the extremities: and there is this distinction between married
Men and Batchelors, that the latter part their Hair upon the Forehead, and wear
higher Caps then the others.

The Women are very sumptuously clad, Their Women.
having about them a great many Pearls and precious Stones. They also paint,
and dress their Heads with as much curiosity and advantage as in any other
place of the World. They have a particular affection of having little feet;
whence it comes, that the Mothers make it their business, so to straiten their
Daughters Feet, from their Infancy, that they are hardly able to go. Some are
of opinion, that this Custom was introduced by those who were desirous to
accustom Women to a sedentary life, whereto they are as it were condemned even
from their birth. They are never seen in the House; and it is very seldom they
go abroad, which when they do, it is to visit some of their nearest Relations;
and then, they are so attended, and shut up in Palanquins, that they cannot be
seen.

The Men are ingenious enough, Are ingenious.
and discover, by their Works, that they are not inferior to the Europeans. It
is no easy matter for a Man to avoid the circumventions of their Merchants,
who make use of all imaginable Advantages in their Dealings. At every Door
there hangs a Table, containing a Catalogue of all the Commodities that are in
the Shop: and in regard all the Merchants of the same Body have their
habitations in the same quarter, a man finds, as soon as he comes into it, what
is to be sold in all the Street.

They use Brass-money in no Province but that of Chekiang; Their Money.
in all other parts of the Kingdom, only Gold and Silver is current, which yet
is received only by weight, without any regard of the mark. Whence it comes,
that no China Merchant but has his Weights about him, and such pieces of Money
as are full weight, by which that which he receives is to be weighed.

I am of opinion, The provision for the subsistence of the poor.
that the provision, which is made in several parts of Europe, for the
subsistence of the Poor, was derived from China. Beggary, which is infamous in
those who are reduced thereto, and a shame to such as suffer it, in as much as
it is a reproach of their want of Charity, whose care it should be to remedy
that inconvenience, is there very severely forbidden; and there is in all
Cities a particular Judge appointed for the Poor, who, in order to their
relief, takes the following course.

The very day he comes into that Employment, he publishes an Order, whereby he
commands all those who have any Children, either born weak or imperfect, or
become such, through sickness or any other accident, to come and make their
cases known, that he may examine whether they are capable of learning any Trade
or not; and in case they are not, whether the Parents are able to maintain
them. If they are Orphans, and have no other Friends able to keep them, they
are disposed into Hospitals, where they are brought up at the Kings charge. The
same course is taken with maimed or decrepit Soldiers. They are all locked up,
and not permitted to go any more abroad. The Houses, where they put up the
Poor, have Gardens and Courts belonging to them, where they are permitted to
keep Poultry and Swine, as well for their divertisement as advantage, and the
King appoints a certain Overseer, who, jointly with the ordinary Judge, makes a
Visitation of the Hospitals twice a year.

They do not put the blind into the number of those Poor who are accounted
unable to work; but they are employed in pulling the Bell^^^ at Smiths Forges,
and other things which do not much require the help of the fight. Maids that
are blind are forced to a Trade, which may be as gainful, but not so honest as
some others.

I conceive I may also presume to affirm, that it is to China we are obliged
for the Mystery of Printing. Printing in China before we had it.
For it is certain, we have it but since the year 1450. and that the Chinese
have some Books printed above seven hundred years since.

They have a way of Writing particular to themselves, not only upon this
account, that they make use of Figures rather then Characters, Their way of
writing.
in as much as they signify entire words, and do not represent the Letters;
but also upon this, that, in their Writing they observe an order wholly
different from that of all other Nations. For these write either from the left
hand to the right, as all the Europeans do, or from the right to the left, as
the Hebrews, Arabians, and most of the other Nations of Asia do; but the
Chinese write from the top downwards, and in their Writing observe such equal
distances, that there cannot be any thing more exact. And to show, that these
Figures stand not for any word that has any particular signification in their
Language, but that they express the same things, it is to be noted, that the
Chinese, who, when they speak, cannot understand one the other, by reason of
the diversity of the Idioms and Dialects that is among the Inhabitants of
several Provinces, make use of these Characters, not only to render themselves
intelligible one to another, all over the Kingdom, but also in their Commerce
with the Iaponneses, and the Inhabitants of Corea and Conchinchine, between
whose Languages there is no more rapport, then the English has to the Greek or
Arabian.

They make their Paper of the Bark of Bambus, Their Paper.
or Canes, but so thin, that it will bear writing but on one side, though they
do not use Pens, but Pencils, as the Iaponneses do, which only slide along the
Paper, so that they write as fast, and cut their Characters so neatly, that the
best Penmen in Europe are not to be preferred before them.

The King is at a vast charge, as well in the maintenance of the Schools, where
they are taught to read and write, as also the other Elements and Sciences, as
in that of the Universities, where are taught Philosophy, natural and moral,
Astrology, and the other Sciences. There passes not a year, but there is a
Visitation made, at which the Professors and Scholars are examined; and they
who express an inclination to study are recompensed; such as apply not
themselves thereto as they ought, are punished.

The Visitor having ended the general Examen, The dignity of Loytia.
makes another particular one for those who aspire to the quality of Loytia, a
Dignity there like that of our Doctors. True it is, that they give this Title
to all nobly descended; but in matter of Learning, it is a Degree, conferred,
by giving the Graduate a permission to wear a Girdle, by which he is
distinguished from others. For the King bestows this quality, as the Princes of
our parts confer Honors on those who have deserved them by their services, or
are so much in favor, either with them or such as are about them, as to get
them by Letters Patents. This promotion of Doctors is done with as great
Ceremonies, as in any European University.

But indeed this Nation is so punctual in point of Ceremony, The Chinese very
ceremonious.
that it goes beyond any other, even to importunity. The first Lectures they
make to Youth are those of Complements, whereof there are whole Books, that
they may be sure to have them upon all occasions. If a man has but once seen a
person, he is obliged to salute him, and this is not done with the Hat, but
closing the left hand, they put it into the right, and so both to the breast,
with a low inclination of the head, accompanied with protestations to confirm
what they would express by their gestures.

Persons of Quality meeting in the Street, make a stand, join their hands by
putting the fingers one within another, and stretching out the arms bow-wise,
they do their reverences with low inclinations, and continue a good while in
that posture, proffering one another the way. When there is no equality between
the persons who meet, the inferior gives way to the other, does him reverence,
and lets him pass by. He who goes to speak about any business to a Loytia at
his own Lodgings, kneels down as soon as he comes into the Room, and advances,
and continues in that posture till he has done speaking, or delivered his
Petition, and having done his business, he retires still kneeling, without
turning his back on the Loytia.

If a man standing at his own Door, or in the Street, espy a Kinsman, or
Friend, coming out of the Country, if he who lives in the City thinks not
himself well enough clad to welcome his Friend as he would, he will pretend not
to have seen him, go into his Lodging, put on his best Clothes, and then will
come and meet his Friend, and salute him, as if he had not seen him before. If
he meet him in the Street at some distance from his own House, the first
question he makes is, whether he has dined or supped, if not, he will carry
him to the next Tavern, and treat him magnificently with Fish and Flesh; if he
has dined, he will give him only a Collation of Fruits and Conserves.

They are very sumptuous in their Treatments, and have a custom different from
what is done in all other places. Their Feast*
They set up as many Tables as there are guests; but instead of cloths, which
would hide the beauty of the gilding and painting, wherewith they are enriched,
they have only carpets of Damask, Taffata, or some other Silk stuff, which
covering only the edges thereof, hang down to the ground. At the four corners
of the Table they set a paper of Fruits and Conserves for the Desert, and
several figures of Sugar, made and painted to the life, and flowers for the
divertisement of the Eye, and they set the meat in the midst.

They use either Silver-plate or Porcelane, Plate.
and have no Napkins, in regard they make use of their forks so neatly, that
they never have any occasion to wipe either their hands or mouths. They drink
often, but little at a time, whence it comes their drinking cups are very
small; and whereas they serve up many dishes, they are very long at meals: but
that the guests might not be weary, they give them all manner of
divertisements, as Music, Plays, tricks of Legerdemain, and Puppet-showes. If
it be a person of quality that is invited, they set up in the Hall where the
treatment is made, several other Tables, on which are all sorts of tame and
wild Fowl, all which are carried away by several servants marching in a file
before him, when he returns home, whither having brought them, they, with great
Complements, oblige him to suffer them to leave at his own house what he had
not consumed at their Masters. The treatments they make for a Governor of a
Province lasts sometimes fifteen days or three weeks, and costs them a years
Revenue who undertake any such thing, what ever their Estates may be. Their
entertainments are commonly in the night, making choice of some time about the
change of the Moon, especially that of March, with which they begin their year.

That day they all spend in merriment, put on their best clothes, hang their
houses with the richest stuffs they have, Their newyears day.
cover the streets with Roses and other flowers, adorn their triumphal Arches
with branched works, Damask and silk Tapestry, beset with Torches, and plant
before the door a tree so enlightened, that though there were but one in a whole
street, it might give light to the whole quarter. Their Priests are present at
these public rejoycings, and add to the solemnities of the day by the
Sacrifices they make to their Gods.

Speaking of their civility, I shall here give an account of that which they
have particularly for the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, The honor they do
Ambassadors.
for whom the Chinese have the same veneration and respect, as they might
express to their own Masters.

They do not look on the occasion of the Embassy, but the quality of the
Prince who sends the Ambassador, who is received at the entrance of the
Kingdom, by the Governor of the first Frontier City, who meets him with all
the persons of Quality within his Government. They suffer him not to set his
foot on the ground; but as soon as he comes out of the Ship, he is put into an
Ivory Chair, and carried by eight men to a house appointed for that purpose,
which is furnished at the Kings charge, and so spacious, that several
Ambassadors may be lodged therein at the same time without any inconvenience.
The next day, the Governor of the City goes to wait on him, and endeavors to
learn of him the occasion of his Embassy, to be communicated to the Governor
of the Province, who immediately sends to the Ambassador, to desire his
Credentials, that he may dispatch them to the Court, and get thence the
Passport requisite for the prosecution of his journey. This Passport is upon
Parchment, with the Kings Seal in Gold, which is carried before the
Ambassador, with the Credentials written upon a board, having over head in
Golden letters the name of the Prince who sends him. The Governors of
Provinces make provision for his expense by the way, and when he is come near
the Metropolis, there meets him the President of the Privy-Councel, who
receives him in the head of all the Counselors, and most of the Courtiers, and
conducts the Ambassador to his Lodgings, and as he takes leave of him, he
empowers him to create a certain number of Loytias, and to set at liberty some
Condemned persons, the number whereof is regulated sutably to the greatness of
the Prince who sends him. They allow him a certain time to repose himself, and
then the same persons, who met him at his entrance, conduct him to his
Audience, which the King gives him as often as he desires it, and is present at
all the Propositions he makes.

The entertainments they make at Weddings, are very great, for the Brides
Father gives her no other Portion then what he spends the first day, in
treating the relations and friends of his Son in Law; Their weddings.
and the next day, those of the Bride. The Feasting being over, the Husband
delivers to his Wife, in the presence of her kindred, the Portion he promised
her, and she gives it her Father or Mother, as a requital of the pains they had
taken in her Education; so that by this means such as have most Daughters are
the happiest, especially if they be handsome. Maids are married very young, and
the Father may dispose of the Dower given his Daughter, if any necessity oblige
him thereto; but if he keep it, it is due to the Daughter, all the other
Children being excluded from having any benefit thereof.

Polygamy is lawful among them, Polygamy lawful.
but incest severely forbidden, in a direct line, to infinity; and in a
collateral, to Sisters and Nieces. The first is the only lawful Wife, the rest
Concubines, insomuch that they do not only not live in the same Lodgings with
the first, but also her eldest Son Inherits as much of the Estate himself, as
all the rest put together. If the first wife have no Son, or having any, if he
die before the Father, the eldest by the other wives succeeds him in his right,
and represents the heir apparent of the Family.

A man seldom hears of any Adulteries committed among them; for the women are
kept in such restraint, that they are in a manner inaccessible. The Husband
has the same power, as in other places, to kill the Adulteress and her
Gallant, if he take them in the Act: but in regard it is a self-ended and
self-conceited Nation, they choose rather to make their advantage otherwise of
such an accident, then defame themselves by a severity, which saves their
reputation only in appearance.

The Government of the King, The Government of China Monarchical.
the Emperor of China, is Monarchical, and it may be said to be in some
respect despotical, in as much as the Sovereign is so absolute, that no Law
checks his Power; and yet his Government is so mild, that there is not any
Democracy, where the Inhabitants are less burdened then they are in China.
Nothing is more destructive to a State, and more obliges Princes to have
recourse to extraordinary ways, to the cost of their Subjects, Offensive War
become defensive by a Fundamental Law.
then War. Whence it comes, that the Kings of China, considering that no
foreign War can be carried on but at the cost of the people, and that by that
means the foundations of a House are dig'd up to cover the roof of it, have
made it a Fundamental Law, that no War should be made to extend the Frontiers
of the Kingdoms. And to the end, their Subjects may give foreigners no
occasion of making any War against their Country, they are forbidden upon pain
of Death to go out of it, without express permission from the Prince, or
Governor of the Frontiers.

They call their Emperor Tie'neu, Their King called Son of Heaven.
that is, Son of Heaven, or Son of God; not that they believe him descended
from Heaven, but being the chiefest of men, they look on him as a gift of
Heaven, and a person dear to the Gods. He assumes to himself the quality of
Hoang, which signifies Emperor of dirt or earth, so to be distinguished, from
Xanhi, who is the great Emperor of the Universe. They say, that he who first
took the name of Hoangthir lived many ages before the birth of our Savior, and
that his successors were desirous to continue the same name, as they did who
succeeded Julius Caesar in the Empire.

That dignity is hereditary in the Family of him who now Reigns, The Crown
hereditary.
so as that the eldest Son only succeeds him, the younger brothers being wholly
excluded, who yet have the Title of King, and a Royal retinue, with some City
of their demean, where they are lodged and treated as Kings, but have so little
Authority, that the Governor who has it wholly himself, suffers them not so
much as to go out of the City, nay, lets them have their allowance but
quarterly, lest having it paid in altogether, they might employ it in making
friends, to the disturbance of the Public.

The Council of State consists of twelve Councillors and a President, The
Council of State.
who next the King, has most Authority. Besides this, there are in the City of
Xuntien six other Councillors, to wit, one for the administration of Justice,
which they call Lyp'u. The second, for the Revenue, which they call Hup'u. The
third, for Ceremonies, which are essential in that Kingdom, and is also called
Lyp'u. The fourth for Military Affairs, and is called Pingp'u. The fifth for
public Structures, called Cungp'u. And the sixth for criminal affairs, called
Hingp'u. The Councillors employed in these Counsels, deliberate about those
things whereof they are to take Cognizance, and come to some resolution; but
they neither publish nor execute any thing without the Emperors express
permission, who reserves the decision thereof to himself, as indeed he does
that of all other affairs of the Kingdom.

Once in three years he sends Visitors into all the Provinces, who particularly
inquire into the lives and actions of the Governors, and the state of the
Provinces; whereof they make him a faithful report; and by this means he
perfectly knows what is done all over the Kingdom, though he never stirs out of
his place.

The members of that Council of State which they call Colao, Astrology requisue
in Counselors of State.
or Caisiang, that is, Auxiliary Governors, or Ministers of State, are all
Philosophers, and most of them well skilled in Astrology, inasmuch as it is
expected they should foresee the Events of things, not only by the help of
civil Prudence, but also by the course of the Stars, which they think more
infallible, then those of reason grounded on experience. The President of this
Council, and in his absence, the most ancient Counselor, reports to the King
the debates of the Council, speaking to him on his knees, and looking down to
the ground, never lifting up his eyes, though the audience should last two
hours.

All the Provinces of China have a Viceroy, Viceroys and Governors
whom they call Common, only Peking and Nanking excepted, which are Royal
Provinces, and have only Governors, whom they call Insuanto's, and are as
King's Lieutenants, inasmuch as they have the chief Authority in the Province
next the Viceroy, yet each within his own jurisdiction, which extends only over
the great Cities, where they reside, and the lesser ones which depend on them.
These last have also their Governors, whom they call Tutuam, and the
Portuguez, Mandorines.

They call him who is receiver of the King's Revenue in a Province, Other
Officers of Provinces.
Ponchasi; him who commands the Soldiery thereof, Toloc; The President for the
Administration of Justice, Anchasi, and the chief of a Council of War Aytao.
All these Officers have their several Counsels, who all meet in the Viceroys
Palace, who takes Cognizance of all Affairs passed therein; and if they be of
importance, he sends an Express to give notice thereof to the President of the
Council of State.

The most eminent persons next the President, Officers of the Crown.
whom they call Colao, are the Cautoc, that is, the chief Standard Bearer; the
Pochin, or receiver of the Kings Revenue; the Pochinsy, or Lord Keeper of the
Great-Seal; and the Autzat, who is the chief Judge of the City.

Under this last, (...)
there are three Lieutenants, whereof one is called Hutay, another, Tzi^, and
the third, Toutoy, who sit in Judgment once a week at their own houses, and
appoint Commissioners, who have their settled quarters, consisting each of a
thousand (...). This is particularly observable, that the Commissioner has no
Authority in the street where he lives, lest he should be biased in his
Judgment by any (...) on of neighborhood, whence it also comes, that no man
is made Viceroy, (...) Judge in his own Country, but he is sent to remote
Provinces, where he has no relations.

The Officers are changed every three years, and from the day of their
departure from Court, or the place of their ordinary Habitation, the King
defrayes all their Charges, leaving it to their choice, whether they will take
their allowance in provision or money. While they continue in their employment,
they are lodged and treated at the Kings charge, and there are lodged near the
Judges in the same house, the Clerks, Door-keepers, and all the other Officers
belonging to their charge, who are also maintained and paid by the King, that
they may take no bribes or gratifications from the parties.

They are so circumspect in all their proceedings, Debtors (...) treated.
that there is no Judge but so strictly examines all particulars, as not to
fear any reproach of neglect. Debtours are treated with so great rigor, that
such as are not able to satisfy their Creditors, had rather be sold to them
then endure the cruel fustigations, in the midst whereof, some, who are of a
more delicate Constitution, many times expire.

The course taken for the discovery of Crimes, An admirable order.
and to prevent several other disorders, is admirable. The Judges coming to the
place of their residence, cause a List to be taken of all the houses within
their jurisdiction, and having distributed them into Decads, they set a bill on
every tenth house, injoyning the Inhabitants to discover such of their Decad as
they know has committed any crimes, upon pain of being responsible for the
same themselves; as also to give notice of such of their Decad, as remove from
their houses, or intend any great journey, that they may be obliged to pay
their debts, before they leave the quarter.

They have no mercy on Criminals, yet is there not any person Executed, till
the crime be made so apparent, that the criminal can allege nothing for
himself. They endeavor to get out the truth by fair means, and never order any
to be tortured, but upon very great presumptions; but then they do it cruelly.

They put their fingers between two sticks, Their To^tures.
two fingers broad and better, through the ends whereof they draw a strong
pack-thred, which they bind so hard, that they break the bones, and make the
nails come off. Another torture they have is, to put the feet between two
boards, much after the same manner, as in some parts of Europe, they put the
Legs into boots full of hot oil, save that, there the feet are tormented, and
here the legs.

Every great City has several Prisons, Prisons.
which are very strictly kept, but have belonging to them Courts, Gardens,
Ponds, and Walks for the divertisement of such as are detained there for slight
offenses. They have also drinking-houses, for the convenience of the Prisoners,
and Shops, wherein are sold such things as the Prisoners make, in order to
their better subsistence.

The Sentence of death is not executed till the King has confirmed it; nay,
even that had, it is done with so many Ceremonies, that unless the heynousness
of the Crime cry for Vengeance very loud, there are more Condemned persons
languish in the Prisons, then die by the hand of the Executioner. For there is
no Execution, but in presence of the chief Judge of the Province, or Visitor,
who being come to the place, calls for the Indictments of such as stand
condemned to die, and examine them, and thereupon either confirms or repeals
the sentence of the ordinary Judge. Of those whose Sentence is confirmed, he
takes fifty of the greatest offenders, and orders the Jailer to prepare them
for their execution. Yet are they not brought out of the Prison, till they are
once more examined; and if they can allege any receivable excuse, they are
shut up again, and then they discharge the great Guns, to show that they are
going to Execution. But before they are brought to the place of punishment,
they are examined once more, and the Judge presses them to think of themselves,
and to find out some pretense that might oblige him to defer it. If they have
nothing to allege, he orders so many Guns to be fired, as there are persons to
be executed. Being come to the place of execution, they are set upon heaps of
Ashes, where they have somewhat given them to eat, and then begins the last
examination: but if, that over, they have no excuse, the Guns are discharged
the third time, and the execution is completed.

Their punishments are, Their punishments.
to hang up, to empale, to burn; but this last is only for such as are guilty
of high Treason.

They have a particular punishment for Thieves. That of Thieves.
For as they detest Theft above all Crimes, so is its punishment attended with
more infamy then the others. They lay the Malefactor upon his belly, with his
hands ti'd behind him, and in that posture, two executioners beat him with all
their might upon the calf of the Leg, with great Canes moystned in water, which
is so painful a chastisement, that most of the wretches die under their hands.
The Judges are present at these executions; but that they may not be moved to
compassion, which the Condemned would never be the better for, they spend their
time in gaming and drinking, and stop their ears against their cries.

But that Governors and Judges may not abuse their power, The Visitors
they are obliged not only to give an account of their actions, at the
expiration of their Commissions, before Judges appointed for that purpose, whom
they call Chenes; but also the King sends into the Provinces a Visitor, whom
they call Leaches. He goes into the Province incognito, takes an exact and
secret information of the Actions of the Officers, and having gone round the
Province, comes up near the Metropolis of it, toward the time that all the
Officers of the Province meet there, which is once a month; he sends to the
Viceroy and the Assembly to open the Gate to him, that he may come and acquaint
them with the King's pleasure. This message discovers his quality, and yet when
he goes into the Assembly, he has his Commission carried open before him; and
as soon as it is read, the Viceroy comes out of his place, and the other Judges
out of their seats, and do reverence to the Visitor, who having taken the
Viceroys place, commends those who have done their duty, and tells them, he
shall not fail to report the same to his Majesty.

Then turning to those whom he has found Delinquent, he reproves them,
deprives them of the Marks of Magistracy, which are the Hat and Girdle,
suspends, or absolutely dispossesses them of their charges, and puts others
into them. It is in his power to advance to the greatest dignities such as he
judges capable thereof, to brand with infamy those who have neglected their
duty, nay, to punish them, but not with death; inasmuch as the Emperor only is
Master of the lives of his Subjects.

As to the Religion of the Chinese, The Religion of the chinese.
it may be said to be Pagan, though from the figure of one of their principal
Divinities, it might be imagined that they have heretofore had some
apprehensions of Christianity, and some would infer, that three Heads, which
they make coming out of the Body of one of their Idols, represent the blessed
Trinity, which makes the first and greatest Mystery of Christian Religion. They
add hereto, that St. Thomas the Apostle Preached the Gospel in China, and that
there are some Pictures to be found there, wherein may be seen men dressed and
shaped as the Apostles are painted among us, and that some have seen their
Images representing the blessed Virgin, holding the Savior of the World in her
Arms. But the se are only chimerical imaginations, since that, setting aside
the establishments which the Portuguez and Spaniards have made there some years
since, there is not the least track to be seen of the Ancient Christian
Religion.

They affirm that all things, Their Divinities.
visible and invisible, were made by Heaven. And this they express by the first
Letter of their Alphabet. They also believe that the Heaven governs the
Universe by a Vicegerent, whom they call Laocon Tzautey. For him it is they
have the greatest veneration next the Sun, and say, it is an eternal Spirit,
who was not created. They have the same opinion of another Divinity, whom they
call Cansay, and to whom they Attribute an absolute power over all Sublunary
things. To these three Spirits, they add three principal Ministers, whom they
call Tanquam, Teiquam, and Tzuiquam, whereof the first presides over the Air,
and makes it rain; another, over the generation of Men and other Animals, and
the production of Fruits; and the third has the government of the Sea. They
also canonize some, whose lives have been eminent for Sanctity, or otherwise,
and call them Pausaos, that is, Saints; but they do not render them the same
Honors they do the Gods before mentioned, or yet the three following Saints,
who are also in great veneration among them.

The first they call Sichia, (...) China Saints.
who came into China out of the Kingdom of Toungking, and is Founder of all the
Religious Orders of both Sexes, which are at present in the Kingdom, and
whereof there are very great numbers, living in perpetual celebate, and
inhabiting in Monasteries.

The second is called Quanina, The Fabl^ of Quanina
a Female Saint, and, as they affirm, was the third Daughter of King Tzonton,
who having married his two elder Daughters, would also have this embrace the
same kind of life. But this Princess having made a Vow of Chastity, would not
hear of Marriage, and upon that account lost her Fathers favor, who shut her
up in a place, where her employment was, to carry Wood and Water, and to weed a
great Garden whereof she had the keeping. They have great Legends of the Life
of this Saint, and relate several stories of her; among others, that the Apes
of the neighboring Forest came thither, and carried Water for her; that the
Birds weeded the Garden for her; and that several other Creatures brought the
wood she was obliged to fetch. The Father imagining this was done by his
Daughter's witchcraft, caused the house to be fired, which the Princess seeing,
and considering that it was for her sake, would have cut her own throat, with a
string of hair; but she immediately found the fire put out by a great shower
which then fell, whereupon she went thence and retired into the Deserts of the
neighboring Mountain. The King's impiety was punished with the Leprosy, which
spread it self over all his body, wherein it bred so many Worms, that he had
been devoured by them, if the Daughter, upon notice given her of it by a voice
from Heaven, had not relieved him. The misery he endured had raised in him a
great remorse of Conscience; so that finding himself recovered by his
Daughter's intercession, he fell down on his knees before her, begged her
pardon for what was past, and would have adored her, but she refused those
honors: yet so as that, it not being in her power to avoid them, she set an
Idol before her, and returned to the Desert, whence she came only to cure her
Father. She dyed there, and, by an extraordinary austerity of life, acquired so
great a reputation of sanctity, that they still honor her with a Religious
worship, invocate her, and beg her intercession for the remission of sins.

They have yet a third Saint, The (...) of Neoma.
of the same Sex, whom they call Neoma; and affirm, she was a Daughter of a
Prince of the City of Yocheu, in the Province of Huquang. The aversion she had
conceived against Marriage, obliged her to retire into the Island of Ingoa,
where they say she wrought many Miracles. They relate, among others, that a
Lord named Compo, having received orders from the King to go along with a Fleet
which lay ready to set sail, it was not in the power of the Mariners to weigh
the Anchors. Compo was so surprised at the accident, that he would needs see
himself what might be the cause of it. He found Neoma sitting on the Anchor
belonging to the Admiral. He told her, the King had commanded him to go and
make a War in one of the neighboring Provinces, and entreated her not to
oppose his Design. She made answer, that she would contribute to his gaining
the Victory he promised himself in that Expedition, if he would take her along
with him: which he was the more inclinable to do, in regard he already knew her
by reputation. Accordingly, the Army was no sooner come in sight of the Enemies
Country, but she dissolved the Charm, whereby the Inhabitants had made all the
Sea look as if it had been on fire, and forced the Enemies to render themselves
up at mercy. Compo thought at first it had been an illusion; whereupon he would
have a stronger assurance of Neoma's power, and told her; he should make no
further question of her sanctity, if she could make the stick he had in his
hand to flourish, and wax green again; which she did. Compo planted his stick
at the stern of his Ship, and openly acknowledged, that all the success of his
Arms was to be attributed to Neoma; and thence it comes, they say, that the
Chinese set this Neoma at the Sterns of their Ships, and make their Addresses
to her, for the prosperity of their Voyages.

They express little Devotion and respect for their Idol's. The Chinese use
inc^ntations
For being extremely addicted to consult Incantations and Charms, in all their
affairs of great Importance, in so much that they will not undertake a journey,
nor marry, nor indeed do any business of consequence, till they have consulted
them. If they prove not according to their expectations, they rail at their
Gods, call them Dogs, and reproach them with all baseness. But when their
indignation is a little over, they change their reproaches into flattery and
kindness, ask them pardon, promise them what they least intend to perform, and
then return to their Incantations again. If they are otherwise answered then
before, they flatter and praise their Gods; but if they are still threatened
with misfortune, they give them both ill words and blows, throw them down,
tread upon them, beat them, drag them into the dirt, burn them with a candle,
or whip them, till the Spell favors them, and then they offer to them Ducks,
Geese, Poultry, boild Rice, etc. Their great Sacrifices consist of offering to
their Gods the head of a boiled Hog, adorned with flowers and (...), and a Jar
of Wine.

Their way of Incantation is performed by two pieces of Wood, How they do it.
about the bigness of a Wall-nut, whereof one side is flat, the other round,
like a half bowl. These they cast upon the ground, and if it happen that both,
or one fall so as that the round side be downwards, they take it for a very ill
omen; but they cast them so often, that they must at last fall as they would
have them. Another way they have, and that is, by casting into a Pot several
pieces of Wood, each whereof has a certain Character upon it, and they have
them drawn out by a Child; and as they are taken out, they turn over a Book,
till they come to a Page that begins with the Character drawn out of the Pot,
and they accommodate the words they find in the Page, to the thing whereof they
would know the event by the said drawing out of the Characters.

They also invoke the Devil; They invoke the Devil.
and the gestures of those who are employed in these Invocations are such, as a
man would say they were really possessed; nay there have been some Christians
so simple as to believe it.

The Chinese believe, Their beli^f concerning the Creation.
that the Heavens, the Earth, and Water, have been from all eternity, but that
heretofore they were so confounded together, that it must be the work of a
Divinity to reduce them into order. They call the God who did this, Tayn, and
affirm that, in the beginning, he, of nothing, created a man whom he called
Panzon, and a woman, whom he namen Panzona; That Panzon, in like manner, of
nothing, created another man, named Tanhom, and his thirteen brethren, and that
this Tanhom was so learned, that he gave names to all things that were Created:
That Tanhom and his brethren had diverse Children, but particularly that the
second, whom they call Teyencom, had twelve sons, and that his eldest, whose
name was Tubucom, had nine: That their Race has lived upon the Earth above
ninety thousand years; but that, at last, Tayn killed all the Males for their
Rebellion: That at that time, the heaven fell, but that Tayn raised it again,
and created another man, named Lotzitzen, who had two horns in his forehead,
ou^ of which came forth a pleasant scent, from whence were begotten males and
females, and that all now alive are descended from Lotzitzan, who, as they
affirm, lived nine hundred years: That the Heaven begot also another man, named
Atzion, by a very extraordinary production, inasmuch as his Mother, whom they
call Lutim, was got with child, by looking on the head of the Lion in the
Zodiac, and that she was brought to bed in the City of Tengcheu, in the
Province of Xantung: That many Ages afterward, one named Vsao taught
Architecture, and began to build houses, and make clothes: That Huntzui, his
successor, found out fire, and taught people how to boil and roast meat, as
also how to buy, and sell, and make contracts: That a woman named Hautzibon,
had conceived, by setting her foot in the step of a man, and brought forth
Ocheutey, who first made marriages, and invented several musical instruments:
That Ezonlom, his Son, was the first Teacher of Medicine and Judiciary
Astrology, and the first who made use of the Plough and the Spade. They affirm
also, that he was wont to feed on a Sallad of seven of the most venomous Herbs
could be found, and that instead of receiving any harm thereby, it kept him
alive four hundred years, and that he left a son, from whom are descended all
the ancient Kings of China.

They believe the Immortality of the Soul, They believe the Immortality of the
Soul.
and affirm that the Heaven communicates its Eternity thereto, and that, after
this Life, it shall enjoy eternal bliss, or be eternally tormented, according
to the good or evil done in this World,

They believe also a kind of Purgatory, and that there is a certain place,
where Souls are to be cleansed from the impurities they derived from the bodies
which they had informed; and that, as to this particular, the Suffrages of
their Friends and Relations may procure them some refreshment. Whence it comes,
that, in August, they have a Day appointed for Prayers and supplications to be
made for the Deceased: but instead of performing these Ceremonies in their
Pagodes, they do them in the private Houses of such as are inclined to this
kind of Devotion: To that end, three of their Religious men go to the House
appointed, and exhort the Family to make the Prayers requisite for the purging
of those sins which obstruct the Beatitude of their deceased Relations. Of
these three Religious men, one carries a little Drum; another certain Images;
and the third, a small Bell. Having set the Images upon the Altar, they Incense
them, while in the mean time some others are busied in setting, on five or six
Tables, certain Dishes of Meat, for the Saints and Souls of the Deceased, and
that done, they fall a-dancing, and singing certain Hymns, which the younger of
the Religious men writes down on Paper, and afterward lays on the Altar.
As Soon as he is returned to his place, they fall a-singing again, till such
time as he who says the Service strikes his Image against the Table, whereto
the others answer with their heads, and that done, they burn the Images before
the Altar. Having spent the night in this kind of Devotion, which is not begun
till after Sun set, the Religious men, and those of the House make good cheer
with what they find on the Tables, and had been set there for the spirits of
the other World: and thus they procure the purgation of the Souls departed.

Most of them do also believe the Transmigration of Souls, And Metempsychosis.
but few speak of it with any rational ground.

They have four Orders of Religious men, whereof some are clad in black, some
in white, Their Religious men
and some in a dark gray. Every Order has its General, whom they call Tricon,
who lives in the City of Xuntien. He has under him Provincials, who make
Visitations within their several Jurisdictions, to see that there be an
observance of Discipline, and that there be no remission of the rigor required
by the Rules of the Order. These have also the nomination of Superiors and
Guardians in the several Monasteries. The General continues in that dignity as
long as he lives, and when he dies, the King names his successor, making
choice of him among those who are most deserving. He is clothed in Silk, but of
the same color as is worn by the Religious men of the Order, and never goes
out of his own house, without a retinue of four Religious men, who carry him in
an Ivory Chair, upon their shoulders. He has a particular Seal for such
affairs as concern his Order, and his Religious men never speak to him but on
their knees. The King allows him what may keep a plentiful house, and
contributes also to the subsistence of the Monks in the Monasteries; and if
they want any thing, it is supplied by the liberality of private persons. The
Religious men are all clad in serge, and all after the same fashion, save that
they are distinguished by the color. Use Beads.
They all shave their heads and beards. They use beads, and say their Mattens
and other Offices, much after the same manner as our Monks in Europe do. Those
who enter into the Monastery make a feast for all the Monks; but the eldest Son
of a Family is not permitted to take the habit; in regard the Laws of the
Kingdom forbid it, and would have him to be the comfort and support of the weak
and decrepit age of his Father. Their vows are not indispensable, but they may
quit the Monastery, and marry.

The Chinese observe at their Funerals the following Ceremonies. Funeral
Ceremonies.
As Soon as any person is deceased, they wash the body, put about him his best
clothes well perfumed, and set him in the biggest Chair they can find in the
house: That done, the Wife, Children, Brothers, Sisters, and afterward all the
Relations, kneel down before him, and take their leave of him. That Ceremony
over, they put him into a Coffin of sweet-wood well closed, and set him upon a
Table, or two tressels, and they cover him with a Hearsecloath, reaching down
to the ground, upon which they draw the Picture of the deceased. They leave him
in that posture fifteen days, during which time, in some other Chamber or Hall,
there stand constantly set on a Table, Wine, Fruit, and two wax Torches
lighted, for the Priests, who spend the night there in singing and praying,
according to their way; but especially in making diverse inchantme^ts against
the evil Spirits, and in burning several Images and fastening others to the
Hearse-cloath, which covers the Coffin, which Images they ever and anon move
with their hands, thinking they by that means force the Soul to Heaven. The
fifteen days being over, the body is carried into the Country, where the
Priests interr it, and commonly plant a Pine Tree near the Sepulcher; whence it
comes, that they have a particular ven^ration for that Tree.

Their mourning is austere enough. Sons continue it for a whole year, and
sometimes two, Their mourning.
during which time, they are clad in a course cloth, cover their heads with a
Hat of the same, and tie about their upper Garment with a cord. Nay, some quit
the public employments they have, with the Kings consent, and ever after live
privately. Remote kindred go in mourning for some months; and friends put it
not off till the body be laid in the ground.

From what we said before concerning the Wall which divides China, The present
State of China.
from Tartary, it may well be inferred that the Chinese have a dreadful enemy
beyond it. It must indeed be acknowledged, that though we have not any Author
that has given a pertinent account of the Eastern part of Tartary, which
reaches from little Tartary, and the Kingdom of Cascar, to the Eastern Sea, and
the Streights of Anian above Iapan, yet have we it for certain, that out of
those parts, and the Kingdoms of Samahania, Taniulth, Niuche, Niulhan, etc.
came those Nations who overran several Provinces of Eu^ope, and in a manner
all Asia, under Tamerlaine; and under other Chiefs, possessed themselves of the
Kingdom of China.

For in the year 1206, The Tartars possessed of China.
the Tartars, whom the Chinese called Tata, because they do not pronounce the
Letter R. entered China with a powerful Army, and after a War of seventy two
years became Masters of it, forced thence the Princes of the house of Sunga,
which then Reigned, and were peaceably possessed of the whole Country, for the
space of near seventy years; till a certain Priest's servant named Chu,
considering that the savageness of the Tartars was much abated by the delights
of China, undertook a War against them, And forced thence.
and forced them out of China in the year, 1368. The aversion the Chinese had
to be governed by a foreign power soon prevailed with them to become subject
to Chu, who assumed the quality of Hugnus, that is, Great Warrior; and was the
first of the Royal Family of Teiming, The origin of the Royal house of Teyming.
which reigned in China even to our days.

Chu not thinking it enough to have forced the Tartars out of the Kingdom of
Chi^a, entered with an Army into that of Niuche, whither the Tartars were
retreated, and forced them to acknowledge the Sovereignty of the Emperor of
China, and to pay him Tribute.

The Tartars divided themselves into seven Colonies, which warred one against
the other, till they were reduced into one State, under the name of the Kingdom
of Niuche, about the year 1600.

About that time Reigned in China, The beginning of the Tartarian War.
Vanlie, who had succeeded his Father in the Empire, in the year 1573. and
lived in an absolute peace, when the Governors of the Frontiers, conceiving
some jealousy at the great powerfulness of the Tartars, would needs hinder
their Merchants from trading into China, opposed the match, which the King of
N^uche would have made between his Daughter, and the King of Tanyu, took him
and killed him. The King of Nyuche's son, desirous to revenge his Fathers
Death, raised an Army, passed over the great wall, entered China in the year
1616. and took the City of Gayven, whence he writ, in very respectful terms, to
Vanlie, who was then living, and represented to him the injury had been done
him by the Governors of the Frontiers, proffering to deliver up the City, and
go out of the Kingdom upon condition his complaints might be heard, and Justice
done him. Vanlie, instead of reflecting on the Justice of this demand, returned
the business to the Council of State, where it was not thought fit so much as
to answer his Letters. The Tartar, on the other side, was so incensed at this
slighting of his Proposals, that he vowed to sacr^fice two hundred Thousand
Chinese to the Manes of his Father.

Accordingly, Take the Metropolis of Leatung
having taken the City of Leaoyang by assault, though the Metropolis of the
Province of Leaotung, he put all the Chinese to death. He afterward took the
City of Quan^ning, and entered with his Army into the Province of Peking. But
fearing to be shut up there by the Chinese, who had got a vast Army together,
he returned to Leaoyang, where he caused new Fortifications to be made, and
there assumed the quality of Thienming, and was called Emperor of China,
though he were possessed only of Leaotung; which is so inconsiderable a place,
as that it is not so much as numbered among the Provinces of that Kingdom.

This happened in the year 1618. The year following, 1619. the Chinese, who
had got together an Army of six hundred thousand fighting men, gave battle to
the Tartars; but they were defeated, and lost, besides the fifty thousand men
killed upon the place, most of their best Commanders. Upon this Victory, the
Tartars entered the Province of Peking, where they took and ransacked all; n^y
would have set upon the City of Xuntien, where the Emperor was then in person,
had they not been prevented by the Garrison, which consisted of twen^y thousand
men.

Amidst these distractions, Vanlie dies, in the year 1620. Tayohang, his Son,
succeeded him; but he reigning only four months, left the Scepter to Thienki,
who proved so fortunate, Vanlie dies and succeeded by Tayohang He by Thienki.
as to force away the Tartars, not only out of the Cities they had taken in
Peking, but also out of Leaotung, and all the Province of Leaoyang, where their
cruelties had made their Government very odious and burthensom. But he enjoyed
not long the fruits of that Victory. For the Tartar having set all things in
order at home, sent into China an Army of eighty thousand Horse, which he
followed with another Body, and retook the City of Leaoyang by assault, Wh^
forces ^way the Tartars.
there having been before an Engagement between them, wherein both sides had
fought very resolutely, for the space of forty hours.

There were killed in the said Engagement 20000. of the Tartars, But they
re-enter Leaotung.
who were so startled at that resistance, that having fighting work elsewhere,
cut them out by Maovenlung, General of the Chinese Army, even in Leaotung,
things continued in that posture till the year 1625.

In the said year 1625. they assaulted the City of Ningiven, which the Chinese
had fortified, but were forced back, with the loss of ten thousand men, and
among others the King of Tartary's Son, Take the Isle of Thaoyuen
who to express his resentment of that misfortune, passed over with his Army
into the Island of Thaoyven, where the Tartars put all the Garrison to the
Sword, but made no further progress.

In the year 1627. died Thienki, The Kings of China, and Tartary dye.
Emperor of China, and Thienning, King of the Tartars. The former was
succeeded by Zungchini his Brother; the other, by Thienzung, his Son, who
taking a different course from his Fathers, and changing his cruelty into
mildness, endeavored by that means to prevail with the Chinese, whom he could
not overcome by force. Yet was it not either the prudence of Thienzung, or the
courage of the Tartars, but the disloyalty of the Chinese, and the treachery
of their Commanders, which proved the final ruin of the Kingdom.

For Zunchini, The Chinese betray their Country.
perceiving that the Army which he had sent into Corea had been defeated,
though the Tartars had lost on their side above fifty thousand men, and that he
had some ground to fear a Civil War, bestowed the command of an Army on one
named Yuen, empowring him withal to make a peace with the Tartars. This
Traitor having received money from the Enemy, took off Maovenlung by poison,
and concluded so disadvantagious a Treaty with them, that the Emperor refused
to ratify it. This pretended affront proved the destruction of Yuen, who still
continued his intelligence with the Tartars; but Zungchini, having discovered
his Treachery, ordered him to be cut in pieces, which was done in the year 1630.

Ever after that time, Thienzung King of Tartary dies.
the Tartars only made incursions into the neighboring Provinces: but
Thienzung, King of Tartary, dying in the year 1636. Zungte, his Son, (who had
been brought up in his infancy in China, where the manner of living of that
Country had been instilled into him) succeeded him, and by his liberality
corrupted most of the Governors and Chinese Commanders, who thereupon sided
with him; especially when they saw that the distractions which then shook the
State, wherein there were eight Armies of Tories, or common Rogues, at the same
time, were absolutely contrary to the preservation of the Kingdom.

These Armies were disposed, in the year 1641. under two Generals, whereof one
was called Licungzo, the other Chanchienchung, who divided the Provinces
between them, so as that the former had the command in Xensi and Honan, and the
other, in Suchuen and Huquang. Licungzo having taken in the chief Cities of
these two Provinces, assumed the quality of King, and would be called Xunuang,
that is, the fortunate King; and hoping to become Master of the whole Empire,
would needs have the Title of Emperor, and that his Family should have the
name of Thienxun, that is, obedient to Heaven. And indeed Heaven seemed to
comply with his perfidiousness, by the intrigues which in the mean time were
carried on at Court, where all the Grandees were divided into Factions, through
the means of a Favorite, of whom we shall here take occasion to say somewhat.

Under the Reign of Thienki, there was, at Court, an Eunuch, named Guei: who
was so much in favor with the Emperor, that the latter called the other
Father. This man, who had been raised to that greatness, in a manner from the
Dunghill, abused his Authority, and made his Ministry odious, by the ill
treatment they received from him, who had too much courage to become his
Courtiers and Adorers. He was so ^mpudent, as to declare himself against the
Prince, who was looked upon as Heir apparent to the Crown, in as much as
Thienki had no Children, and to oppose his establishment after the Emperors
death. This Prince was Zungchini, whom we spoke of before, and of whom we shall
have occasion to speak hereafter. He proved so fortunate as to elude the
Artifices of the Eunuch, and got the Crown on his Head, without much
contestation, but he had not so much power as to smother the Factions, into
which the Court was divided by the intrigues of the Favorite. As soon as he
came to the Crown, he gave the Eunuch a Commission, very honorable in
appearance, but in effect very fatal to him; for he commanded him to go and
visit the Sepulchers of his Ancestors, and to give order there should be
nothing amiss about them: but as soon as he was gone from Peking, Zunchini sent
after him a Messenger, who presented him with a gilt Box, wherein there was a
Silken Halter, and told him, that the Emperor had commanded him to bring an
account of his death. But this Execution reconciled not those who had engaged
either for or against him, during his life, and the aversion which the Emperor
openly expressed toward his Abettors, only augmented the number of
discontented and treacherous persons, which were on both sides; in so much that
most of the Grandees, minding only their private Affairs, they either neglected
sending the relief which the Governors of the Provinces required against the
Tartars, or maliciously dissembled the need they stood in thereof: and by that
means, the Rebels had time to make sure work on their side.

Lizungzo so well knew how to make his Advantages of these Distractions,
Lizungzo enters the Province of Xansi.
that, having settled all things relating to the Province of Xensi, he without
any obstruction crossed the River Hoangh, or Croceus, and entered the Province
of Xansi, where he took the great and rich City of Kiangcheu. The other Cities
of the same Province afterward came in, save only that of Thaiyuen, which was
taken by storm, and plundered. The Emperor, hearing that the Rebels had passed
the River Hoangh, and fearing they might beset him in the City of Xuntien,
would have retreated to Nanking; but he was persuaded to the contrary by his
Council, it being the intention of some by that means to keep up the reputation
of his Arms, of others, to deliver him up to Lizungzo; so that he sent against
the Rebels a powerful Army, under the Command of the Colao, or President of the
Council, who proved so unfortunate in his business, that, out of despair, he
hung himself.

Lizungzo, Takes the City of Peking.
who had his Correspondents in the City of Peking, or Xuntien, understanding
how things stood at Court, sent some of his people into the City, who, under
pretense of keeping a Tavern, or opening Shops for Mercery, were to make a
Rising, when they heard the Army was advanced near the City. Some affirm, he
had corrupted him who had the Command of the City, and that by his Order he
found one of the Gates open, at which he entered it, in April 1644. and
afterward became Master of the Palace, before the Emperor had any notice of
his coming. The Traitors, who had kept him from hearing of it, prevented him
also from getting away: so that perceiving Lizungzo was possessed of all the
Avenues of the Castle, and thinking it too great a dishonor to submit to the
Commander of a sort of Robbers, he with his own hands killed an only Daughter
he had, so to secure her honor, which she could not have kept with her life;
and going into the Garden, he took off one of his Garters, and hung himself at
a Plum-tree. The Colao, the Queen, and some of his Eunuchs, followed his
example, and hung themselves in the same Garden. Zunchini left three Sons,
whereof the two youngest had their Heads cut off, three days after the Fathers
death, but the eldest vanished, and could not be found, notwithstanding all the
diligence Lizungzo used to get some account of him.

I shall forbear giving a relation of all the executions which this barbarous
person ordered in the City, where he put all the Officers to death; only this I
cannot omit, that, among others Persons of Quality, there was an ancient man
named Us, whose Son commanded the Chinese Army upon the Frontiers of Leaotung.
Lizungzo sent order to this Us, that he should write to his Son, to this
effect, That if he with his Army would acknowledge him Emperor of China, he
would divide Fortunes with him; threatening, if he did it not, A Chinese calls
the Tartar^te his relief against the Rebels.
to put him to death. The Father writ to Vsanguei, so was his Son called, in
such terms, as he might infer from them what condition he was in: but the Son
generously made him answer, that he could not own him for a Father, who had
been unfaithful to his King; and that if he had so base a Soul as to advise him
to be a Traitor, he, for his part, had one so loyal, as to persist in the
resolution he had taken, rather to die, then obey a Highway-man. Whereupon
Vsanguei immediately sent to the Tartars, to desire them to join, and march
along with him against that Usurper. The Tartar thought it not amiss to make
his advantage of the opportunity he then had, to get into the Heart of the
Kingdom, and so marched with his Forces against Lizungzo.

This lewd Villain, Lizungzo flies
who had put so many innocent persons to death, trembled at the first notice he
received of the March of the Tartars, left the City of Xuntien, and retreats
into the Province of Xensi, intending to establish the Seat of his pretended
Empire at the City of Sigan. The Tartars pursued him to the River Croceus, or
Hoangh, defeated part of the Rear-guard, and had the Plunder of some part of
the Baggage, in which were all the Riches which the Emperors of China, of the
House of Tayming, had been two hundred and eighty years getting together.

The Tartars would not cross the River, as well because they would secure the
Conquest of the Province of Peking, as for that they were without any Prince,
ever since the death of Zungte, who died when the Army began to march out of
the Province of Leaotung. He had left only one Son, about six years of age,
whom he had recommended to the tuition of the eldest of his three Brethren, who
proved so faithful to his trust, that the Tartars gave him the name of Amaban,
that is, Father-King.

Vsanguei, The Tartars will not go out of China.
finding the Province of Peking and the Metropolis thereof delivered of those
Robbers, would have requited the service the Tartars had done China, and
obliged the Foreigners to leave the Kingdom. But he who commanded the
Tartarian Army told him, that it was too soon to talk of any such thing as yet;
that Lizungzo was still alive, and might re-enter Peking, that there was a
necessity of ruining him, so as that it should be impossible for him to recover
himself; and that Vsanguei should go himself with his Army, and some of the
Tartarian Force, against the Usurper, and put the Rebels to an absolute Defeat.

As soon as the Tartars were entreated by Vsanguei to come into China, they
sent to invite all the other Tartars, from the Eastern Sea to the River Wolga,
to come and participate of their Conquests; in so much that no Colony of them
but sent in some Forces, which coming into China, brought along with them that
young Tartar King, the Son of Zungte. As soon as he was come, And proclaio^
their King Emperor of China.
the Tartars discovered what their intentions were; for they settled him upon
the Throne, and caused him to be proclaimed Emperor of China, under the
Regency of the eldest of his Uncles. He took the name of Xunchi, and ordered
his Family to be called Taicing; and they say, that young Prince made so
sensible a discourse at his inauguration, as very much startled those who heard
it, and expected no such thing from one so young.

The same day that these Ceremonies were performed at Peking, Usanguei made
King.
they sent away some Tartarian Regiments, with Orders to establish Vsanguei
King, to give him the quality of Pingsi, that is, Pacifier of the West, and
that he should reside in the Province of Xensi. He was the more inclinable to
accept what was proffered him since there was no other choice to make; for as
to Lizungzo, it could never be known, what became of that Villain.

Vsanguei's declaring himself satisfied with what had been proffered him by the
Tartars, facilitated their Conquest of the Provinces of Peking, Xansi, and
Xantung, which they possessed themselves of in less then a years time, and
settled themselves therein, allowing the Inhabitants their Laws, Magistrates,
and manner of life, and reserving only to themselves military employments, and
the defense of places.

In the interim, the Southerly Provinces had raised a powerful Army, which they
sent to the Emperors relief: but upon the first news brought them of the
reduction of Peking, and the death of Zungchini, The Southerly Provinces choose
another Emperor.
they remanded their Army, with all the Boats, which carried the yearly
Provisions and Contributions to the Court; and hearing of the Invasion of the
Tartars, they proceeded to the election of another Emperor, of the House of
Taiming, whom they called Hungquang, Nephew to Vanlie, and Cousin to Zungehini.
This man began his Reign with a solemn Embassy which he sent to the Tartars,
to demand a Peace, and to proffer them the Northerly Provinces of the Kingdom.
Amahan, whom the Chinese call Amauang, made answer, that the Tartars never
received from any one what they were already possessed of; that if the Chinese
had made choice of an Emperor, it was their business to protect him; and that,
for their parts, they would have all or nothing.

During the time of this Negotiation, A Son of Zungchini'^.
there came into play a Prince, who gave himself out to be the eldest Son of
the Emperor Zungehini, and was acknowledged to be the same person, by several
Grandees of the Court: But Hungquang imprisoned him, with an intention to have
him strangled, to the great dissatisfaction of those who thence took occasion
to revolt: The Tartars enter the Province of Nanking.
so that the Tartars made their advantage of him to get into the Province of
Nanking. Hungquang sent against them a powerful Army, but it ran away, without
ever engaging, upon the first sight of the Tartars, getting into the Boats to
cross the River. Upon that defeat, all the Cities of the Province, on this side
the River Kiang, submitted, save only that of Yangcheu, into which Zu Coloa was
got with some Forces, who made a vigorous resistance, but such as proved the
destruction of the City, which was burnt, purposely, to bury, in its ashes,
their bodies who had been killed, for fear of infecting the Air.

The Metropolis was yet in the power of Hungquan, who kept the Tartars from
crossing the Kiang, by a good Fleet he had under the Command of Hoangchoang,
who had already gaind many advantages over the Tartars, and put them out of all
hope of crossing the River, when he was killed with an Arrow by one of his own
people, named Thien, who had been corrupted by the Tartars. This may be said to
have been China's fatal blow, since that upon the Generals death, the Army
fled, and the Tartars passing the River, immediately pursued Hungquang,
Hungquang strangled.
and having taken him, by the treachery of the said Thien, they sent him to
Peking, where they strangled him in June 1644. They also put to death the young
man, who pretended himself Zunchini's Son, whom they found in prison, and with
him all the other Princes of the Royal house of Tayning, that fell into their
hands.

Most of the Lords, Several Chinese Lords retire to Haneheu. Another Emperor.
Who is also strangled.
who escaped these defeats, met together in the City of Hangcheu, in the
Province of Chekiang, the greatest of any in the whole Country, with a design
to give the utmost expression they could of their fidelity and courage. They
had chosen Emperor one of the Royal Family, named Louang; but ere he had
reigned three days, the Tartarian Army was come to the Gates of the City; and
the Garrison, which was (...) much inclined to fight, demanded their pay; so
that Louang, out of all hope to prevent the taking of the City, would preserve
it and the Inhabitants, by a voluntary delivery of himself to the Tartars, who
strangled him, and suffered not that noble City to be plundered. They took in
the same Province, the great City of Xoaking, and were likely to have made a
powerful settlement there, had they not been so imprudent, as to oblige the
Chinese to shave themselves: but they found them so resolutely bent on the
contrary, that the Chinese, who had taken the loss of their Country with so
much indifference, chose rather to lose their Lives then their Hair. They beat
the Tartars out of the City of Xoaking, Another Prince in the Province of
Chekiang.
forced them to repass the River C'enthaeng, and no doubt had retaken the City
of Hangcheu, had they had the courage to pursue them. They thought it enough to
entrench themselves on the River side, and owned the Authority of a Lord of the
House of Tayming, named Lu, who assumed the Quality of Restaurator of the
County, and refused that of the Emperor.

About this time, Another in that of Fokien.
the Officers and Soldiers, who retired out of the Province of Chekiang into
that of Fokien, chose another Emperor, named Thang, who writ to Lu, that he
should own him for his Sovereign, in regard he was the nearer of Kin to the
deceased Emperor. This division proves the ruin of China.
This division brought the Tartars to be absolute Masters of all China: for
these two Princes refusing to join their Forces together against the common
Enemy, the Tartars set upon Lu, and forced him to retire into the Island of
Cheuxan, over against the City of Ningpo, which had hardly been peopled, had it
not been for that Defeat.

They found it no harder matter to conquer the Province of Fokien, The Tartars
reduce the Province of Fokien.
though it be divided from those of Quantung, Kiangsi, and Chekiang, by
Mountains, which six thousand men have kept against all the Forces of Tartary.
The Emperor himself, who had assumed the name of Longuu, that is, warlike
Dragon, fled, and was killed, as is conceived, by the Tartars, who pursued him.

They had divided their Army into two Bodies, whereof one was got into Fokien,
as we said before; the other had passed through the Provinces of Hungquang and
Kiangsi, so that they met, much about the same time in that of Quantung, where
they again divided, one part being commanded into Peking, The treachery of a
Chinese Pirat.
the other into the Province of Quangsi. Their easy conquest of Fokien
proceeded, partly from the good success that attended their designs, wherever
they went, but particularly from the correspondence they held with Chincilug,
who had the command of Longuu's Army in that Country. He had sometime been an
Interpreter, and a kind of Broker, to the Portuguez, Castilians, and Dutch, at
Macao, the Philippine Islands, and that of Fermosa, under the name of Iquon.
Giving over that employment, he turned Pyrat, and by that means became so
powerful, that having obtained, or rather extorted, an Act of Oblivion from the
Emperor of China, he forced him to suffer him to carry on the Trade of the
whole Kingdom, keeping the Sea with a Fleet of above three thousand Vessels.
His design was to get himself proclaimed Emperor of China; but knowing he
should find too much opposition in the inclinations of the people, as long as
there were Princes to be chosen out of the Family of Tayming, he was not sorry
to see it extirpated by the Tartars, with whom he held correspondence, as we
said before. Upon the reduction of the Province of Fokien, they gave him the
Title of King, under the name of Pingnam, that is, Pacifier of the South,
treating him highly, and putting him in hopes, that they would leave him the
command of the two Provinces of Fokien and Quantung. But the Prince, who
commanded the Tartarian Army in the Province, being upon his departure toward
the Court, Chincilung, who had left his Fleet in the Haven of Focheu, desirous
to accompany him to the place where he was to take leave of all the Officers;
the Tartar took his advantage of the opportunity, pressed him to go along to
Peking; and finding him unwilling to do it, secured him, and brought him away
by force; and had it not been for his Brothers, who were Masters of the Fleet,
the Tartars would have put him to death.

The other Army, An Emperor chosen in Quangsi
which was got into the Province of Quangsi, met with so much resistance there,
that it was forced to dislodge thence, and retreat into that of Quantung, into
which the Viceroy and Governor of the Province pursued them; and to give the
greater reputation to their designs, they created an Emperor of the Royal
Progeny, who assumed the name of Iunglie. After their example, several other
Provinces revolted, but all their attempts only confirmed the settlement of the
Tartars, who after the death of Kiang, Governor of the City of Taitung in the
Province of Xansi, who took up Arms against them in the year 1649. and their
reduction of the City of Quangcheu, in the Province of Quangsi, which was taken
on the 24. of November, 1650. have been possessed of that vast Country, without
any disturbance; rather through the cowardice of the Chinese, then by the
number of their own Soldiery; in as much as it is impossible for any Army, how
numerous soever, to conquer so powerful a State as that of China; if the
Inhabitants had ever so little courage to defend themselves. Xunchi, the
Tartarian Emperor of China, married the daughter of the King of Taayu, in the
Western Tartary, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred forty and
nine.

MANDELSLO'S TRAVELS INTO THE INDIES.
The Third Book.
WE gave the Reader an account in the precedent Book, 1639
how that the calm, which staid our Ship in a manner in fight of the Island of
Ceylon, occasioned the digression we have made, wherein we have represented the
State of the Indies, even to the utmost extremities of Asia.

We continued at the Altitude of Ceylon, FEBRVARY.
till the 20. of February, at which time the North-west-wind obliged us to take
our course toward South-east. Taking the Latitude about noon, The Voyage
continued.
we found we were two minutes beyond the Aequinoctial Line. I asked the Master
of the Ship, what he thought of their opinion, who affirm, that being under the
Line, a man may discover both the Poles: but he made it appear to me, that it
was an error, and showed me clearly, that the Artick Pole is not to be seen
within six Degrees of the Line, and that the Artartick cannot be perceived,
till a man comes to the eighth degree. He showed me farther, that at eight or
ten degrees of the Line, the wind seems to be as changeable, as it is in our
Seas on this side of it, inasmuch as that of the North-west reigns there six
months together; and that of the South-east blows there as constantly for the
other six months. So that such as go into the Indies, or come thence, may
regulate their Voyages accordingly.

In these parts we saw several sorts of Birds, Several sorts of Birds.
whereof some were white, and not unlike our Pigeons, save that their Tails
are longer and narrower. Others were of sundry colors, and somewhat like wild
Ducks. But among others, we saw abundance of those Birds which the Portuguez
call Garayos, or Rabos foreados, which are black and white, as Mag-pies, but
somewhat bigger, and have their Tails divided like a Tailors pair of Shears.
All these Birds live only by the Sea, and feed on a certain flying Fish, which
to avoid the pursuit of the Albocores, Bonitos, and Dorados, that continually
prey upon them, fly into the Air, And Fish.
where they can abide no longer then while their wings are moist, and where
they are caught by these Birds; or if, for want of moisture, they fall back
into the Sea, they are devoured by those Fishes. The Albocores are white all
over, and have no Scales, no more then the Bonitos. The former are much bigger
then the latter, and have but one bone in them, which comes from the Head to
the Tail. Some of them are so large, that if we may credit report, one, between
five and six foot long, has dined sixty Seamen; but the meat of it being not
very good, I conceive they were rather glutted then satisfied. The Dorado,
which the English confound with the Dolphin, is much like a Salmon, but
incomparably more delicate, and has smaller Scales.

We also took a certain Fish, Marsoui^.
which had a mouth like the snout of a Hog; the Portuguez call it Tonina, and
the French Marsouin, a name, which no doubt is derived from the German word,
which signifies a Sea-hog. The Hollanders, in the Relation of their first
Voyage, affirm, that out of curiosity they opened one of them, and that they
found within it not only flesh and fat, and the intrails after the same manner
as those of a Hog, but also a young Pig in the belly of it, which they cast
into the Sea. They are seen always many of them together, and when the Sea is
rough, they come near the Vessel, and grunt, as if they desired shelter against
the Storm they perceive coming, and whereof the Seamen look upon them as an
infallible sign.

The Sea has not a more dangerous Fish then those which the Portuguez call
Tuberones, Tuberones
the Dutch, Hayes, and the English, Shark. It is a great Fish, and has much
ado to swim; whence it comes, that many times, when the Sea is clam, it is seen
floating above water. It is never seen, but there are fastened to the head of
it seven or eight other Fish, about the bigness of a Herring, expecting to
participate of what he takes. Above all things, they love man's flesh, and there
are many sad examples of it, in Seamen, who have either lost arms or other
limbs, or have been devoured by them; for their teeth are as sharp and close as
those of a Saw. Their mouth is below the head, so that to take their prey, they
lie upon their backs, and so catch it upwards. That we took had the heart in
the head, and lived a good while after it was taken out. They are not eaten,
and are hunted only for recreation, or to cleanse the Sea of them.

The Fish which the Portuguez call Pesce puerco, and whereof there is abundance
in these Seas, is no bigger then a Bream, and is so called, only because it
grunts like a Pig. There are also about those parts great store of Tortoises,
which lie on their backs, and commonly sleep upon the water, when the weather
is calm. The Seamen, when they see them in that posture, get near them, cast
out a hook, which fastening in the shells, they draw them into the Boat. Their
meat is as delicate as Veal, and it is one of the greatest refreshments the
Seamen meet with in these great and dangerous Voyages.

February 21. We were at one degree and twenty minutes of the Line, the weather
being rainy and tempestuous, and continuing so much longer then we expected it
should at that place; for it is so unconstant there, and changes so of a
sudden, that many times they have hardly leisure to take in their Sails, to
avoid the violence of the Winds, which the Portuguez call Travados, that is,
Whirlewinds.

The 23. died one of our Seamen, who having got the Pox at Surat, neglected the
taking of timely Remedies for the cure of it.

The 24. being Sunday, the President treated all the Officers of the Ship, and
among other dishes, had the Biggel dressed, and some of the Country Fowl, which
the Viceroy of Goa had presented to him.

The 25. We were surprised by a Calm, which kept us in the same place all that
day; but the night following there rose a Tempest, that put us out of our
course, which we could not well have kept, had that not happened: in regard
that having the Sun in the Zenith, ever since the 22. we could not take the
altitude, but only in the night, by the Stars.

This inconvenience continued till the fifth of March, MARCH.
having had the twenty seventh and twenty eighth of February, the wind at
South-west, which put us in hope, we should soon have the Manson-wind whereof
we stood in need to bring us to the Cape of Good Hope. But the continual
changes of the Wind, and Tempests, which obliged the Seamen to be always
about the Masts, lest they should be surprised by the Travados, retarded our
progress very much.

March 5. We began to make our Observations by the Sun, and found we were at
eight degrees, six minutes Latitude. Our Ship was encompassed by a great number
of all sorts of Fish, which seemed to be our protection against the Whales, by
whom they were pursued.

March 10. We were at ten degrees, Very changeable weather near the Line.
fourteen minutes, the Wind at West, which turned to a Storm that lasted ten
hours.

March 12. and 13. We had a great Storm, accompanied with Lightning and
Thunder. But what we thought most strange, was that, though we were not come to
the 13. degree, yet we found nothing of the ordinary Wind of the season, which
is commonly perceived about the eight or ninth. For the South Wind, which blew
constantly, not only retarded the prosecution of our Voyage, but also forced us
so much back Eastward, that we were in in some fear, we might be constrained to
return upon the Coast of the Indies.

March 15. The Wind changed, and came to the South, and at Night, we had it
South-east; so that not doubting but it was the Manson, we put out all the Sail
we could, and made two Leagues an hour, taking our course South-west. During
the time the Wind was thus fair for us, we saw a great number of Dolphins,
which followed our Ship, and we took as many of them as found us three good
Meals.

March 20. We were surpised by a Calm, which took off much of our courage; in
regard our store of fresh Water being somewhat low, at a time when we knew not
what to hope of our Voyage, we were forced to assign every Man his allowance;
and to make it last the longer, it was resolved, that for some days there
should be no salt Meat eaten, but that the Swine, and some other Creatures,
whereof, having good store, some had died that day upon the eating of
Mustard Seed, should be killed and consumed.

Being about this time at sixteen Degrees, we found that the Compass declined
thirty Minutes to the West, and it continued so to the four and twentieth
Degree. But when the Cape of Good Hope is once doubled, the Loadstone draws
toward the Earth.

The 21. While we floated up and down, without so much as a breath of wind, our
Ship took fire, which might have proved to the ruin of us all.

The Butler, going to remove a Vat which he had filled with Aqus vitae, set it
on fire; whereat he was so startled, that he turned it out about the Cellar,
where the fire took in one of the great Vessels, and was going to set thirty
more into a flame, ahd it not been timely prevented with Coverlets. The Ship
was so laden with all sorts of Gums, and other fat Drugs, that it would have
been impossible to quench it, had there not been a care taken to smother it, at
the beginning.

After that day, we began to made use of the invention of drawing fresh Water
out of the Sea; but it was fit only to dress Meat withal, in regard it had so
untoward a taste, that the Seamen would not take it for their ordinary drink.

March 22. We made a good days sail by the help of the Manson, getting above
two Leagues an hour. The same Wind continued the 23. 24. and 25.

This last day, a Seaman was whipped at the Mainmast, for offering to debauch
two young Boys.

March 26. The Wind continued still fair; but in regard we had some reason to
fear that in case the wind should fail us, as it was likely to do, we should be
put to great inconveinences for want of fresh water, a Council was called, at
which it was resolved, that we should endeavor to make for Maurice Island, and
there take in fresh water. This resolution very much rejoiced the company. The
same night, we discovered the Island called Diego Roiz, or Diego Rodriguez, at
twenty degrees, forty five minutes, in so much that we were in hopes the next
day to reach Maurice Island, as being but sixty Leagues further.

This Island, Maurice Island described.
which the Portuguez call Ilha do Cerno, and the Dutch have named Maurice,
Island, from the Prince of Orange, who was Admiral of the United Provinces at
the time of their first Voyage into the Indies, lies at 20. degrees, 27.
minutes, and is abour 15. leagues in compass.

The Haven of it is very good, Its Haven.
as well in regard, that at the entrance of it there is a hundred fathom water,
as that it is able to contain above fifty great Vessels, sheltred from all
winds. It has some Mountains, which reaching up to the Clouds are seen at a
great distance, and are extremely delightful to the eye, in as much as Nature
maintains them in a constant verdure, though some Cocos-trees, and Date-trees,
only excepted, all the other Trees are wild.

In the Valleys there are some Fruit Trees, And offords the best Ebony.
but such as bear no Fruit are not the less esteemed for that, for these are
they which yield the fairest Ebony in all the East. Some o^ it is as black as
any Jet, and as smooth as Marble; but the yellow and red is of greater value
then the other, as being more rare.

There is, as well in the Rivers of it, as the Sea about it, such abundance of
Fish, that at one casting of the Net, as many may be taken, as will fill two or
three Tun falted.

The Hollanders in their Relations affirm, A prodigious Thornback.
that they took a Thornback, which found all in the Ship two good Meals, and
that they saw there Tortoyses so big, that four Seamen sitting on the back of
one of them, it went as well as if it had had no burden at all. Whereto they
add, that they were so large, that ten Men might sit upon ones Shell.

The Island is not inhabited; The Dutch have built a ^or^ there (...) 1640.
whence it comes, that the Birds are so tame, that a man may take them with his
hand; and they are commonly killed with Cudgels, especially the Turtles,
whereof there is such abundance, that the Dutch in less then two hours, took
above a hundred and fifty, and might have taken more, if they could have
carried them. There is also great store of Herons, and a kind of Birds, of the
bigness of a Swan, which have neither Wings nor Tail, but so hard a flesh, that
no heat can either boil or roast it. There is no four-footed Creature in all
the Island: No fourfooted Beasts.
but for other refreshments, and particularly, for the taking in of fresh
water, there is not a fitter place any way near it.

When the Dutch came thither in September, A French man lived 20. months in
Maurice Island.
1601. they found there a French Soldier, who had left his Country some three
years before, with three English Ships, which were the first in those parts
that attempted failing into the Indies upon the account of Pyracy. Of these
three Ships, one was cast away near the Cape of Good hope, and sickness having
consumed most of the men, they that remained set fire on the second, in regard
for want of men, they were not able to govern it. The third was wracked upon
the Coasts of the Indies, where all the men were lost, seven only excepted, to
wit, four English men, two Negroes, and a French Soldier, who attempted to
return with some booty, which they disposed into a Cannow, wherein they set to
Sea, and made a shift to get to Maurice Island. The two Negroes had a design
there to rid themselves of their Camerades, but being discovered, they cast
themselves into the Sea, and were drowned. The four English men would prosecute
their Voyage, but the French Soldier chose rather to continue in the Isle,
then double the Cape, and expose himself to the mercy of the Sea, in so small a
Vessel. Accordingly, of the English men there was no more news heard. The
French man had been twenty months in the Island, when the Dutch came thither.
He was stark naked, in regard that having been in a burning Fever, which
heightened into a degree of madness, he had torn his clothes; so that having not
had any thing about him ever since his sickness, nor fed on any thing but the
raw Tortoyses he took, they were not a little surpised at the sight of him,
and conceived it would be no easy matter to restore him to his Senses, though
he behaved himself well enough otherwise, and was in very good health.

We got so near Maurice Island, The Ship ^uts not into the Island.
that we clearly saw it, but in regard the wind continued fair, the President
called together the chief Officers, and represented to them, that if they put
into the Island, they should lose at least ten days time, whereas if the wind
continued fair, as it then was, we might in that time reach the Cape of Good
hope, and so avoid the inconveniences of wintering in the Island of Madagascar;
whereupon it was resolved we should prosecute our Voyage, which we did, and the
same day got out of sight of Maurice Island.

March 29. After Sermon, the President acquainted all the men with the reasons
which had obliged him to change his resolution of taking in Water at Mourice
Island, and made it appear, that if they had gone to refresh themselves in the
Island, they must have lost the convenience of the Wind, and the fairest Season
of the year, and so the means of finishing their Voyage; exhorting all to take
courage, and execute his Orders, and to be content with their allowance, which
should be equal to what those had who sat at his own Table.

March 30. We passed the Tropic of Capricorn, continuing our course toward
West-South-West.

April 1. APRIL*
We were at 26. degrees, three, minutes. The Wind began to abate, and toward
the night it rained, and blew not at all; yet ere we were so becalmed, we had
made a shift to get forty Leagues in twenty four hours. The next day we saw
several Whales, and night the Wind rose, and in a short time grew into an
absolute Tempest. Our course was still to the West-south-west, in order to our
gaining the South, which was to bring us to the Cape of Good hope.

The 3. We altered our course a little, taking it more toward the West. We
were then at 28. degrees, 30. minutes; and in 24. hours, we got 50. Leagues.

April 5. We had but little Wind, and in regard the Compass still varied and
declined, we took our course toward the West, instead of taking it to the
South, as we should otherwise have done. In these two days we made 73. Leagues.

The next day we were at 30. degrees Latitude.

The 7. We began to perceive, that we should not long enjoy the good Wind had
attended us some days before. Accordingly, the next day, we had a great calm,
at 32. degrees Latitude.

The 9. The Wind rising again, put us into some confidence, that within a few
days we should reach the Cape of Good hope, from which we could not be above
three hundred Leagues distant.

From that day to the 14. we still advanced somewhat. That being Easter day,
the President made a great Entertainment, whereof all in the Ship participated.

The 15. The North-west-wind grew to a great Tempest, Pintados, a Bird
discov^ring nearness to Land.
and our Seamen assirm'd, that they smelt Land, being confirmed in their
persuasion, by those Birds which the Portuguez call Pintados, and which always
keep within the distance of forty Leagues of the Land.

The Tempest ceased with the morning of the 16th, and our Seamen persisted in
affirming we were near the Coast, in regard many Birds were seen about the Ship.

The 17. Toward night, there blew a fresh Gale of wind: but the next day, and
the night following, we had no wind at all, yet was the Sea as rough as it
proved to be afterward in the Tempest, which surpised us the 19. at night,
with the South-west wind, at 35. degrees Latitude. We took in all our Sails,
and let down the Yards, preparing our selves by that means against the
Tempests, which are very frequent, and in a manner unavoidable, about the Cape
of Good hope, and we hovered up and down in that posture all the next day.

April 20. We perceived that the Water was somewhat more whitish then it is in
the main Sea, Mangas de valeudo, a kind of Bird.
and saw abundance of those Birds, which the Portuguez call Mangas de valeudo,
and are a kind of Sea Mews, being white all over the bodies, and having black
wings. They have also this in particular, that in their flight they beat their
wings one against the other, whereas the common Sea-Mews seldom do it, but
glide through the Air in an uninterrupted and even flight. It is observed, that
where these Birds are seen, there is ground within a hundred, or hundred and
fifty fathom at most. Accordingly upon trial, we found it at eighty fathom. We
saw also the same day, a sort of Black-birds, that had only ^ ^^ttle white upon
the breast. The English ^ffirm, they are Birds presaging misfortune, as being
the infallible forerunners of a great Tempest.

The same day, we had one, with the West-north-west wind, which on the 24.
turned to a North-west. During that time we were forced to go before the Wind,
the Water coming into the Ship with such violence, that it took off our
Carpenter; but he was so fortunate, as to lay hold on a Rope was cast him, by
which he was got aboard again. We found ground at eighty fathom, The Cape of
Agulhas.
and in regard the Earth which stuck to the Plummet was ^lack, we inferred
thence, that we were not far from the Cap d' Agulhas, which is sixty Leagues
from that of Good hope.

The 15. The Tempest increased so, that we began to despair of escaping, in
regard the current of the Sea forced us toward the Coasts, where we had
inevitably been wracked, if it had continued. We were at thirty six degrees,
twenty minutes beyond the Line; and this day we had like to have been destroyed
by fire, occasioned by a Lamp in the Presidents Chamber: but it was soon put
out.

The Storm continued all the next day. Fish ^oreshewing the change of weather.
Our Seamen seeing about the Ship many of those Fish called Pesce Puercos,
would thence persuade us, that it would not be long ere the weather changed,
and that the Wind would blow from the same quarter that those Fishes came.
Accordingly, about two in the afternoon, the Wind came to the North-west, and
the Tempest ceased, so that we could spread our Sails.

The 27. We had no Wind at all, but in the afternoon, it came to the
North-west, which obliged us to take our Course to the North-north-west,
failing two Leagues an hour. We saw that day a great number of Trombas, Trombas.
from which we inferred we were not far from the Cape of Good hope. These
Yrombas are a kind of great Canes, about the bigness of a man's arm, and three
or four foot long, which flote upon the water with their roots, as if the Sea
had forced them away from the neighboring Coast; yet can it not be said whence
they come, nor that they are seen any where but about that Cape.

April 28. We discovered the Coast, which before us reached from North to West.
Some thought at first it was Gabo-Falso, or the Cape of Good hope; but finding
ground at forty Fathom, and at thirty four degrees, forty minutes, they were
soon convinced, that it was the Cap d' Agulhas, whence it came that we went all
that day laveering with a North-west wind.

The 29. The Wind came to the South-east, so that we continued our course to
the North-west, keeping still in sight of the Land. That day we took as many
Fith as found the whole company two or three good meals. The night following
the Wind changed, and came to the North-west, obliging us to laveer; but being
in a manner directly contrary, we advanced but little. Taking the Altitude of
the Sun that day, we found our selves at 34. degrees, 27. minutes, and
consequently, that we wanted 24. Leagues of being at the Altitude of Cap^d'
Agulhas.

April 30. We continued laveering along the Coast, the Wind being still
contrary.

May 1. The wind coming to the North-east by East, we kept along the Coast, and
perceived a very high shore, MAY.
which was at last known to be Cabo Falso, which is within seven Leagues of
that of Good hope. Cabo Falso
It is called Cabo Falso, because it is seen at a great distance, extending it
self into the Sea much after the same manner as the other, though it be not so
high.

The 2. A North-east wind brought us in sight of the Cape of Good hope; They
discover the Cape of Good hope
but turning immediately to the North-west, we could not possibly enter the
Bay, which obliged us to make off the Coast, and get into the main Sea, taking
our course toward the South.

The next day, with a North-west wind, we had a great tempest, which yet
hindered us not from getting somewhat nearer the Coast. That day we cast one of
our Sea men overboard, with the ordinary Ceremonies used at funerals upon such
occasions. This was the third man died out of our Ship, since our departure
from Goa.

May 4. We doubled one of the points of the Cape of Good hope, which is about
ten Leagues distant from the Road or Bay, and much about the same time we
discovered the Mountain, which the Dutch, in the year 1601. named the
Tafelherg, it being flat and square at the top like a Table. It was our
intention to get into the Bay, which is at the foot of the Mountain, and at 34.
Degrees, four Minutes, within fifteen Leagues of the Cape; but the wind being
contrary, obliged us to keep along the Coast, endeavoring to make the best
advantage we could of it.

The 5. At Sunrising, we were out of sight of Land; whereupon we changed our
course, taking it North-east, and turning the prow of the Ship toward the
Coast, which we discovered about noon. About two in the afternoon, we passed in
sight of the Island called St. Elizabeth, which is inhabited, and at night we
got into the Bay, and cast anchor at seven fathom water.

This Promontory of the Continent of Africa, The Cape of Good hop^
which extends it self into the Sea toward the South, at 36. Degrees beyond
the Line, was named Cabo de b^n' Speranza, by John II. King of Portugal, under
whom it was discovered, by Bartholomew Dias, about the year 1493. That Prince
would needs call it so, out of the hopes he conceived to discover afterward
the wealth of the East Indies; and other Nations have continued that name, upon
this account, that having once doubled the Cape, there is some assurance of
completing the Voyage, whereof the Cape makes one half, as lying in a manner
at the equal distance of two thousand five hundred Leagues between Europe, and
the most Easterly Coast of the Indies.

Most Ships take in refreshments at this place, and the Dutch are wont to leave
there under a Stone at the entrance of the Haven, some Letters, wherein they
acquaint the Ships that are coming after them, with whatever had happened to them
in their Voyage, and the course they take at their departure thence. The water
there is excellent good, and so easy to come at, that the taking of it in, is
without any trouble. Cattle are very cheap; their Oxen are large, and have
bunches on their back, as those of the Indies; and there are some Sheep, whose
flesh is extremely delicate; they have long ears, and their tails are as big
and weighty, as a good hind quarter of Mutton.

They have also all sorts of wild Fowl, Pinquins a kind of ^owl
and those Creatures that are hunted, Deer, wild Boars, Partridges, Quails,
etc. and among the rest, a kind of Geese, which they call Pinguins, which have
no wings, but stumps, and consequently cannot raise themselves off the ground.
It is an amphibious Animal, and with those stumps makes a shift to swim. A man
may take them up with his hands, but the flesh of them is not edible, it is so
hard and insipid. There are also Dogs, or rather Sea-bears, Camels, Tygres,
Lions and Lynxes.

The Inhabitants are of low Stature, The Inhabitants about the Cape of Goodhope
ugly and ill-shap'd, living more like Beasts, then men. Their faces are
wrinkled, their hair full of grease and nastiness, and they stink so, that they
are smelt as soon as they are seen; which proceeds not only hence, that they rub
their bodies with train Oil, but also from their constant eating of raw flesh.
They never kill a beast in order to the eating of it, but feed on them only
when they die of any disease. A dead Wh^le cast up by the Sea upon the shore,
is an excellent dish of meat with them; as is also the hot entrails of some
beast, which they eat with all the filth about them, having only taken out the
excrements, wherewith some rub their faces.

They go naked, Their cl^thing.
save that both men and women cover their privy parts with a triangular piece
of skin, which they fasten with leathern girdle about the waste: Some of the
men cover their buttocks and thighs with a Lions skin, or Ox hide, drawing up
the tail between their legs, so that it covers not what they intend should not
be seen. Nay, there are some, who wear a skin, which comes down from the
shoulders to the waste, and cut their faces, arms and thighs, in which they
make diverse strange incisions and characters, which though they were ugly
enough before, adds somewhat to their deformity. The women wear about their
Arms and Legs, rings of Iron or Brass, which they receive from strangers for
their Cattle.

They who live near the Seacoast feed only upon Oysters, Their food.
Fish, such Herbs as Nature produces thereabouts, and the Whales cast up by the
Sea: but such as inhabit further within the Country, and are called
Soltanimans, live a little better, though they are no less barbarous and savage
then the others.

They do not cultivate the Ground, Use no husbandry.
though it be excellent good and very fertile, nor do they understand any thing
of improving and ordering the fruit which Nature bestows on them. They all live
in little Huts, or in the same place with their Cattle, without Beds, Stools,
or any such superfluous pieces of household stuff. Their way of resting
themselves is to sit upon their heels. They are never seen near the Sea, but
only when they think to drive some Trade, in trucking their Cattle, Ox-hides,
Lions, Leopards, Tigers-skins, and Ostritch Feathers, for K^ives,
Looking-glasses, Nails, Hammers, Hatchets, and other pieces of old Iron, to
their great advantage who come thither.

They have no knowledge at all of God, Know neither God nor the Devil.
nor never heard any talk of the Devil; but all the mischief they fear, is,
what may be done them by the Lions, against whom they are forced to fortify
themselves in the night time by great fires, which they make all about their
quarters.

May 10. Having filled all our Vessels with fresh water, Lions their only
enemies
and bought ewo Oxen of the Soltanimans, who were unwilling to sell any more,
we reimbarked, intending to get ou^ of the Bay that day, but the contrary wind
would not permit us. The next day, we sent our Boat to bring aboard us fifteen
persons, to wit, four men, eight women, and three children, to be transported
into the Island of Pingui, which is at the entrance of the Bay, where those
poor people were in hopes to live more at their ease upon the Carcasses of
Whales, which the Sea is wont to cast ashore there, and to be free from the
persecutions of the Soltanimans. The Boat returned in the Evening, laden with
all sorts of Birds, especially Pinguins, which had been all killed with sticks.

May 12. Being Sunday, we weighed Anchor before day, and got out of the Bay
with a North-east Wind, taking our course Westward. The next day it came to
North-north-east, and afterward to the North, and in the afternoon, we had not
any at all: So that we continued all the remainder of the day in sight of the
coast. At night it came to the South, but in less then two hours, it returned
again to the North, and about midnight we had such a Tempest, that we were
forced to take in all our Sails.

The 17. The Tempest which had continued ever-since the 12. grew so high, that
had not our Ship been very sound, and of great burden, it could not possibly
have resisted the violence of the winds and waves, which so covered it
sometimes, that all upon the Deck were wet to the skin.

The next day the Sky cleared up, and the wind was something allayed, but
still contrary. We took the elevation, and sound our selves, at 34. Degrees,
40. Minutes; whence we concluded, that we were between Cabo Falso, and the Cape
of Good hope, and consequently, that the Wind had forced us back 25. or 30.
Leagues, yet in the evening we had in a manner recovered what we had lost; but
the night following, the wind was so violent, as if the Elements had been near
their resolution into their first Chaos.

These extraordinary winds are called Hurricans, Hurricans.
and they come not with such fury, but once in seven years, though the Sea in
those parts be ordinarily tempestuous. We lost in that tempest two of our best
Sea men, who fell from the Scnttle into the Sea, where one was immediately
swallowed up; the other had so much strength as to lay hold (...) the rope was
cast out to him, and got into the Ship; but falling on the sides of the Ship he
had so bruised himself, that he died within an hour after. The contrary wind
forced us into the main Sea, and reduced us to such extremities, that we were
not so much concerned in the prosecution of our Voyage, as the saving of our
lives; in as much as had the Sea made the least breach in the Ship, it had been
impossible for us to escape.

The next day, the contrary wind continuing in the same violence, we were still
in the same danger, having no other hope, but what the next change of the Moon
gave us. But though she appeared the next day above the Horizon, yet the
tempest was nothing abated, till the rain somewhat allayed the wind the 22. so
that we could make use of our sails, endeavoring to keep our course Westward.

May 23. We had a calm, during which the Ship stirred not from the same place.
We discovered the Coast North-east of us; and in regard we were then at 37,
Degrees, six Minutes, we imagined our selves to be in the same Altitude with
the Coast which lies between Cabo Palso, and that of Agulhas. In the evening
the wind increased, and brought with it a tempest, from the West-north-west,
which forced us to put off from the Coast.

The 24. The wind continued strll contrary, and in the evening there rose such
a tempest, as forced us to go all night before the wind.

The 25. We resumed our course with a West wind, taking it South-west. We were
that day at 36. Degrees Latitude.

The 26. With the Sunrising, we had the North-east wind, which made us put out
all our Sails, taking our course West, and sailing after the rate of two
Leagues an hour. But in the evening, the wind turned to the North-west, with so
great likelihood of a tempest, that it was thought fit to take in part of our
Sails. Accordingly, the wind increased so by degrees, that we were forced to
take in all but the main Sail, which was not taken in till the wind grew so
violent, as if it would have confounded all the Elements, to have swallowed us
up in the disorder. Nay, its fury was such, that our Ship which had resisted
all before, as a Rock, was tossed by the waves like a little boat. I must
confess it was through Gods infinite mercy to us, that we escaped that danger,
wherein we were in all likelihood, to perish, since it was a kind of Miracle,
that the Masts stood, considering the violence of the winds was such, as might
have rooted up the strongest Trees. This dreadful Tempest continued the 28.
and 29. with so little intermission, that we began to despair of prosecuting
our Voyage, inasmuch as the first quarter of the Moon had brought no change of
weather: whereupon it was taken into consideration whether it were not our
safest course to go and pass over the Winter in the Island of Madagascar. It
was urged, that the Ship, having been much battered by the waves, would not be
able to hold out much longer, and that though it should, our provisions would
not, and so it would be impossible for us to complete our Voyage. This proposal
was generally approved; but when it was considered on the other side, that that
delay, which must have been at least six months, would be an inconvenience
equal to the imminent danger we were in, it was thought the best course to
prosecute the Voyage.

But May 30. The President having called all the Officers together, and
represented to them the condition of the Ship, and the little likelihood there
was of completing the Voyage; Nay, on the contrary, that the wind might be
more violent, as the Moon increased, and that coming in September, or October
upon the Coasts of England, the dange^ would be as great as that they were then
in upon those of Africa, it was resolved, that to preserve the Ship, we should
put into the Island of Madagascar, and stay there till September, inasmuch as
within that time there would come thither some English Vessels, which might
supply us with things necessary for the prosecution of our Voyage.

According to this resolution, we tacked about at two in the afternoon, the
weather so tempestuous, that we could beat but two Sails. We saild two Leagues
an hour, but the Sea was so rough, that many times the waves came over the
Ship. This tempest continued till the next day, but about noon it ceased.

June the first, IUN^.
We faild on, with a West wind, taking our course Eastward; We put out all
our Sails, so that in 24. hours, we got forty Leagues.

The next being Whitsunday, the Tigre we brought from Surat bit the President
in the hand, and had forced it off, had not I and some others come seasonably
in. About 11. at night, the wind changed, and came to South-south-east, which
was the best point we could have wi^hed it in for our return; insomuch that we
immediately changed our resolution, and set things in order to our return to
the Cape of Good hope, with an intention, to take in fresh water at the Island
of Saint Helene.

The same wind continued the third of June, insomuch that about noon, we were
got to 35. Degrees, 8. Minutes.

June 4. We saw abundance of the Manga's de Valudo, but the wind changed, so
that we had much ado to keep on our course to South-south-west, and afterward
to North-north-west toward the Coast. We saw also abundance of Trombas,
whence we inferred we were not far from the Cape of Good hope.

The 6. We had no wind at all, so that we spent the day in fishing. We found
sometimes, 43. and 48. sometimes 54. and 63. fathom water. Toward night, we
had a good North-west wind.

The 7. The wind came to West; and at night we had so great a tempest, that we
were forced to take in all our Sails.

June 8. The Tempest continuing with the same violence, we could advance but
little. About midnight, it came North, and we took our course Northwest.

The 9. The wind ceased, and having taken the Altitude, we were at 35 Degrees,
30. Minutes. In the afternoon we had a North-west wind, with a dreadful
Tempest, which forced us to take in all our Sails, and go before the wind, in
some danger of running upon the coast. This was the saddest night we had in all
our Voyage. For the Master of the Ship fearing the reproaches of his
superiors, if he came not to England within the year, endeavored all he could
to prosecute the Voyage; but finding at last, all was to no purpose, he
acknowledged there was no other way to save the Ship and the persons in it, but
to put in somewhere. Whereupon it was immediately resolved we should go and
winter in Madagascar; and so we presently changed our course.

The 11. The weather was fair; but about midnight the sky was so overcast, that
it was not doubted but a Tempest was coming, as indeed it did, and continued
the three next days.

The 15. It ceased, and the wind being VVest-north-west, we took our course to
the North-east, and in 24. hours, got 33. Leagues.

The 16. We got 44 Leagues. The 17th. 50. with an East-south-east wind, taking
our course to the North-east.

The 18. We got 30. with a VVest-South-west wind; the 19th. 40. and the 20th.
having failed 30. Leagues, we were at 31. Degrees 15. Minutes Latitude.

The 23. At break of day, we discovered a Vessel, which soon came up to us. It
was a Ship belonging to the new Company, of 500. Tun burden, and came out of
England some four months before, under the command of Captain Hall, who being
sick, and not able to stir, sent to the President to desire him he would honor
him so far as to come aboard his Vessel, which he did, taking along with him
the Physician and my self. He not only treated us kindly, but also proffered to
supply us with Cordage and Sails, in case we met not with any Vessels of the
old Company at Madagascar: whither it was resolved they should make all the
haste they could; Captain Hall's Ship being less, and not so laden as ours,
IVLY.
going before, with a South-east wind.

The first of July, They discover Madagascar.
he was got out of sight, and in the evening we discovered the Coast. We
doubted not but it was Madagascar, and so had a watch set in the night, to see
we came not too near it, as also that we put not off too ^ar from it: It being
on the one side hard to approach, it having once lost the Altitude, and on the
other, dangerous to approach it in the night time, by reason of the Rocks that
are at the point of the Island, Arive there
and especially by reason of the little Island, at the entrance of the Bay.

The 2. We arrived at Madagascar, and got into the Bay of Saint Augustin^,
finding no bottom, till within a quarter of a League of Land, where we cast
Anchor, at 25. fathom water, glad we were got into a Harbor, after so many
dangers escaped.

Our joy was hight^ed by our finding in the Bay two English ships, belonging to
the same Company, one whereof was upon her return for England; the other bound
for the Indies. It was but three months since the latter came from England;
commanded by Captain Willis, being 1400. Tun burden. Her name was the London,
and she was one of the noblest Vessels I ever saw. The Captain came immediately
aboard us, accompanied by a young Merchant, and proffered the President to
supply him with all things necessary for the prosecution of his Voyage.

The 3. The Officers of all the three ships had a meeting aboard ours, to
consider what course they should take with the Inhabitants, that they might not
hold their provisions at too dear a rate; and it was resolved, that what ever
were bought should be bought upon a common account; and to that end, every one
should bring out the commodities they were willing to truck, which should be
put off by the Secretaries of the three Ships.

The Glass-bracelets, beads and Agats, we had brought from the Indies were
incomparably beyond what they were laden with, What Commodities go off at
Madagasc^r.
out of Europe; so that it was resolved ours should not be produced, till the
others were sold. By this means, we bought every day four Oxen for forty pair
of Glass-bracelets, which the Inhabitants call Rangus; a Sheep for two, and a
Calf for three Rangus; and for a brass ring, ten or twelve inches about, a man
might have an Ox worth here six or seven pound.

The 4. The President, Captain Willis, and Captain Hall, went up the River to
discover the Country, and to see what Cattle was brought down to the Bay. We
found near Captain Willis's Tent about thirty men, and some women, who had
brought milk to sell. They had brought also about twenty Oxen, Sheep, and
Goats: but hearing there was a greater number coming after them, we provided
our selves only for three days.

The 6. The President invited the two Captains and all the Officers of both the
other Ships to dinner; and some days after Captain Willis treated the whole
Company. In the afternoon he entertained us with a Comedy, which lasted above
three hours.

The 14. Captain Hall went on his Voyage toward the Indies, and the 16.
Captain Willis went away also, having supplied us with all things necessary for
the prosecution of ours. He intended to touch at the Maldives, and stay there
till the 20. of August, that he might arrive at Surat in the Winter. We
accompanied him to the Island, at the entrance of the Bay, and having taken
leave of him, went into the Island, where we found abundance of odd Shells of
diverse forms, several sorts of Fish cast up there by the Sea, and rotted Cocos,
which the Wind had forced thither from the Eastern Coast of Madagascar, where
some grows, but not from the Coast of the Saint Augustines Bay, which is
opposite to the West.

The 21. The President took up his Lodging in the Tent pitched for him on the
Seaside, intending to continue there, till he embarked in order to our return.
They made there also certain Huts, for the Soldiers that were about him, as
also for such as were repairing some things belonging to the Ship, and for the
Butchers, who killed and salted the Beef for the Provision of the Ship: but on
Sundays all came aboard, where there was a Sermon.

About four Leagues from the Haven, The Lord of those parts*
there lives a Lord, who had three Sons, the eldest of whom was named Massar.
They came all three to see us, with a retinue of about a hundred men, armed
with a kind of Pikes. They brought along with them about three hundred Oxen,
some Sheep, Goats, Poultry, Citrons, and Oranges, to truck for our Commodities.
Being come near the President, they made a little halt, to observe what posture
we were in, and at last the eldest of the three Brothers came up, and bestowed
on the President twelve Goats, and his two Wives gave him, each of them, a fat
Capon. The President presented him with three Strings of Glass Coral, each of
his Brothers with two, and each of the Wives with a Bracelet. This signified
but very little to us; but they highly valued them. Makes an alliance with the
English.
They planted a great Pole in the ground, as a mark of the Alliance they made
with us, promising severely to punish such as should injure us, and desiring us
to take such a course, as no disorder might happen on our side. They desired to
hear our Music, and seemed to be much pleased with it. They sold us ten fat
Oxen, some Sheep, Goats and Poultry. They sold us a fat Sheep, the Tail whereof
weighed twenty or twenty four pound for seven or eight grains of Coral or Agat,
and a Capon for three or four grains of counterfeit Coral. They would not
meddle with our money, as being so happy as not to know the value of a thing
which occasions the misery of other parts of the World.

During the six weeks we staid in the Island, most of our diversion was
shooting at Buts, or fishing with the Angle-rod. We took good store of Fish,
and some Oysters, which the Inhabitants call Oring. These stick to the Trees
and Bushes that are upon the Seaside, being at high water covered with the
Tide. They are large, and as delicate as any England affords.

From the fifth to the eighth of August, AUGUST
there were such abundance of Grasshoppers, that they deprived us of the fight
of the Sun. The Inhabitants eat them, but they look on them as forerunners of
famine and mortality of Cattle. One small shower of Rain dispersed them all.

As for the Island of Madagascar, Madagascar described.
which the French call the Island of St. Laurence, (either from its being
discovered by Laurence, Son of Francisco Almeyda, General of the King of
Portugal's Army in the Indies, or from its being done upon Saint Laurence his
day, Its greatness.
in the year 1506.) It lies in the torrid Zone, reaching from North to South,
from the tenth to the twenty sixth degree. It Is certainly one of the greatest
Islands in the World, since it is above 150. Leagues in length, Its Havens.
and 180. in breadth, and has many good Harbors, whereof the chiefest are,
St. Augustine's Bay, where we put in, St. Iago, Anton Gil, Antipera, St.
Iulian's, St. Mary's, St. Sebastians, St. Romanus and Manatenga. Its Mountains
are for the most part covered with Citron-trees and Orange Trees; and if any
are bare and rocky, that Rock is an excellent white Marble, out of which issues
forth the best Water in the World. Some of them are covered with a kind of
Trees, the Wood whereof is of all sorts of colors, (but especially, such as
afford Ebony, and a certain Wood, which in color comes near that of Brasil,
whereof they make their Lances or Pikes) and Date-trees, which gives shelter to
an infinite number of Apes and Birds, and among others, a kind of Hens, as big
as Turkies, save that they were black all over the body, but marked with little
white spots. Their heads are between a red and blew color, and in their
foreheads they have a yellow horn. They feed in the Woods whole hundreds of
them together.

There is also great store of that Gum, which the Druggists call Dragons-bloud,
which is drawn out of the flower of a Tree, Dragons-bloud.
about the bigness of a Pear Tree, but much more branchy, and not so full of
leaves. Its leaves are longer, but narrower then those of Laurel, and the
flower is taken off in order to the extracting of the juice, and put into
hollow Canes, wherein it is reduced to that form, in which it is brought into
Europe.

This Island affords also some Aloes, Aloes.
a Commodity we have before given an account of, in the description of the
Island of Zocotora. That which grows in Madagascar, is not so good as the
other, in regard it is wild; yet it is used in Medicine, nay, many times
instead of the other. They have also Cotton and Indico, but they make it not
into a paste, as they do in Indosthan, and elsewhere.

Their greatest wealth consists in Cattle. The Island rich in Cattle.
For where they do till the ground, it is only to get a little Rice, which is
excellent good there, as also for Beans, Pompions, and that kind of Melons,
which the Persians call Harpus. There are also several sorts of Citron-trees,
and Orange Trees, which bring forth twice a year, Date-trees, Cocos-trees, and
Bananas. No House but has some Hives of Bees about it; but they have not yet
the invention of making Wax, nor using their Honey, otherwise then in making a
certain Drink of it with Rice, which serves them instead of Wine. The ground
yields Salt, and Saltpeter, and upon the Seacoasts there is found abundance of
Ambergreece. It is reported also, that there are mines of Gold and Silver; but
the Inhabitants making no use of these Metals, and valuing Tin above Silver,
have not yet searched into them.

Madagascar is very populous, Its Inhabitams.
and the Inhabitants are for the most part Negroes, of a good stature, and well
shaped. All the clothing they wear is only a piece of Cotton-cloth, of several
colors, which they so fasten about their Waste, that one of the ends hangs
down to the Knee before, and the other to the Ham behind, and in the night they
take it off, and make it serve for a Coverlet. They lie upon Mats, and in
regard their Huts are made only of the branches of Trees, (those little wooden
Houses only excepted which they make for their Princes) they make a fire of all
sides of them, against the Mill-dew, which i^ seems is there very dangerous.
Some wear above their Navels a row of Glassbeads of several colors, and
several Bracelets of them about their Necks, their Arms, or above the Elbow,
and about their Legs under the gartering place. Both Men and Women have their
Ears bored through, and put into them Copper Rings, somewhat like, but not so
large as those they wear about their Wrists, and the small of the Leg. Their
Hair is black, but not equally curled all over the Country, and they dispose it
into several tresses, but it grows not much, though they grease it perpetually,
and do all they can to get long Hair. There is little difference between the
clothing of the Men, and that of the Women, save that the Women wear also a
kind of sleeveless long Coat, and that the Cloth wherewith they cover
themselves is so large, that it hides all their Thighs almost down to the Knee.
In this Cloth they carry their Children upon their Backs, so as that putting
their Legs under the Mothers Arms, they seem to be in a manner fastened
together, and yet as she carries them, a Man would think, they should fall
backwards, and break their back-bones.

The fidelity of Wives toward their Husbands is here exemplary, and the Men
think it no disparagement to take their advice. No Man but has at least two
Wives, but disposed into several Huts. For the more aged of the two he has
most compliance, though he undertakes no business, nor concludes any bargain,
till he has consulted both. These they buy of their Parents, or rather
Relations, for a certain number of Oxen, Pikes, or other Arms. Adultery and
Fornication is punished with death; but they do not easily suspect one another.
They are very free in their conversation, and there is no familiarity so great
as to raise any jealousy in them.

Some young Women made no difficulty to come into our Tent; nay, one of them
made not any to take one of my Shirts from the President, who entreated her to
wear it for my sake. She accordingly wore it two days, but afterward tore it
to pieces, to be used about other things.

The Men are courageous, The men are courageous.
and well skilled in the use of their Lances, Darts, and Pikes, which they
carry along with them where ever they go. When they are at work, their Arms lie
not far from them, and they are accustomed to them from the eighth or ninth
year of their age.

Some Persons of Quality have a bundle of twenty five or thirty of these little
Pikes carried after them. Their Arms.
They use also Bows and Arrows, and their Bows are at least five or six foot
long, the String being very loose, yet have they a sleight of shooting with a
miraculous swiftness and strength. When they cast their Pikes or Javelings,
they make several postures, and are so expert at this exercise, that at the
distance of forty paces they will not miss a bird.

The Inhabitants of Madagascar are divided into several Tribes, Their Chief
which consist of Cantons of a 100. 200. and 300. persons, and live like
Tartars, under a Chief, whom they call Tsehich, that is, King, or Lord. There
were two of these Princes lived in a wood near our Tent, where they had built
them huts under Date-trees. When their cattle multiplies so as that the grass
falls short, they engage in a kind of a war among themselves, and endeavor to
get what they can from their neighbors. King Massar, whom we named before,
told us, that he had joined with two other Kings, named Machicore, Schich
Tango, and Andiam Palola, with whom he made account to get together a body of
500. men, and to set upon some of their neighbors, who had better pastures
then theirs. These Princes have an absolute power over their Subjects, and
severely punish the crimes committed within their jurisdictions, especially
such as tend to the disturbance of the Public peace: but this dignity is not
so continued in the same Family, but that upon the Prince's death, the
strongest is advanced to this pretended Crown.

It were a hard matter to say what Religion they are off, Their Religion.
save that as I have been informed, they belive there is one God, who has made
Heaven and Earth; and will one day punish bad Actions, and reward the good. I
saw one among them, who was certainly their Priest, getting up a tree, and
speaking to the People, for above half an hour: but not one of us understanding
their Language, I know not what discourse he made to them, nor yet what
difference there is between their Priests and the others; save that I observed,
they carried at the end of a Cane a piece of a Cowes-tail, and that one of them
suffered the nails of the two fore-fingers of his right hand to grow to the
length of Eagles claws. Every Canton has its Priest, who would also be
accounted Sorcerers, and have it thought they can bind the Devil, and force
him to do what they please.

The Portuguez of the Island of Mozambique, Mozambique.
which is but half a league from the Continent of Africa, drive a considerable
trade here in Aloes, Dragons-blood, Ebony, and other Drugs. For the Captain,
who under the King of Portugal has the command of this little Island, which is
but half a league in compass, and who, in the three years of his Government,
gets a hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, is not a little obliged to
the Neighborhood of Madagascar, though the greatest part of his wealth comes
from Soffola, where he has his Factor, and where the Portuguez have built a
Fort.

Hieronymus Osorius, When discovered by the Portuguez.
in his History of the Life and Actions of Emanuel King of Portugal, affirms,
that when the Portuguez discovered the Island of Madagascar, in the year 1506.
there came aboard their Ship as many Negroes as a boat could well carry. They
were kindly received, and had several little Presents made them; but they ill
requited that civility, for as soon as they were got into their own boat, they
shot so many Arrows at the Portuguez, that they were forced to answer them with
Cannon and Musket Shot. The same year another Portuguez Captain, named, Rodrigo
Pereira, being cast by a tempest upon the Eastern Coast of this Island, he sent
word to the Inhabitants, by an African Moor, who understood somewhat of their
Language, that the design of his coming thither, was to enter into an alliance
with them, and to settle an advantageous Commerce for both. The Islanders
seemed to approve of this Proposal, and told the Moor, they would carry him to
their King, that he might conclude with him the Treaty desired by the
Portuguez, but being got off a little from the others, they fell upon him, and
had killed him, had they not discharged some Muskets at them, whereby some
fell, and the rest were forced to let go the Moor. The Portuguez Captain having
got him again, landed at another place, where he surprised the Inhabitants, and
took their King Prisoner: but treated him so well, that he proffered to bring
them to a place, where they should find a good Haven for their Ship. He brought
the Portuguez Captain to a Bay, at the entrance whereof there was a very
populous Island, whereat the Inhabitants were frightened, and fled into the
great Island, forsaking Wives and Children, nay even their King: so that it
proved no hard matter for the Portuguez to possess themselves of the Island;
whence they sent to the Inhabitants, Inviting them to return, and to permit
their planting among them, since they desired only their friendships. They
returned, and presented the Captain with 50. Oxen, and 20. Goats; but, to be
rid of their Guests, they represented to them, that there were greater
advantages to be made in the Port of Matatana, inasmuch as there they would
find Silver and several Drugs to truck for. The Captain would have gone
thither, but the current of the Sea having forced one of his Ships upon the
Coast, he retired with the other to the Island of Mozambique. The same Tempest
which had cast that Captain upon the Eastern Coast of the Island, forced
another Ship of the same Fleet into the Port of Matatana, whither there
presently came one of the boats of the Country, into which he sent the Master
of his Vessel, who by the many Voyage^ he had made upon the Coasts of Africa,
and learnt the Language of the Country. The Negroes having him in their boat,
made all the haste they could ashore, which obliged the Portuguez to put out
their shallop, with fourscore men in it, to overtake them; but the Negroes were
too quick for them, and carried away the man. The Shallop coming near Land, the
Portuguez^ saw their Master, who told them he had been brought to their King,
and civilly received by him, and that he was desirous to speak with the
Captain, and enter into friendship with him. The Captain made no difficulty to
go ashore, where the King received him kindly, and treated him magnificently,
according to the custom of the Country: but thinking to return in the Evening,
there rose so great a tempest, that it was impossible for him to get aboard.
The tempest continued four days, so that those who were in the Ship, believed
that their Captain had been killed by the Barbarians, weighed Anchor, and
returned to Mozambique. The Captain finding the Ship gone, and that there was
little likelihood of ever getting out of the Island, grew so discontented that
he died of it. Eight other Persons of his retinue died also, and they who
remained embarked in the Shallop, choosing rather to expose themselves to the
uncertain event of a dangerous Navigation, then stay in a place where they must
perish within a few days; and they were so happy as to meet with a Vessel
commanded by the Captain John Fonseca, who received them aboard, and carried
them into Africa.

The first landing of the Dutch in this Island, The fist landing of the Dutch
(...) Madagasc^^.
was in August 1595. at which they met with as great difficulties as the
Portuguez had done. Their design was only to refresh themselves there, upon
this account; that, in those first Voyages, they had so little knowledge of the
disease called the Scurvy, and the remedies now used for the cure of it, that
most of their men being not able to perform their labor, they were forced to
touch there in order to some relief for their diseased: but ere they could meet
with any refreshment, there died above 70. persons out of the four Vessels
whereof their Fleet consisted, whom they buried in a little Island, which upon
that occasion they called, The Dutch-Church-yard. The description they make of
this Island is very short, and for the most part, taken out of the Relation of
Mark Paulo V^net^, which is none of the most exact. That of Francis Couche of
Rouen, Printed by the means of the late M. du Puy, is so exact, that that of
the Dutch cannot compare with it. What these last relations have in particular,
is, that the Inhabitants of Madagascar are circumcised, though there be nothing
otherwise that evinces them to be Mahumetans, since they have no Mosques, nor
any exercise of Religion, nor appearance of Devotion in all their Demeanor.

Having passed over the Winter on the other side of the Aequinoctial Line, we
began to set things in order for the prosecution of our Voyage, and bought the
19. of August, of King Masiar, and two other neighboring Princes, Tsebich
Tanga, and Andiam Palola, twenty five fat Oxen more, and about a hundred Sheep
and Goats, besides the hundred and fifty Oxen we had bought during our abode in
the Island, all which we put aboard the 20. that we might not want fresh meat
during our Voyage. The same day we embarked our baggage, and the next day we
got out of the Bay of St. Augustine, and left the Island of Madagascar, with a
South-west wind, which continuing all the night following, we soon got out of
sight of the Island.

The 22. The Manson, which we could not yet have hoped for, came unexpectedly
upon us, and advanced our progress very much, taking our course to
West-south-west.

The 23. The wind came to the East, so that having it full behind us, we went
on merrily, taking our course the more toward the South, to avoid the Cape of
Good hope, where we intended not to touch at all.

The 24. and 25. the wind was somewhat abated; but the 26. it blew so fresh a
gale, that we made a great progress. We were that day at 27. degrees, 27.
minutes Latitude; and the 28th. at 28. degrees, 12. minutes.

The 29. We had the wind East-south-east, with those storms which the Portuguez
call Travados: They were immediately over. We saw that day, being at 31.
degrees, 15. minutes Latitude, a great number of the Fishes called Pesce
puercos, which leaped three or four foot above water, as if it had been their
design to find us sport. The next day we had a Tempest, yet such as hindered
not our getting somewhat forward; so that the last of August, we were at 33.
degree, 34. minutes.

September the first, SEPTEMBER.
the wind grew so violent, that we were forced to take in part of our sails,
yet we made a shift to get 50. Leagues in 24. hours. The next day, we got but
30. the wind being South-west.

The 3. The Sea being very calm, we killed one of the Cowes we had bought in
Madagascar, and found three Calves in the belly of it; as also a Goat, that had
four young Kids within it; from which a man may judge of the fruitfulness of
the Country.

At night we saw up and down certain Lights, like flames; but we could not
judge whether they were the Fishes, which the Spaniards call Dorad^s, and the
English Blubbers, or those Meteors, which the Spaniards call Cuerpos sanctos.
In ancient time, when there appeared two, they were called Castor and Pollux,
Dioscures, and Tyndarides, and when but one, it was called Helene. Some have
not shaken off the superstition of believing, that their fire presages a
Tempest. But, on the contrary, we had a great calm, the next day, and saw
infinite multitudes of little Sea-birds. About two in the afternoon, we had a
North-east wind, which continuing fair all the next day, we failed above two
Leagues an hour.

September 6. We had a great tempest; It continued all night, and shook the
Ship so, that the water coming in at several places, we were forced to pump
four times an hour. The same day we came 35. degrees Latitude.

The 7. The weather was somewhat fair, so that we made use of our Sails, taking
our course West-north-west. The Sea was very rough, and forced us toward the
Coast, from which we thought our selves forty Leagues distant, and from the
Cape of Good hope 130. The 8. and 9. the wind South, and it proved rainy
weather.

The 10. We had but little wind, yet got 40 Leagues in 24 hours; we saw many of
the Mangas de Valudo; whence it was inferred we could not be far from the Cape
d' Ag^lhas:

The 11. We made but a small progress, with an East wind. Casting the plummet,
and finding a sandy bottom, one hundred and twenty fathom water, we are
confirmed in the opinion we had before, of our being near Cape d' Agulhas.

The 12. The contrary wind forced us to laveering to the North-north-west, and
Southwest, going either further from, or nearer to the Coast, which yet they
could not discover. In the afternoon, we resumed our course to the
West-north-west, with a Southwest wind, and at night we found a yellowish sand,
at 190. fathom water.

The 13. Our course was to the West-north-west, with a South-east wind. About
10. we saw a dead Whale floating upon the water; and being then at 35. degree
latitude, we conceived we might be at the altitude of the Cape of Good hope,
where many of these creatures are ordinarily seen.

The 14. we found at Sunrising, Declinat^^ of the Loadstone.
that the Compass declined four degrees, 50. minutes to the East, whence we
inferred, that we had compassed the Cape of Good hope.

The next day, we had the wind so full a Stern, that had it been contrary, it
would have forced us once more to think of putting into some place, or at least
put us to the same extremities we had been in before near the Cape. We
therefore found the declination of the Lodestone to be one degree, fifty
minutes, and presently after, the declination of it near the Cape of Good hope,
is four degrees, though otherwise it does not decline so much. As Soon as the
Cape is past, the Compass still varies toward the East, in regard the Needle
draws to the Earth, where no doubt there is Iron, and other Load-stones that
draw it: but the declination on that Coast never exceeds eight degrees.

About 20. Leagues on this side the Cape of Good hope, and at 33. degrees, 15.
minutes, lies the Island of St. Elizabeth. The Island of St. Elizabeth.
It is not above two Leagues distant from the Coasts of Africa, and has a very
good Haven toward the Continent, at 16. fathom water. The Coast of the Isle
is but one continued Rock, but there grows such abundance of delicate Herbs in
the Island, that it may be presumed it would afford as great conveniences and
refreshments as that of St. Helene, if it were planted with Citron-trees, and
Orange Trees, and stocked with Cattle. It Is true, it has no fresh water, but
what falls from the sky, which in all likelihood is the reason that seldom any
touch at it, though there come thither such store of Sea-wolves, that in a few
days there might be as much fat gotten, as would load a Vessel of 600 Tun.

These creatures are called Sea-wolves, Sea-Wolves
though they are more like Bears, both in color, and the making of their
heads, save that the snowt of these is somewhat sharper. They have only two
paws under the breast, and draw the lower part of the body after them, as if it
were a tail, yet are they so swift, that it is as much as a man can do to
overtake them running.

It is a cruel and fierce beast, which fears not to set upon two or three men
together; and his teeth are so close and strong, that he can therewith easily
break the handle of a Patizan.

There is also in the same place a kind of Badger, Badger.
the flesh whereof is as delicate and wholesome as that of Lambs; the birds
called Pinguins, are there better and more tender then any where else* and in
regard few Ships come thither, these birds and some others, are so tame and so
little afraid of a man, that he needs only put out his hand to take them.

The 16th. The wind was contrary, we being at 32. degrees Latitude. The next
day, and the 18. with a North-north-west, and South-west wind, we got 64.
Leagues, and came to 29. degrees, 16. minutes Latitude.

The 19. With a good South-south-west vvind, we got 40 Leagues to the
North-west, and were at 28 degrees Latitude.

The 20. With a South-east wind, we got 34 Leagues, continuing the same course
to the North-west.

The 21th. 28 Leagues, with the same wind, and keeping on the same course.

The 22th. 20 Leagues, with the same wind, and in the same course.

The 23th. 24 Leagues, with the same wind, taking our course West-north-west.

The 24th. We got with the same vvind, 30 Leagues, continuing our course to the
West-north-vvest.

The 25th. We had so great a calm, that we advanced not any thing at all.

The 26th. We got but 20 Leagues, with a little East-south-east vvind,
continuing the same course.

The 27th. We got 36. Leagues, with a North-east vvind, pursuing the same
course, and were come to 21 degrees Latitude.

The 28th. With the same vvind, and holding the same course, we got 46.
Leagues, and were at 20 degrees Latitude.

29th. With an East-north-east vvind, we got 20 Leagues, continuing the same
course.

The 30. Keeping the same course, to the North-vvest, we advanced 25 Leagues.

October the first, OCTOBER
a South-vvest vvinde put us forvvard 25 Leagues; keeping our course to
North-vvest, and we got that day to 17 degrees Latitude.

The 2. With the same vvind, we got 25 Leagues, keeping on in the same course,
till we were come to sixteen degrees, sixteen minutes Latitude.

The 3d. With the same vvind, and in the same course, 28 Leagues.

The 4th. With the same vvind, taking our course to the west 20 Leagues.

The 5th. In the same course, 16 Leagues.

The 6th. We got 15 Leagues with a South-east vvind, St. Helen's Island.
and came that day to the Island of St. Helene.

This Island lies at 16. degrees, 12 minutes, beyond the Aequinoctial, and was
so called by the Portuguez, Planted by the Portuguez
upon its being discovered the one and twentieth of May, on which day is
celebrated the memory of Saint Helene, Mother to Constantine the Great. It is
distant from the Coast of Angola 350. Leagues, from that of the Cape of Good
hope 550. and from that of Bresil 510. So that it is somevvhat strange, that at
so great a distance from the continent, the Sea should start out an Island
about 7 Leagues in compass. It is so fertile, that there is not any Province in
Europe affords such plenty of excellent fruits, and breeds so many creatures as
this Island.

Some affirm, it afforded neither, when it was first discovered by the
Portuguez, and that the fevv Trees they planted, and the little stock of Cattle
they left there, has so furnished it, that it is able sufficiently to refresh
all the fleets that come thither. At this place, a man may have at any time of
the year, Figs, Pomegranats, Citrons and Oranges, and there are Goats, Swine,
Barbary-Hens, Feasants, Partridges, Quails, Peacocks, Pigeons, and great store
of all sorts of Birds, as also salt for the keeping of them; so that Ships
might be sufficiently provided with all things, if they would stay there any
time. The Sea supplies it with more Fish then can be consumed; and the Earth
brings forth so many excellent Herbs, that the Portuguez, unwilling to retard
their Voyage, leave at this place their sick men, who recover their health
within a few days, and having only a little Oil, Rice, Biscuit and Spice, make a
shift to live there till the Ships come thither the next year. Its Mountains
are so high, that they reach above the Clouds, and are seen at Sea, at the
distance of 14 Leagues. The Trees wherewith they are covered bring forth no
Fruit, and are fit only for firing, but the Valleys are extremely pleasant. The
King of Portugal would not have any establishment to be made there upon these
reflections; that all Ships passing that way might find refreshment there, and
that it would be a hard matter to keep the said Island against all the other
Nations, who are concerned in its being still free, inasmuch as were it not for
that, Vessels many times, would be forced upon the Coasts of Guiny, where water
is not to be had at all times, and where they should be obliged to stay for
Rain, which would be so great an inconvenience that many of the men would in
the mean time droop and die.

The fertility of this Island proceeds chiefly from the daily rain which falls
there: but they are transient showrs soon over, so that the Sun shining
presently after, and that by intervals, it must needs very much advance the
maturation of all things.

There are three places where fresh water may be taken in, to wit, where the
three Rivers, which come out of the Mountain fall into the Sea. They breed
abundance of Snakes; but the Dutch eat them, and prefer them before Eels.

At 190 Leagues, Ascension Island.
North-west of the Island of Saint Helene, is that of the Ascension, so called
by the Portuguez, upon its being discovered upon Ascention-day. It lies at 8.
degrees, 30. minutes South of the Line, and has also very high mountains; but
it affords no fresh water, nor any other refreshment; nay, it has not so much
as any verdure; only what may be particularly said of it, is that upon the
Coasts of it, there are more Fish then upon those of Saint Helenes, which
occasions the coming thither of abundance of Birds, that live only upon the
said Fish. These Birds are somewhat like Geese, at least as the Relations
describe them. As Soon as a Vessel comes near, there fly such numbers thereof
into it, that they are easily killed with sticks, but the meat of them is not
good. The Earth of its Mountains is of a reddish color, much like that which
the Spaniards call Almagro, from the name of a City, where there is much of it
found.

October 9. The South-east wind continued, but so weakly, that we got that day
but 15. Leagues, holding our course to the South-west, and we were at 16.
degrees, 11. minutes Latitude.

The 10. We had a great calm, with insupportable heats, so that we got that day
bu^ 8. Leagues, keeping the same course.

The 11. With an Easterly wind, and keeping on the same course, we got 15.
Leagues.

The 12. We got 21. Leagues with the same wind, taking our course to the
North-north-west.

The 13. The wind came to North-east, and helped us forward 25. Leagues to
North-north-west, to 14. Degrees, 25. minutes Latitude.

The 14. With the same wind, keeping on the same course, we advanced 22.
Leagues.

The 15. The wind came to South-east, and keeping on the same course, we
advanced 44. Leagues.

The 16. The wind continued South-east, and we got 46. Leagues; we had that day
the Sun in the Zenith, so that we could not observe the Elevation. The heats
were very great.

The 17. We got 40. Leagues, with the same wind.

The 18. With the same wind, we got 42. Leagues, to the fifth degree of
Latitude. That day we saw Millions of flying fishes, and abundance of those
birds the Portuguez call Mangas de Veludo. The heats were excessive.

The 19. With a South-east wind, we got 40. Leagues, and got to 3. Degrees, 19
minutes Latitude.

The 20. With the same wind, we got 40. Leagues further, and at one degree, 18.
minutes Latitude.

The 21. With the same wind, we got 35. Leagues, and passed under the
Aequinoctial Line. At one degree beyond the Line lies the Cape de Lope
Gonsales, upon the Coasts of Guiny, the Road whereof is very good. There
Vessels take in refreshments, in case they had not done it at Saint Helene's
Island.

The Island of Saint Thomas, St. Thomas Island.
so called by the Portuguez, from its being discovered on 21th. of December,
lies under the Line. Though there be no talk of any Plague at that place, yet
is the air thereof very unwholesome, and prejudicial to strangers, who cannot
well bear the excessive heats predominant there; Whence it comes, there are few
graybeards seen there, and few Christians reach 50. years of Age, though the
Inhabitants of the Country live to above a hundred. Day and Night are of an
equal length there all the year long, and it rains only in March and September:
but all the remainder of the year, the Earth is moistened by a certain Dew,
which brings forth all sorts of fruits. They who discovered the Island found it
overgrown with a kind of trees, the branches whereof were all straight.
Heretofore there grew Sugar there, in such quantities, as that there was enough
to load thence yearly above forty Ships: but it is now sometime since that
there bred there a kind of Worms, which so gnaw the Canes, that the Island can
hardly furnish six Ships therewith. It affords much Wheat, and Wine, Millet,
Rye, Barley, Melons, Cowcumbers, Figs, Ginger, red-Parsnips, Cabbages, Navews,
Lettice, Parsley, all sorts of Roots, Pulse, and Pot Herbs, and among others, a
certain Root named Ignaman, accounted a very delicate dish by the Inhabitants.
It is a kind of Toadstool, the rind whereof is black, and the meat white,
about the bigness, and not unlike the French Navew, save that it casts forth
several branches below. It is baked in the Embers, and tastes somewhat like,
but much better then a great Chestnut. The Spaniards have planted Olive Trees
there, as also Peach-trees, and Almond-trees, which grow well enough, but bear
no Fruit.

Among the living Creatures, Land Crevisses.
particularly to this Island, there is a kind of Crevisses, which live within
the ground, and work like Moles. There is also abundance of Partridges, Quails,
Black-birds, Parrats, and other Birds: but particularly great store of
excellent fish, especially Whales, which are of a monstrous bulk, upon the
Coasts of this Island.

In the midst of the Island, there is a Mountain covered with Trees, and
overspread with a Cloud, which supplies it with fresh water, and that
abundantly enough to water the Sugar Canes: but what is most remarkable is,
that the higher the Sun comes over the Horizon, the more water falls from the
said Cloud.

The natural Inhabitants of it are Negroes, The Inhabitants.
but Foreigners continue white to the third and fourth Generation; and it is
reported, that the lice and fleas, wherewith the Negroes are extremely
troubled, meddle not with the white people, inasmuch as the skins of the former
are much more delicate then those of the latter.

Within 35. Leagues of St. Thomas Island, Rolles-Island.
Southward, there is another Island, which the Portuguez. call Rolls Island.
wherein there are Oranges, Citrons, Bananas, Ananas, Ginger, Poultry, Swine,
and other refreshments, in such plenty, that having besides a very good Haven
at ten Fathorn water, it is a more commodious place then the Cape de Lope
Gonsales.

The Island of Carisco, Carisco-Island
which lies 30. minutes on this side the Line, has no other refreshment but
fresh water, and is so near the Continent, that seldom any Ships Anchor there,
but in great extremity.

October 22. With a South-west wind, we got 33. Leagues, and about noon, were
at one degree, 35. minutes Latitude, North from the Line, having very fair
weather.

The 23. The same wind brought excessive heats, and advanced us 26. Leagues and
3. degrees, one minute Latitude.

The 24. We got but 22. Leagues, having continual thunder and lightning, which
lasted till night.

The 25. The same South-east wind carried us 32. Leagues, taking our course
North-North-west; The weather was rainy, with storms, and those winds which the
Portuguez call Travados, which are very ordinary toward the Coasts of Guiny,
from which we conceived our selves to be then distant about 150. Leagues.

The 26. The wind continuing South-east, we got 25. Leagues, and were at seven
degrees Latitude. The heat was much greater here, then it had been on the other
side of the Aequinoctial, though the Sun were ten degrees further from our
Hemisphere, in as much as the Sun, which had so lately warmed the Septentrional
Hemisphere, had not yet had time to warm the Meridional.

The 27. The wind changed and came to North and by East, which obliged us to
change our course. We got that day but 13. Leagues, and about noon, were at
seven degrees, 50. minutes Latitude. And as we came further off from the Coasts
of Guiny, we accordingly removed out of the bad weather, which had much
incommodated us before.

The 28. The wind came to North-east, which is ordinary in those parts within
the 10th. and 20th. degrees, whereas from thence it changes, as it does on our
Seas on this side. We got that day 30. Leagues.

The 29. The same wind carried us 31. Leagues; and at noon, we were got to 10
degrees Latitude. The next day, with the same wind, and keeping on the same
course, we got 28 Leagues, to 11. degrees, 13. minutes Latitude. The next, with
the same wind, the weather rainy, 23. Leagues.

November 1. The same wind continuing, we advanced 26. Leagues.

The 2. The wind North-east, we got 24. Leagues, holding our course to the
North-west.

The 3. We kept on, November.
with the same wind, the same course, and were, about noon, at 14. degrees, 40.
minutes, and consequently near the Latitude of Capo Verde, which is a point of
the Land reaching from the Continent of Africa into the Sea, Capo Verde.
between the Rivers of Gambea and Sanaga, by Ptolomy called Promontorium
Arsinarium.

The Inhabitants are black, Its Inhabitants.
bulky and well-shaped, but mischievous and dangerous. They are for the most
part Pagans, whereof some invocate the Moon, and others adore the Devil, whom
they call Cammate. Some among them profess themselves to be Mahumetans; but all
they have of that Religion is only the name and Circumcision.

They are in perpetual wars with their Neighbors, and are expert enough at the
mannagement of their Horses, Their Arms
which are brought them out of Barbary, and very swift. Their Arms are the Bow,
and a kind of Lance or light Pike, which they handle very advantagiously. The
most illustrious marks of their Victories are the Privy parts, which having cut
off from their Enemies, they present them to their Wives, who dispose them into
Neck-laces, and account them a greater Ornament then Pearls.

They marry several Wives, The women do all the work
whom they force to work like Slaves, as well in the fields as at home, where
the Husband is served up alone, with what his Wife has provided for him; and
as soon as he has dined, he reassumes his Arms, and goes either a hunting, or
about his business. The Women are accustomed to such hardness, that as soon as
they are delivered, they go and wash the Child, either in the Sea, or the next
River.

The Men are for the most part much subject to drunkenness, The men drunkards.
and such lovers of Wine, that some have been seen to take off a Bottle of Aqua
vitae at a draught. Their times of debauches are, at the Funerals of their
Friends, at which they spend four or five days together in weeping and
drinking by intervals, so that they seldom part ere they get their Skins full
of Drink. The Entertainments are performed with the Drum and Pipe, and there is
set at the head of the deceased a Pot of Wine or Water, which is changed twice
a day, and that for several years afterward.

They believe the dead will rise again, Believe the immortality of the soul.
but that they shall be white, and trade there as the Europeans do. The French,
Spaniards and Dutch, trade much there in the Hides of Oxen, Bufflers, and Elks,
Elephants teeth, Wax, Rice, Ambergreece, which is excellent there. Here it was
that Peter de la Brouck, a Dutch Merchant, bought in the year 1606. a piece of
Amber of eighty pound weight.

We shall here say by the way, D. ^urique discovers Guiny.
that the Portuguez began their discoveries of this Coast of Africa, in the
year 1417. in the reign of John I. who had been Master of Avis, under the
direction of the Infanto D. Eurique his third Son. These first Voyages had not
the success he expected, till that in the year 1441. Anthony Gonsales, having
discovered the Cape del C^vellero, brought away with him certain Negroes, whom
the Infanto sent to Pope Martin V. desiring him to promote the Zeal he had for
the advancement of Christian Religion, and to bestow on him the places he
should discover upon those Coasts, which he pretended were prossessed by such
as had no right thereto.

The Pope was pleased to make him a Present of what cost him nothing, and gave
him all he should discover in Africa, especially in those parts toward the
Indies, upon condition, that at his death he left them to the Crown of
Portugal. The Inf^nte had discovered all the Coast between Capo de Naom, as far
as a hundred Leagues beyond Cabo Verde, and died in the year 1453. King Alfonso
V. in the year 1457. bestowed all these Conquests on D. Ferand, Duke of Viseo,
Heir to the Infanto D. Eurique, and in 1461. the same King ordered the building
of a Fort in the Island of Arguin, for the safety of Commerce, by Suero Mendez,
which the King D. John II. caused to be rebuilt, before his coming to the
Crown, as Lord of those Conquests, and the Commerce of Guiny, by gift from the
King his Father. This Prince, in the year 1461. farmed it out to one named
Ferdinand Gomez, upon condition he should every year discover a hundred Leagues
of the Coast; so that in the year 1479. they had discovered the Islands of
Fernando del Po, St. Thomas, Anno Bueno, those of del Principe, and the Cape of
St. Katherine. The wars which happened between the King D. Alfonso, and the
Crown of Castile, hindered him from spending his thoughts on these Conquests;
but the King D. John II. being come to the Crown, sent away in December 1481.
Diego d' Azambuja, who came to Mina, Iannary 19. 1482. to a place called then
Aldea de dos parts, and where reigned at that time a King, or Prince, named
Caramansa.

This place, The scitu^tion of Mina.
on which the Portuguez bestowed the name of Mina, by reason of the abundance
of Gold found there, is seated upon the Coast of Guiny, five degrees, forty
minutes South of the Aequinoctial Line, between the Kingdoms of Axen and Cara,
where within the space of fifty Leagues is carried on the trade of almost all
the Gold in those parts. It has on the North-west Comana, and on the
North-east Afuto, small Countries, subject to those of Abarambues. The Fort is
built upon an ascent, which the situation of the Country makes by little and
little at the end of a skirt of Land, which advances into the Sea like a
Peninsula, having on the North-side the Ethiopian Sea, and on the South a
little River, which serves it for a Ditch. It may be easily kept by five
hundred men, and the Town, which is at the foot of the Fort, has about eight
hundred Inhabitants. But this place is so fenny and barren, that such as have
settled themselves there upon the account of Traffic, are forced to buy
Provisions of those of Camana and Afuto.

The Inhabitants are docile enough, and better natured then the Negroes, though
not so rational as to matter of Religion. The Religion of the Inhabitants.
They make Divinities of all they see, that is new and and extraordinary. They
had at that time enclosed with a Wall a great Tree, which they adored, and to
which, on certain days, Water and Meat was served up by one of their Priests,
whom they call Sofo. They had also a veneration for the Bones of a Whale, and
religiously worshipped a certain Rock, for this reason, that it was higher then
any other near it. No Nation in the World is more superstitious about
groundless Divinations and Augury, Their Superstitious.
then this is. They take certain pieces of Straw into their mouths, and
according to their falling to the ground they judge ofthe event of things. They
all affirm, that they speak to the Devil, and they have a particular respect
for such as have the reputation of Sorcerers, but indeed are only Cheats and
Impostors, who make their advantages of the weakness of the besotted multitude.

They are very religious in the observance of their Oaths, Religious in their
Oaths.
as being persuaded, that such as violate them small dye suddenly, and allege
to that purpose, the examples of some of their Nation, who having broke the
Oath they had taken, not to injure some holy persons, who preached the Gospel
in those parts, were all destroyed. From this sincerity, there arises an
advantage not known elsewhere; which is, that Lawsuits and differences are
decided in a few hours, upon the pure affirmation of the parties. No Crime so
heinous, but a man may redeem his life with money, unless he be so lost to
goodness, as to fall several times into the same offense.

They go naked, Their Clothing.
and cover only those parts which are not with decency to be named; and they do
it with Ape-skins, or pieces of Cloth of diverse colors, which they make of
their Date-trees. The Ornament they most affect is, to make their Bodies shine
by frequent rubbing them with Oil, or Fat. Persons of Quality wear Bracelets of
Gold about their Arms and Legs, and tie up their Hair and Beards with small
Chains of the same Metal.

In their wars, they observe neither Order nor Discipline, and the Instruments
they make use of, Their Arms.
are fitter rather to excite laughter, then animate them to fighting. Their
defensive Arms are made of Lions, Tigers, or Leopards skins, and the offensive
are Darts, and short Lances. Their Hidalgos, when they go to the wars, are
attended by two Pages, whereof one carries the Buckler, and the other a little
Stool, on which the Master rests himself when any halt is made.

They regulate the number of their Wives according to their Revenue; and they
contract Marriages without any Ceremonies, giving the Brides Father only ten
Rials for his Wine, which they are such lovers of, that many times they take of
it, till they have lost their Senses and Understanding.

The Dutch have there the Fort called Boure, The settlement of the Dutch in
Guiny.
within four Leagues of Mina. They have also their Factors at Cara, Coromantin,
and Aldea del Tuerto, and they quietly drive on the trade of Mina, where they
return yearly above two millions of Gold, and by that means get out of the
Iazans, and other Inhabitants of Aethiopia, great quantities of Gold;
especially since their settling at this place occasioned the Portuguez to
attempt what they did at Brasil, contrary to the Treaty they had made with the
States of the United Provinces. The Dutch had already destroyed the trade of
the Portuguez there, upon this score, that they were content with a moderate
profit, and treated the Negroes with so much mildness, that they brought them
to some liking of their Religion, which has made a considerable progress among
them.

Christopher Colombo, perceiving King John II. to be much inclined to those
Voyages went to the Court of Portugal, to proffer his service, for the
discovery of the West Indies. But the business being taken into consideration
at the Council, they thanked Colombo, and resolved to prosecute their Conquests
in the East. In pursuance of this resolution, the King sent away two of the
best Pilots in the Kingdom, named Diego Can, and Iuan Alonso d' Avero.

The former took his course to Mina, Diego Can discovers the Kingdom of Congo.
and arrived at the Cape de Lope Consales, and afterward doubling that of St.
Katharine, he entered the River Zaire, seven degrees South of the Line, and
there took possession of the Kingdom of Congo.

This Kingdom reaches from the Cape of St. Katherine Southward, as far as Cape
de Ledo, and has on the West, The Kingdom of Cong^.
the Ethiopian Sea; on the South, the Mountains of the Moon, and the Cafres;
on the East, the Mantabas; and on the North, the Kingdom of Beny, being in
length about a hundred and sixty Leagues, from the second degree, 30. minutes,
to the 13. degree beyond the Line. ^s Provinces
It consists of six great Provinces, named, Bamba, Sengo, Sunda, Pango, Batta
and Pambu.

The Province Bamba reaches along the Coast, from the River Ambrisi, to that of
Coanse; the Metropolis, Bamba.
Bamba, lying between the Rivers of Losa and Ambrisi, 30. Leagues from the Sea.

The Province of Songo lies upon the Rivers of Zaire and Loango, Songo.
reaching from the River Ambrisi, to the Mountains which divide it from the
Kingdom of Loango. The Metropolis is of the same name.

The City of Sunda does also derive its name to the Province, Sunda.
whereof it is the Metropolis. It is 8. Leagues in compass, and comprehends
under its jurisdiction all the Country, which is near the City of Congo, (by
the Portuguez named St. Salvader) as far as the River Zaire.

The Province of Pango, Pango,
which had heretofore its particular King, has on the North, the Province of
Sunda; on the South, that of Batta; on the West, the City of Congo; and on the
East, the Mountains of the Sun. The Metropolis, from which it has the name,
lies upon the River Barbella, which has its Source common with that of the
Nile.

The Province of Batta lies North-eastward, Batta,
between that of Pango, and the River Barbella, and reaches to the burnt
Mountains.

The City of Congo, Pamba.
is the Metropolis of the Province of Pamba, and lies upon a Mountain fifty
Leagues from the Sea. There is in the same Province, another Mountain which is
above six Leagues in length, and has on it so many Villages and Hamlets, as
find Habitations for above a hundred thousand persons.

Duarte Lopez, The Air of the Country
who lived several years in those parts, and made a particular description of
the Kingdom of Congo, which Augustinus Cassiodorus has taken the pains to
translate into the German language, affirms, that the Air is so temperate there
in Winter, as it is in Rome in October; and that the greatest annoyance to the
Europeans, is the Rain, which falls there every day, for two hours before, and
as many in the afternoon, as being rather burning then hot. Their Winter begins
the 15. of March, and their Summer the 15. of September, and during the months
of April, May, June, July and August, not a day passes, but it rains, so that
there is hardly a fair day in five months. But the days and nights are of
equal length in all seasons of the year.

The River Zaire, The River Zaire.
which rises out of the same Lake, where the Nile has its Source, is certainly
the greatest River of any in Africa, in as much as having received into its
Channel, the waters of the Vambo, and the Barbella, it is 28. leagues broad at
the mouth. The River Goanze is a common Frontier between the Kingdoms of Congo
and Angola; and in the Lelonda, there are abundance of Crocodiles and
Sea-horses.

This last Creature is of a duskish color, Sea-horses*
and has very little hair; It is in the head like a Cartal, without ears, has
broad nostrils, and in his jaws two teeth, like the Tusks of a wild Boar. Its
hoof has the form of a three-leav'd-grass, and he neighs like a Horse, and
runs very swiftly. The Dutch in their Relations, affirm, that the Africans make
use of them, but avoid watering of them in Rivers, left they should overthrow
their Riders.

From the hot Rains we spoke of proceeds the fruitfulness of the Country, which
brings forth Herbs, Fruit and Corn in so great plenty, that if the Inhabitants
would but cultivate the Ground, the World would not afford a better place.

The Mountains in the Province of Pamba afford Gold, Gold Mines.
and the Forests thereof are full of Elephants, which are so big, that some
teeth have weighed two hundred pounds a piece. There is also among others, a
certain Creature called Sebra, which is like a Mule, save that it is capable of
engendring, and from the backbone down to the belly, it has three bars, each
of about three fingers breadth, whereof one is black, another white, and the
third yellow. This Creature is so swift, that the Portuguez, to express
extraordinary swiftness, instanee in the Sebra.

The Empalenges is a kind of Ox, but less and more fierce. The Forests there
are also stored with Wolves, Foxes, wild Bufflers, wild Goats, Deer, and
Conies, whereof there must be abundance, in regard they are never hunted, nor
indeed any, but the Civet-cats, which they tame and keep, Serpents.
for the advantage made of them. It is reported there are also Serpents fifteen
foot in length, which have such wide throats, that they swallow down Creatures
entire. There are Amphybia, but not venomous, for the Inhabitants eat of them,
and prefer their flesh before any Venison. There are others on the contrary, so
dangerous, that such as are stung by them die within twenty four hours.

They have also all sorts of Birds, as Pheasants, Partridges, Hens,
Turky-cocks, Ducks, Geese. Turtles, Pigeons, and all kinds of Hawks and Eagles.

The Mountain of the Province of Pemba brings forth all sorts of Fruits, and
very clear and wholesome Waters, and the Country thereabouts affords a kind of
Wheat called Leuco, not much bigger then Mustard Seed, but makes better Bread
then any in our parts. It is accordingly more esteemed, then that made of Rice
or Turkey-wheat, which is left to the poorer sort; Citrons, Oranges, and
Bananas, are as common there, as in the Indies; but the Tree yields them most
Fruit is the Date-tree.

There are two kinds of it, Cocos.
for some bear Dates, other Cocos, whereof they make Butter, Oil, Wine,
Vinegar, Fruit and Bread, and yet they have withal their use in Physic, since
the juice extracted from them is so great a cleanser of the Reins, that no
person of this Country ever complained of the Stone or Gravel.

All Simples are incomparably better there then in any of our parts, as are
also the Melons, Cowcumbers and Pulse, which the Country brings forth in great
plenty.

No Mountain but is planted with a great number of Fruit Trees, and several
others, which keep on their verdant Liveries all the year long: or if they are
barren without, they fail not of yielding somewhat within, as Marble,
Alablaster, Jasper, Porphyry, nay, some Hyacinths, and particularly that white
kind of Marble, which was heretofore so highly esteemed by the Romans.

The Inhabitants of the Country are Negroes, but the Women not so black as the
Men. Their Hair curls, but they have not so great lips, nor such flat Noses, as
the other Moors. It is particularly affirmed of those of Bamba, that they are
so strong, they will at one blow strike off the head of an Ox, or cut a Slave
in the middle.

Their Houses are low, Their houses.
narrow, and ill built, not for want of Materials, but Workmen, in as much as
there is neither Mason nor Architect among them, unless a many may say, there
is not any place in the World has more, since every man builds his own House.

The same may be said of Physicians; They are all Ar^hitects and Physi^ions
They all understand Medicine and Botanicks, at least as much as they think
necessary for the preservation or recovery of their health. They cure Fevers
with a little Sandall-wood beaten to powder, the Headache by bleeding, and the
Purge they take is only the Powder made of the Bark of a certain Tree.

They go most bare-headed, Their Clothing,
save that some wear a kind of Hats made of Nut-shells, or the Barks of Trees.
Some also wear Plumes of Feathers, which they fasten to their hair with a piece
of Packthread; and as well Men as Women, put into their Ears very weighty Rings
of Gold, with Stones in them, and wear Iron, Tin, or Brass Rings or Plates,
about the Arms or Legs, though most of quality are clothed after the Portuguez
fashion. They sleep on Mats, and eat upon the Ground, sometimes shuffling
flesh, and fish, and fruits together all into the same dish; but persons of
quality are otherwise served, and eat alone, having Mats laid under the meat.
They never do their necessities, but they lay a stick cross a pit, upon which
they sit for their greater ease.

A man may guess at the Wealth of the Country, The wealth of the Country.
by the abundance of Gold, Silver, Copper, Cristal, Iron, and other Metals,
which their Mines afford, but especially by the prodigious quantity of Ivory
sold there. There is also a great trade driven in Civet, and the Portuguez and
Spaniards buy there a great number of Slaves, whom they set at work in the
Mines of Peru, or the Sugar-mills at Bresil.

Instead of Money, Their money.
they use shells; whence it comes, that the King of Congo has a Governor in
the Island of Londa, who has the oversight of the fishing there, which is of
so much the greater importance, in that men find there, what is here sought,
though under another name, many times with the hazard of life, and the loss of
honor and conscience.

The King of Congo is so absolute, The obsolute power of the King of Congo.
that he does not only dispose of the lives and estates of his Subjects, but
also, there is not a person in all his Country can pretend a propriety to any
thing; so that if he were not yearly paid the tribute due to him, he might take
all and satisfy himself. He has his Governors in all the Provinces, who have
their residence in the chief Cities. The Governor of Batta Minister of State.
H^ privileges.
The Governor of Batta, being of the Blood Royal, is the first, not only of
all the Governors, but also of all the Ministers of State: and in that
qualification, his authority is so great, that none of the Council will
contradict any thing he proposes. The King sometimes permits him to eat at his
own Table, a privilege he allows not his own Sons; but when he receives that
honor, he does not sit down, but stands all the time, He has also his Pipers
and other Musicians, as the King has, and he has only the privilege of
having within his Government, such Guards as make use of Firearms. He employes
them particularly against the Giaques, a people living upon the Nile, which
makes incursions into the Kingdom, and against which an Alarm is given in the
Country, by discharging of a Musket.

The Province of Bamba is as it were a Citadel to the whole Kingdom, in regard
thence come the best Soldiers. It can raise above forty thousand able men,
with whom, yet those of Batta, where they may raise above seventy thousand, are
not to be compared; their Swords which are brought them by the Portuguez, are
as big as those of the Swisses, yet they are so expert in the handling of them,
as some among us are in handling ordinary Swords. They also use Darts, and make
their Bucklers of the barks of Trees.

Their Armies consist only of foot, Their Armies and manner of fighting.
and fight all at the same time, or if they be divided into several Batallions,
the General keeps in the midst of the Army, and commands, by means of diverse
instruments, by which the other Commanders, whom they call Mani, understand
whether they are to advance or retreat, close, or open, turn to the right or
left, fight on, or desist. They have a kind of wooden Trumpets, which make a
dreadful noise, as do also their Drums, which are made of barks of trees, and
covered with a skin, which they beat with great sticks of Ivory.

They have also an Instrument, made of plates of Iron disposed triangle-wise,
which they beat with ordinary sticks; and Elephants teeth made hollow, the
noise whereof very much animates them to fighting. The General causes to be
brought into the Army a great many of these Instruments, which he distributes
among the inferior Officers, who thereby answer the Signal given them by the
General.

Christian Religion was introduced into the Kingdom of Congo, How Christian
Religion was introduced there.
by occasion of an Embassy, which King Caramansa sent to D. John II. King of
Portugal, at the second Voyage made by Diego Can into those parts. The chief
Ambassador, whose name was Casuta, being baptized in Portugal, the King sent
him back with a Convoy of three Ships, under the command of Gonsalo de Sonsa,
who being come to Cabo Verde, died there of the Plague, as did also Casuta. Ruy
de Sousa, who succeeded his Uncle in the charge of General, was forced to put
in at the Port of Finda, in the Province of Songo, where the Dutch have now a
Factory, and where the Lord of Governor of the place, who was Uncle to the
King, was baptized with his Son, and all his Family. The King and Queen
followed their example, and were called John and Eleanor.

This design was prosecuted by King Emanuel, in the year 1504. but the
discovery of the Indies, and the advantages made in those parts, having
occasioned the discontinuance of the Voyages upon the Coasts of Africa, those
foundations of Religion were neglected, and the Dutch made their advantages
thereof, to introduce the Protestant Religion into that Country.

Let us now see, The Kingdom of Beny.
what became of Iuan Alonso ^ Avero, who left Portugal with Diego Can. He
discovered upon the same Coast of Africa, the Kingdom of Beny, between the
Mina, and the Kingdom of Congo. It is about fourscore Leagues in length, and
forty in breadth, and about twelve Leagues or thereabouts from the Sea, a man
may see the City of Hugatoo, upon the River which the discoverers of it named
Rio Fermoso: a little further within the Country, the Metropolis, which
derives its name to the whole Kingdom. Iuan Alonso was no sooner arrived there,
but the King of Beny made a Treaty with him, and promised he would be baptized.
But this Conversion, being without any motive either of Faith, or knowledge of
the Religion he was to embrace, it accordingly came to nothing, as did also the
Trade they intended to establish there; for it was soon quitted for that of the
Indies.

As to Cabo Verde, Cabo Verde described.
which Ptolomey calls Promontorium Arsinarium, and puts at ten degrees, forty
minutes, on this side the Line, we affirm it for certain, that it is at
fourteen degrees, twenty minutes, and lies between the Rivers of Zanaga, and
Gambra, or Gambe^, which Ptolomey seems to call Durago and Stachiris. It is
called also Promontorium Hesperium, from its being so much toward the West,
and lying over against the Islands, which the Ancients called Hesperides: and
it is called Cabo Verde, from the Trees and verdure, for which it is
remarkable: But though Ptolomey affirms these Rivers to be very little ones,
and that their Sources are hardly known, yet it is certain they rise out of two
Lakes, whereof one is called by Ptolomey, Paulus Chelonides, now the Lake of
Goaga, and the other that of Naba. The Inhabitants believe they have their rise
from the Nile, but there is little likelihood they should.

Ptolomey gives no account of their falling into the Sea; but it has been
found since, that the River Gambra, which runs throughout the Province of
Mandiga, having received into its Channel the waters of several other Rivers,
which cross that Province, falls into the Ocean, at thirteen degrees, thirty
minutes: And that the Zanaga, changing its name several times, though its
course be not so long, but straight from East to West, loses it quite, at
fifteen degrees and a half, where it falls into the River Geny, which derives
its name to the Country we now call Guiny.

Ptolomey's Tables discover, that he knew nothing of the people who live
between these two Rivers, The Inhabitants of the Cabo Verde.
so that to speak pertinently of them, we are to credit the modern Relations,
which affirm, that the people called Budumeys are possessed of the Eastern part
of the Country, and reach as far as Cabo Verde: The Fowls, and Berbecines, are
quartered further within the Country, upon the River Zanaga, and more Northerly
then the Ialofes, whereof some are subject to the Fowls, others to the
Budumeyes. They call their King Breque, and their Country is plain and fenny,
but very fertile in Cattle, Wine, Cotton, Ivory, wild Fowl, and Horses, by
reason of the frequent inundations of the River. They have neither Gold nor
Silver, but abundance of Iron, whereof they make all sorts of Instruments, and
Utensils. The Air there is very wholesome, though there be no great change of
Seasons. The Inhabitants of Cabo Verde are accounted courageous, and they have
learnt of the Zeneguezes, their Neighbors, Are Pagans.
the Art of mannaging Horses, as they have also Paganism, which they profess.

They have this advantage over their Neighbors, that Justice is better
administered among them then elsewhere; that they proceed with greater prudence
and secrecy about public Affairs, which concern the greatness and safety of
the State; and that they impartially dispose punishments and rewards. The
Prince, when he makes choice of any for his Council, regards principally their
Age, and he bestows the place of Judicature on such among them as have most
experience, and are best acquainted with Affairs. These fit every day to hear
Causes, and decide Differences.

They know nothing of our Military discipline, Their way of raising forces.
but their way of making war has something particular in it, which is this:
All that are able to bear Arms, are disposed into several Regiments, and lodged
in Quarters appointed for that purpose, under their Colonels, whom they call
Iugarases; so that as soon as there is any occasion, the Orders are dispatched
from Quarter to Quarter, and by that means a powerful Army is raised in a few
days, without any need of making new Levies; in as much as the places are kept
for the Sons of the Soldiers, who succeed their Fathers, and put the Prince to
no charge, but what he allows them by way of salary, since they bring their
provisions and baggage along with them.

The names of buying and selling are not yet known among them: for having
neither Gold nor Silver coined, they truck and exchange all, as well among
themselves as with Foreigners. Their greatest Commerce consists in trucking of
Hides and Slaves. Of these they have only such as they take in war, which being
many times civil among themselves, they make the best advantage they can of
them.

They have among them some distinction of Nobility and Peasantry, Their
Nobility.
and call the former Sahibibos, who are a kind of Knights, for whom they have a
great respect, but not so much as they bear the Grandees, whom they call
Thubalas, out of which rank they choose their King, provided he be full thirty
years of age.

When the Portuguez discovered the Country of the Ialofes, The state of the
Country when first discovered.
there reigned a very powerful Prince, named Brabiran, who dying left three
Sons, by two several Wives. By the former, he had Cibitam and Camba, and by the
second, who was the Widow of another Prince, Father of Beomi, Biran, who was
chosen King after the Fathers death. His two elder Brethren, envying the
greatness of that Prince, declared themselves so openly against him, that
Biran, who had great assurances of the affection and fidelity of Beomi, his
Brother by the same Mother, took him so much into favor, that he seemed to
have reserved to himself only the name of King. But that extraordinary favor
proved fatal to both; for Biran was killed by his Brethren, and Beomi, who
thought to make his advantage of that Fratricide, to get himself chosen, took
up Arms against the two Brethren. He got together a considerable Army; but
being afterward forsaken by his Friends, he was forced to apply himself to
Portugal for relief. King John II. having got him instructed in the Christian
Religion, had him baptized with all his Family, and sent him back with a
considerable Fleet, under the conduct of Pedro Vaz de Cogna, whom he ordered to
build a Fort at the mouth of the River Zanaga, it being his design to get
further into Africa, as far as the Country of Prester John, whereof he had but
a confused knowledge. But that great design proved abortive, and miscarried at
the beginning, through the cowardice of Pedro Vaz, who minding his convenience
more then his honor, demolished the Fort he had newly built, and not able to
endure the just reproaches which Beomi made him upon that occasion, he killed
him with his own hands, the King of Portugal not expressing the least
resentment of so base an action.

The Islands, which the Portuguez call As Ilhas Verdes, The Green Island.
and the Dutch, the Salt-Islands, lie over against Cabo Verde, and were not
discovered by the Portuguez till the year 1472. Some are of opinion, they are
the Gorgonides of Ptolomy: but I dare not affirm, that that great Person, who
has left us so confused an account of that Coast of Africa, knew any thing of
these Islands, whereof the nearest is 70. and the most remote 160. Leagues
distant from the Continent. They reach from the 15. to the 19. degree, and are
in number ten, to wit, St. Iago, St. Antonio, Santa Lucia, Sant. Vincenle, St.
Nicholas, Ilha blanca, Ilha de sal, Ilha de Mayo, Ilha de Eogo, and Ilha de Boa
Vista. It is probable, the Portuguez gave them the general name of Ilhas
Verdes, or the Green-Islands, either from the Cape we spoke of before, or from
the verdure which floats upon the water in those parts, and which the Portuguez
call Sargasso, Sargasso.
from its resemblance to Watercresses. The Sea is so covered there with, from
the twentieth to the twenty fourth degree, that they seem to be floating
Islands, intended to block up the passage of Ships. Nay, this Herb is so thick
thereabouts, that, without a pretty strong Gale of wind, it would be no easy
matter to pass that way. Yet can it not be fai^^ whence the said verdure comes
to that place, where the Sea has no bottom, there being not any but in those
parts, at above a hundred and fifty Leagues from the Coasts of Africa. They
were desert and not inhabited, when the Portuguez discovered them; but now they
are cultivated, and bring forth plenty of Rice, Millet, Abruin, or Turkish
wheat, Oranges, Citrons, Bananas, Annanas, Ignaues, Potatoes, Melons, Citruls,
Cowcumbers, Figs and Raisins, twice a year. The Islands of Mayo, de Sal, and de
Boa Vista, are so stored with Cattle, that they load whole Ships thence for
Brasil. The same Islands yield also such abundance of Salt, that the Dutch have
taken occasion thence to name them the Salt-Islands. The same Portuguez brought
thither Barbary, and common Hens, Peacocks and Pigeons, which are so increased
there, that with the Partridges, Quails, and other smaller Birds, whereof there
is plenty, people may fare very well, at an easy rate.

There are also among others, Flamencos
a kind of Birds, which the Portuguez call Flamencos, that are white all over
the body, and have wings of a lively red, near the color of fire, and are as
big as Swans. They have, above all, abundance of Conies; and the Sea supplies
them with so much Fish, that, at all times, a man may find there many Portugal
Vessels, fishing for the provision of Bresil. Whence it may be inferred, they
lie very conveniently for the refreshing of such Ships as are bound for the
Indies, in as much as going thither they may easily put in at the Island of
Mayo, and coming thence, at that of St. Anthony, so as the Portuguez who live
there cannot hinder them.

The Island of St. Iago is the chiefest of them, St. Jago,
as being the residence of the Governor and Archbishop, whose spiritual
jurisdiction extends not only over these Islands, but also over all the
Portuguez are possessed of, upon the Coasts of Africa, as far as the C^pe of
Good hope.

November 4. With a North-east wind we got 24. Leagues, The Voyage^ continued.
keeping our course to the North-north-west, and were got to 16. Degrees, one
minute Latitude.

The 5. With the same wind 31. Leagues, to 17. degrees, 27. minutes.

The 6. With the same wind, and in the same course, 34. Leagues, to 19.
degrees, 10. minutes.

The 7. The wind continuing North-east, we got 36 Leagues. Not that we had
still the advantage of the Manson, at the Latitude; but it is to be observed,
that the North-east wind reigns in those parts all the year long, and brings
Vessels as far as the Artick Tropic.

The 8. The wind came East-north-east, and we run 32. Leagues, and were got to
22. degrees, 35. minutes Latitude. Here we met with abundance of Sargasso,
which I really found like Cresses, save that it was of a more yellowish green,
and had little seeds, like those of green Goosberries. Some are of opinion,
that the wind forces it from the Rocks upon the Coasts of the West Indies; but
this is the more unlikely, in that the North-east wind reigns there all the
year long, as we said before.

The 9. The same wind continuing, we got 33. Leagues, taking our course to the
North, and were at 24. degrees, 32. minutes Latitude.

The 10. With the same wind, 25. Leagues, taking our course to
North-north-west, at 25. degrees, 40. minutes Latitude.

The 11. The wind came to East-south-east, and afterward to South, and toward
evening, to North-west, with a great Calm; so that we got that day but eight
Leagues, changing our course from North to West, at twenty six degrees, forty
minutes Latitude. That day we took one of those Fish the Dutch call Hay, which
are very common in the Indies; but our Seamen affirmed they had never seen any
of them in that Sea.

The 12, We got 11 leagues with a North-east wind, keeping our course to the
North-west.

The 13. With a North-north-east wind, we got 21. leagues, taking our course
West-north-west.

The 14. With the same wind, and in the same course, we got 22. leagues.

The 15. The wind North-east, we got 20. leagues to North-west, at 27. degrees,
30. minutes latitude.

The 16. and 17. With the same wind, keeping the same course, we got these two
days 32. leagues.

The 18. The wind South-east, we run 21. leagues, to the North-west, at 29.
degrees, 20. minutes latitude.

The 19. The wind changed, and came to South-south-west, and brought with it
Rain, which lasted all day; yet so as we advanced 37. Leagues, taking our
course North-east.

The 20. The wind, North-west, we got 12. Leagues, in the same course.

The 11. The same wind carried us 22. Leagues.

The 22. The wind West-south-west, we got 40. Leagues to North-north-east, at
35. degrees, 20. minutes Latitude.

The 23. With a South-west wind, we got 34. Leagues, to the East-north-east.

The 24. the same wind, and course, 35. Leagues.

The 25. With a North-west wind, we got 33. Leagues, to North-east, and were at
38. degrees, -- minutes Latitude.

The 26. Being calm weather, we got but 13. Leagues.

The 27. We got but 12. Leagues, taking our course East-north-east, at 38.
degrees, 48. minutes Latitude.

The 28. The wind came to South-south-east, and carried us 27. Leagues, taking
our course East-south-east.

The 29. The wind South-south-east, we were at noon, at 33. degrees, 30.
minutes. We saw the Islands of Corvo, and de Flores, which some number among
the Assores; and we got that day 24. Leagues, taking our course East-south-east.

The Islands of Corzo and Flores, The A^^ores.
are not to be numbered among those which the Spaniards call the Assores, by
reason of the many Hawks found there, when they were discovered. The Dutch call
them the Flemmings Islands, hence, that the first Inhabitants of the Island of
Fajal, which is one of the seven Assores, were Flemmings, either born in
Flanders, or some other Province of the Low Countries, where they speak Low-
Dutch. The Posterity of those Flemmings live there still, and observe the
Customs of their own Country, and have their habitations on the little River
rising out of the Mountains, which the Portuguez, upon that occasion, call
Ribera dos Flamen^os.

The seven Islands called the Assores, Tercera.
are Tercera, St. Michael, Santa Maria, So^, Georges, Gratiosa Pico, and Fajal.
Tercera is the biggest of them all, as being fifteen or sixteen Leagues in
compass. The Country is mountainous, and all the Island is so encompassed with
Rocks, that it is in a manner inaccessible.

It has no Haven, but that at the City of Angra, which is the Metropolis, not
only of Tercera, but also of all the other Islands, and that no Rode where
Vessels might safely ride.

The Port of Tercera is like a Crescent between two Promotories, whereof one
has two Mountains advancing so far into the Sea, that they seem to be quite
loosned from the Island.

They are called Bresil* and so high, that a man may from thence discover
twelve or thirteen Leagues into the Sea. The Governors of the Assores, and the
Bishop of all those Islands, live in the City of Angra, within three Leagues
whereof lies that which they call Villa da Praya, which is well built, but not
very populous, in as much as it is a place of no Commerce, by reason of a flat
shore or strand thereabouts, which occasioned the name of the City.

The City of Angra is so called from the manner of its situation, Angra
it being a term whereby the Portuguez would express the Figure of the Mount
when it is half open, or the New Mood. It has two Forts, whereof one which is
toward the Mountains, serves it for a Citadel; and the other, called the
Castle of Saint Sebastiant, is built upon one of the points, which shut up the
Port, which it defends with the Artillery. On the other point which is forked,
there are two Towers, whence they give the signal, as soon as they discover any
Vessels at Sea, either from Fresil-side, or from Europe.

These Islands belong to the Crown of Portugal; but during the last troubles of
that Kingdom, there was a Castilian Garrison there, under the Command of D. A.
Alvaro de Vizeros; from whom the Portuguez soon took the Castle of Saint
Sestastian; but he kept the Citadel, till famine, and the utmost extremity
forced him to deliver it up, on composition, May 6. 1642. After the relief
which had been sent from Saint Lucars, Corogno, and Dunk^rk, had proved
ineffectual, partly through the treachery of the Portuguez, who served in the
Fleet, and partly by their vigilance, who had possessed themselves of the
Avenues of the Island.

The soil of it is very good, nay the very Rocks yield Wine, though they are in
some places so steepy, that it is almost a miracle how the Rock should thrust
out of its Veins, which are not covered with Earth, the Vine-stock, which does
not thrive so well in the best parts of the Valley. It Is true, the Wine is none
of the most excellent, and that such as are able to get better, have it brought
from Madera, or the Canaries: but this hinders not, but it may be affirmed,
that Salt and Oil only excepted, which are brought thither from Portugal, this
Island has not only what is necessary, but also what may be accounted
delicacy, since that, besides the Wheat whereof, there is sufficient to
maintain all the Inhabitants, They (...) good Fruit.
they have Apples, Pears, Citrons and Oranges, but especially plenty of
Peaches, and of all the kinds thereof. They have also Cherries, Plums, Walnuts,
and Chestnuts, but not such quantities thereof, as of other Fruits. Nor do they
want any Pulse, or Potherbs.

They have also a Fruit they call Battatas, Battat^s (...) Potatoes.
which spreads its root just under the uppermost Superficies of the Earth, as
the Vine does, and brings forth a Fruit much like a Raddish, save that it is
much bigger, there being some Roots that weigh a pound or more. It is much
esteemed in Portugal, but in the Island it is of no account, so that only the
poorer sort live on it. They have also a certain Plant which grows up five or
six foot high, and is fastened to the Earth by an infinite number of Roots,
yellow as Gold, and as small as the Hair of Man's Head. The Inhabitants use it
instead of Wool and Feathers, to fill their Beds and Mattresses withal: but
would they take the pains to spin it, they might make very good Stuffs thereof.

Cattle is extremely multiplied there, as also all the several sorts of Poultry
brought thither, and there are abundance of Quails, and such multitudes of
little Birds, like the Canary Bird, that some of the Inhabitants trade in
nothing else. But there is neither wild Fowl nor Venison, and consequently no
hunting, nor any divertisement of that kind, though there be Forest enough,
which might be sufficiently stored in a short time.

The Wheat there is very good, Their Wheat will not keep.
but will not keep, in so much, that they are forced to put it under ground, to
preserve it to the end of the year. Whence it comes, that every Family has a
pit in some part of the City, the entrance whereof was so big, that a man may
go in, into which they dispose their Wheat, seal it with the mark and seal of
the Owner, and leave it there till Christmas, and then they have it conveyed
to their Houses, and put it into Chests of Bull-rushes, where it keeps the
remainder of the year, so as that there is no need of ever stirring it.

There is no Province in Europe, Tercera O^en very large.
where Oxen are so fair, and so strong, as in the Island of Tercera, or have
fairer and larger Horns; and they are withal so tame, that they impose names
upon them, as we do on Dogs, that they may go or come when they are called.

To hear the noise which the Rocks make when people go over them, Is (...)
Earthquakes.
as if they were going over a Cellar, a man would think the Island were all
hollow; and its probable, that the Air which is ra^ified in its Concavities,
occasions the frequent Earthquakes, whereto it is subject, as are also most of
the other Islands. There happened so great a one in this of Tercera, on the 24.
of May, 1614. that it overturned, in the City of Angra, eleven Churches, and
nine Chapels, besides private houses; and in the City of Pray^, it proved so
dreadful, that there was hardly a house left standing: and the 16. of June
1028. there happened so horrible an Earthquake in the Island of Saint Michael,
that not far from it, the Sea opened, An Island started of ^ sudden.
and thrust forth at a place, where there was above a hundred and fifty fathom
water, an Island above a League and a half in length, and above sixty fathom
high.

There are also, in these two Islands, certain places, out of which there
issues forth a sulphurous smoke, whence it may be inferred, there is fire
hidden under the earth, that gives heat to the Springs of scalding water, which
are to be seen thereabouts.

There is a Spring within three Leagues of Angra, A Spring that petrifies wood.
which petrifies Wood; whereof there is an evident demonstration in a Tree, the
root whereof is absolutely petrified, as far as it was covered by the water,
whereas otherwise it is not changed at all.

In the Island of Pico, A kind of wood hard as Iron.
there is a certain Wood called Texio, which is as hard as Iron, and being cut,
is full of Waves like Chamlet, and as red as any Scarlet. The Cabinets made of
this Wood are so highly esteemed, that the Wood is kept for the Kings use.

Cedar is so common, Cedar.
that they do not only make all sorts of Household Stuff thereof, but also
Wagons and Boats; Nay, sometimes it serves for firing.

The Trade of these parts is not very great; for, Woad only excepted, whereof
they make great quantities in these Islands, the Inhabitants have few other
Commodities to Trade withal; unless it be some provisions, which they sell to
the Ships that are bound for the East Indies, and take in refreshments at these
places, in their way.

The Island of Saint Michael, St. Michaels Island.
whereof we spoke before, lies at twenty seven or twenty eight Leagues,
South-east, from the Island of Tercera, and is above twenty Leagues in length.

Its Metropolis is called Punta Delgada, and its Soil is incomparably more
fertile then that of the other, and produces such plenty of Wheat, that it is
able to relieve its Neighbors. There are made yearly in this Island above two
hundred thousand Quintals of Woad, wherewith the Inhabitants drive a great
trade, though it has neither Haven nor Road, where Ships may ride secure from
all wind.

Twelve leagues South from that of Saint Michael, St. Mary's Island.
lies the Island of Saint Mary, which is about ten or twelve leagues in
compass, and affords only Provisions, and Potters-earth, wherewith the
Inhabitants trade into the neighboring Islands.

The Island Gratiosa is not above five or six Leagues in compass, Gratiosa
Island.
and lies North-north-east from that of Tercera, from which it is about seven
or eight leagues distant. The pleasantness of it, and the Fruits which grow
there in great abundance, occasioned its having that name given it.

The Island of Saint George lies about eight or nine Leagues North-west from
that of Tercera, St. Georges Island.
and is twelve leagues in length, and two or three in breadth. It affords
plenty of Provisions, but little Woad. The Country is rough and full of
Mountains, which yield great store of Cedar, wherein the Inhabitants drive a
considerable Trade, with the Joyners of Tercera, where most Tradesman have
settled themselves, in regard there it is the Ships put in, and that they can
best put off their Commodities.

Seven leagues from Saint Georges Island, Fayal Island.
to the South-west, lies the Island of Fayal, which is seventeen or eighteen
Leagues in compass, and is no doubt the best of all the Assores, next those of
Tercera, and Saint Michael. The Inhabitants drive a considerable Trade in Woad,
as also in Provisions and Fish, whereof they carry whole Caravels laden, to
the Island of Tercera, where they are distributed among the Fleets which put in
there. Its Metropolis is called Villa Desta, where live those who are
Originally Flemmings, as we said before.

Pico Island, Pico Island.
which has its name from the high Mountain within it, called Pico, and which
is conceived to be as high as that of the great Canary, whereof we shall speak
anon, lies three Leagues South-east from the Island of Fayal, four South-west
of that of Saint George, and twelve West-south-west of that of Tercera. The
Inhabitants live by their Cattle and Tillage, the earth answering their
expectations, and requites the pains they bestow on it, as being more fertile
here, then in any of these seven Islands.

The Island de Flores, The Island de Flores.
whereof we spoke before, and which we discovered the 29. of November, is
seventy Leagues distant from that of Tercera, more to the West, and
consequently so far from these Islands, that it is unjustly numbered among the
Assores, or Flemmish Islands, as is also that of Coruo, which is distant from
that of Flores, about a League to the North; though both are subject to the
Crown of Portugal, and submit to the Governor of Tercera. Flores Island is
about seven Leagues in compass, and affords some Woad, but not much.

The Portuguez are so much the more jealous of the preservation of these
Islands, the more convenient they lie, The convenience of these Islands.
for the relief and accommodation of such Ships, as are bound for the
East Indies and Brasil. Whence it comes they permit not Strangers to compass
the Island of Tercera, which serves for a Citadel to all the rest, (which have
no Haven, where Vessels may ride secure as to all winds, nor any fortified
place for a retreat) least they should discover the weakness of the Island, and
take notice of those places where people might land. Before the English became
Masters of Iamaica, their Ships kept for the most part between the Assores and
the Island of Flores, and there waited for the Fleet, which comes every year
from the Havanna for Spain.

The Air is very healthy in all these Islands, The Air very sharp in the
Assores.
but so piercing, that in very few years it consumes Iron and Stones. Whence it
comes that ordinarily they use in their buildings, the Flints, which they find
by the Seaside, under water, in regard they better bear the sharpness of the
Air.

The wind coming to the South, 1640.
we kept on our course to the North-east, leaving the Islands of Flores and
Corvo East of us, so that we soon lost sight of them.

But ere we prosecute our Voyage, The ^anaries.
we shall here take occasion by the way to speak a word or two of the Canary
Islands, which lie upon the Coast of Afri^^, near the Streights of Gibralter.

They were discovered in the year 1342. When discovered.
The Ancients called them Insulae Fortunatae, by reason of the wholsomness of
the Air, and fertility of their soil. They are seven, to wit, Lanzarotta,
For^^ientura, the Great Canary, Teneriffa, Gomera, Fierro and Palma, and reach
in a manner upon the same Line, from East to West.

They who affirm that the Discoverers thereof gave them the name of the
Canaries, from their finding many Canes or Dogs there are mistaken. For it is
certain, that as well Pliny and Soli^us, as Ptolomey name one of these
fortunate Islands Canaria, though the two former give the others very different
names from those we find in Ptalomy.

So that it may probably be said that Canaria being the biggest of all the
Fortunate Islands, derived its name to all the rest of them, as that of Tercera
communicates its name to all the Assores, and Flauders its name to all the
Low Countries; and Holland its, to all the (...) under the States General.

About the year 1348. Lewis, Count of Clermont, Lewis Count of Clermont
conquers them.
Son of D. Aloso dela Cerda, surnamed the Disinberited, made ready a Fleet upon
the Coasts of Catalonia, under the protection of Alpb^nso King of Arag^n, with
a design to go and take possession of the Canary Islands; which the Pope hold
bestowed on him, conditionally he would cause the Gospel to be preached to the
Barbarious, by whom those Islands were inhabited.

He could not go along with their himself by reason of the Wars in France, and
the battle of Crecy, at which he was in the service of King Philip of Valois;
Yet so as this hindered not, but that the Conquest of them was made in his name
and he was called the Fortunate Child.

About the end of the same Age the Besques and Adoluzians* having made an
agreement among themselves for the division of these Islands which had been
forsaken ever since the death of D. Lewis de la c^rda set forth certain
Vessels, and surprised the Island of Lanza^^^a, when they brought so much.
wealth, that the King of Castit^ had even then attempted the Conquest of these
Islands, had not the Wars, he was engaged in with his Neighbors, hindered him.

Some time afterward, John de Betancourt, a French Gentleman made a Voyage
thither, A French Gentleman conquers them by commission from the King of
Casteel;
with A Commission from Henry III King of Spain; provided, that after the
Conquest thereof, he should acknowledge the Kings protection, and do homage for
the same to the Crown of Castile, He took the five lesser Islands, but the
Inhabitants of the two greater ones defended themselves so well, that he was
forced to sit down with his former Conquest. The King of Castile being thus
Sovereign thereof, sent thither a Bishop, to instruct the Islanders in the
Christian Reigion; but Betancourt's Nephew, who had sucdeeded his Uncle, not
able to brook any Authority that might eclipse his own, would needs drive him
thence, and grew so high, that the King was forced to interpose in their
difference. He sent* thither; one named Pedro Barba, who became Master of them,
to his use, and sold them afterward to one named Peraza, who gave them upon a
Con^^act of Marriage to his Son-in-Law, named He^^era. This last assumed the
quality of King of the Co^^^ries; but not able to conquer the two greate^
Islands, he sold four of them to Ferdinand* King of Aragon, surnamed the
Catholic, and reserved to himself only the Island of Gomera, with the quality
of Count. King Ferdinand, who was the most fortunate of any Prince in his time*
sent a Fleet thither, and conquered also the two greater Islands, for the Crown
of Castile, (...) of Castile.
whereto they have belonged ever since.

The Great Canary has above nine thousand Inhabitants, and among others a
Bishop, Great Canary.
the In^uisition, and the Council, which governs and the other Island. From the
excellence of its Wine, which is much beyoud that of Spain, a man may judge of
the fruitfulness of the Country, which produces Wheat, Barley, Honey, Wax,
Sugarcanes, Cheese and Woad in great abundance, and breeds such (...) of
Cattle, that the Leather sold there is not one of the least Commodities the
Inhabitants trade in not only with those of Sevil, and several other Cities of
Spain, but also with the English, Dutch, Hamburgers, and other Nations of
Europe, especially the Speniards, who bound for the West Indies, take the most
of their refreshments at this place.

In the Isle of Teneriffe there is a Mountain, Teneriffe.
called El Pi^o de Terraira. It is certainly the highest Mountain in the World,
since that a man cannot get it up in less then three days, and that must be
too either in July or August, in as much as all the year besides, it is covered
with Snow, though there never fall any in those Islands. It is so high, that it
may be seen at the distance of sixty Leagues, and from the top of it, a man may
discover, and easily count all the other Canary Islands, though some of them be
above fifty leagues distant from this.

The Island of Fierro is also one of the most considerable of all the Canaries,
Fierro Island.
and I conceive that name to be given it upon this account, that its soil, not
affording so much as a drop of fresh water, seems to be of Iron. And indeed
there is in this Island, neither River, nor Rivulet, nor Well, nor Spring, save
that toward the Seaside there are some Wells, but they lie at such a distance
from the City, that the Inhabitants can make no use thereof. But the great
Preserver, and Sustainer of all, remedies this inconvenience by a way so
extraordinary, that a man will be forced to sit down and acknowledge, that he
gives, in this, an undeniable Demonstration of his Goodness and infinite
Providence.

For, A miraculous tree.
in the midst of the Island, there is a Tree, which is the only one in its
kind, in as much as it has no resemblance to those mentioned by us in this
Relation, nor to any other known to us in Europe. The leaves of it are long and
narrow, and continue in a constant verdure, Winter and Summer, and its branches
are covered with a Cloud, which is never dispelled, but resolved into a
moisture, which causes to fall from its leaves, a very clear Water, and that in
such abundance, that the Cisterns, which are placed at the foot of the Tree, to
receive it, are never empty, but contain enough to supply both men and beasts.

Some affirm, that above a hundred leagues West of the Can^ries, there is
sometimes seen an Island, called St. Borondon, which, they say, is very
delightful and fertile, and inhabited by Christians; yet can it not be said,
what Language they speak, nor how the Island came to be peopled. The Spaniards
of the Canaries have often endeavored to find out the said Island; but whether
it be that it is always covered with a thick mist, which hinders it from being
discovered, or that the current of the water thereabouts was so strong, that it
is a hard matter to land thereat; certain it is, that as yet, it subsists only
in the opinion wherewith most Seamen are prepossessed, that, certainly there
is an Island in those parts.

The 30th. of November, The Voyage continued.
the wind South-south-west, we got 31. leagues to the North-east, and were at
noon got to 40. degrees, 32. minutes Latitude.

December 3. With the same wind we got 34. Leagues, DECEMBER.
taking our course North-east.

The 4. The wind North-east, carried us twenty seven Leagues, to
East-north-east.

The 5. The wind came to South-west, and continuing the same course, we got 34.
leagues. This day it was just eleven months that we had been tossed up and
down the Sea; for we left Surat the 5. of January, though our Voyage had been
prosperous enough ever since our departure from the Island of Madag^^ear.

The 6. The same wind was heightened into a tempest, but having it Easterly, we
got 50. leagues that day.

When a man is once come to the Azores, The West-wind (...) from the Azores to
England.
he may assure himself all the year after of a West-wind, which will bring him
into England, and never almost turns to South or North, though it may sometimes
vary some points of the Compass from one side to the other.

The 7. The wind came to the North-west, and we got 39. Leagues to
East-north-east.

The 8. The wind turned to South-west, and was so high, that we got 47.
leagues, keeping on the same course.

The 9. The wind South-south-west, we got 31. leagues, to North-north-east. We
were this day at 49. degrees, 13. minutes. It was very cold, and we found
bottom at 68. fathom, the Sand very white.

In the evening we founded again, and found some change in the Sand, which was
yellower then that in the morning, at fifty three fathom water. The wind
changed at night, and coming to North-east, was just in our teeth.

The 10. About noon, the wind came to South-west, and we found we had got 22.
Leagues.

The 11. At break of day we saw two English Vessels, and soon after, we
discovered on our left hand, that point of England which is called The Lands
end, and in the County of Cornwall. The wind was against us, which obliged us to
endeavor doubling the point by Laveering. We made shift to get that day 16.
Leagues.

The 12. The wind still contrary, we continued Laveering. We saw another
English Vessel, but could not come near it.

The 13. The wind South-west, and South-south-west; we continued our course to
East-south-east, and to East, with a point toward the South. We got that day
64. Leagues, and were at 49. degrees Latitude.

Then we changed our course, Come into the Channel
taking it to East-north-east, to get into the channel which divides England
from France.

The 14. we saw two Scotch Ships, and a Dunkirker. We came somewhat near them,
but the Sea made such a noise, that we could not possibly hear one the other.

The 15. We continued our course to East-north-east, and met three Dutch Ships
bound for Br^sil.

That day we passed in sight of the Isle of Wight, The Isle of Wight.
which lies at 50. degrees, 36. minutes Latitude, and at 19. degrees, and 4.
minutes Longitude.

The 16. About 10. in the morning we passed in sight of Dover-Castle, Dover.
and at noon came to the Downs. We cast Anchor near three men of war which lay
at Anchor in the same Road; and thus we completed our Voyage, in the 12. month
after our departure from Surat.

There were in the same Road above a hundred other ships lying at Anchor, in
expectation of some change of weather, which was then so boystrous, that for
two days we could not get out of our Ship. The Lord Admiral who commanded the
Men of War, ventured to send his Shallop to our Ship, to congratulate the
Presidents safe return.

The 19. The wind being somewhat laid, the Admiral invited the President to
dinner. I went along with him, and participated of the civility wherewith he
received him. I must confess, I was somewhat surprised, to see upon the Sea
such a prodigious quantity of silver Plate; and a Table as well furnished, as
that I may boldly say, the King was not better served at London, then the
Admiral was in his Vessel. We were so well treated there, that night began to
draw on ere we got away.

Our Ship was not above a Musket shot from the Admiral's but we were no sooner
got into our boat, (...) like to be cast away in the Haven.
ere there rose such a Tempest, as not only hindered us from getting aboard, but
forced us to Sea, the waves so filling our little Vessel, that we were forced
to cast out the water with our hats.

In the precedent part of this Relation, the Reader may have observed, that we
had been in many great dangers ere we got to the Coasts of England; but certain
it is, that we were then in, was far greater then any we had escaped; since we
were in all probability to perish in fight of our dear Country, and to be
wrackt in the Port, whereto we were already arrived. We were above four hours
in these extremities, and at last we discovered a little Vessel, which had lost
all its Anchors but the last, which was not so fastened, but that the wind
forced it toward the Sea. We were in water up to the waste, but that hindered
us not from setting our selves to the Oars, so that with much adoo we got to
the said Vessel. As Soon as we were got into it, we found that it was as unsafe
to be there, as to continue in our own; in regard the Anchor being not able to
stay it, we were in danger of being cast on a certain bank, which is one of the
most dangerous of any about that Coast. And indeed, we should hardly have
recovered our selves out of that fear, had we been in a condition to reflect on
the danger we were in: but the cold we had endured, the good cheer we had made,
the salt water we had swallowed down in our boat, and the violent and
extraordinary motion of that little Vessel, put us so out of order, that we
were better then half dead, when we were brought the next day to our Ship,
where we were received as persons risen from the dead, inasmuch as all who had
seen our boat carried away by the violence of the winds, had given us over for
irrecoverably lost; nay, so far did they despair of ever seeing us again, that
they had already bewailed our death.

December 24. There rose so dreadful a Tempest, Another tempest. Canterbury.
that in the same Road, which is accounted one of the safest and best in the
World, 24. Ships, were forced to cut off their Masts. We were our selves put to
the same extremity, but not so much by reason of the violence of the winds, as
to avoid the running upon us of two men of War, which were got loose from their
Anchors, and would otherwise have run foul upon ours.

The 26. We got ashore, and reached that night to Canterbury, Canterbury.
the Cathedral whereof is without doubt the noblest of any in England, and may
be compared with the best structures in the World.

The 27. We came to Gravesend; Come to London.
the 28. to London, where certain Deputies of the East India Company expected
the President in eight Coaches at Black-wall. There came along with them the
President's Lady, whom he had not seen in seven years before. He would needs
have me salute her, according to the English way, and obliged me to take up my
lodging at his own house, and to participate of all the honors done him upon
his arrival.

December 30. I went to see the East India House, and thanked the Overseers
there for all the civilities I had received from the President. They invited me
to the entertainment which they made that day for him.

The next day, IANV. S. Edmund Wright.
and the 1. of January, we were at other treatments, and January 2. the Lord
Major sent to invite us. He was so pleased with the Presidents discourse, that
he prevailed with him to come again the next day. The Lord Major was indeed
himself very excellent for discourse, and having heard what dangers he had
escaped in that great Voyage, he would show us that they were not to be
compared with such as some others had been in. He gave us the story of a Dutch
Seaman, who being condemned for a crime, his punishment was changed, and he
was ordered to be left in St. Helens's Island, a place we have spoken of
before. This unhappy person representing to himself the horror of that
solitude much beyond what it really was, since it came not near that we shall
have occasion to speak of anon, fell into a despair, that made him attempt the
strangest Action that ever was heard of.

There had that day been interred in the same Island an Officer of the Ship: A
strange attempt of a Duch mariner.
This Seaman took up the body out of the Coffin, and having made a kind of
rudder of the upper board, ventured himself to Sea in it. It happened fortunately
to him, to be so great a calm, that the Ship lay as it were immovable, within
a League and half of the Island; but his companions seeing so strange a kind of
boat floating on the water, imagined they saw a Spectre, and were not a little
startled at the resolution of the man, who durst hazard himself upon that
Element, in three boards slightly nailed together, which a small wave might
have overturned, though he had no confidence to be received by those, who had
so lately sentenced him to death. Accordingly it was put to the question
whether he should be received or not, and some would have the sentence put in
execution; but at last, they concluded in mitiorem, and he was taken aboard,
and came afterward to Holland, where he lived in the Town of Horn, and related
to many, how miraculously God had delivered him.

Whereto the Lord Major added, that it was a great mistake in the said Seaman,
to take so desperate a resolution, upon pure thoughts of the solitude of that
Place, since the Spaniards leave their sick there from year to year, to recover
themselves of the inconveniences of their long Voyages, and that he could give
them an example, which condemned the fortunate temerity of that man, whom fear
caused to do what the most resolute courage would never have attempted.

In the year 1616. a Flemming named Pickman, An example of a dreadful solitude.
well known in England and Holland, for the Art he had in getting out of the
Sea the great Guns of that Spanish Fleet, which was forced upon the Coasts of
Ireland and Scotland, in the year 1588. coming from Dronthem in Norway, with a
Vessel laden with boards, was overtaken by a calm, during which, the current
of the Sea carried him upon a Rock or little Island, toward the extremities of
Scotland, where he was in some danger to be cast away. To avoid a wrack, he
commanded some of his men to go into the Shallop, and to tow off the Ship.
These having done so, would needs go up into a certain Rock to look for Eggs;
but as soon as they were got up into it, they at some distance perceived a man,
whence they imagine there were others lay lurking thereabouts, and that he had
made his escape thither to avoid some Pirates which might surprise their Ship:
so that they made all the haste they could to their Shallop* and returned to
their Ship. But the calm continuing, and the current of the Sea, driving the
Vessel against that Island, they were forced to get into the long boat, and tow
her off again. The man they had seen before was in the mean time come to the
brink of the Island, and made signs to them with his hands, entreating them to
come nearer, and falling on his knees, and joining his hands together, begged
relief from them. At first, there was some difficulty made; but coming nearer
the Island, they saw something, which was more like a Ghost, then a living
person, a body stark naked, black and hairy, a meagre and deformed countenance,
and hollow and distorted eyes, which raised such compassion in them, that they
proffered to take him into the boat; but the Rock being so steepy thereabouts,
that it was impossible to land, they went about the Island, and came at last to
a flat shore, where they took the man aboard. They found nothing at all in the
Island, nor grass, nor tree, nor ought whence a man could derive any
subsistence, nor any shelter, but the ruins of a boat, wherewith he had made a
kind of Hut, under which he might lie down, and shelter himself from the rain
and injuries of the weather.

The Sun was set ere they got to the Ship, and immediately, there rose a wind,
which forced them off from the Island; whence they imagined that what they had
brought with them was not a man, since he had not the Figure of one; whereupon
they would know of him who he was, and how he came to that uninhabitable place.
He made answer, He was an Englishman, and that about a year before, being to
pass in the ordinary passage boat from England to Dublin in Ireland, they were
taken by a French Pirate, who being forced by the Tempest which immediately
rose, to let go the passage boat, left us to the mercy of the waves, which
carried us between Ireland and Scotland into the main Sea, expecting to be cast
away every minute, as at last we were. For the bark being split against the
Rock where you took me in, I escaped with one of my comrades into the Island,
in a more wretched condition, then if being swallowed up by the Sea, we had
been delivered out of the extremities we were in for want of meat and drink.

Of some of the boards of our boat, we made the Hut you saw, and we took some
Sea-mews, which we set a drying in the wind and Sun, and so eat them raw. We
found also, in the erevices of the Rock, upon the Seaside, some Eggs, and thus
had we wherewithal to subsist, as much as served to keep us from starving* but
what we thought most insupportable, was thirst, in regard the place affording
no fresh water, but what fell from the sky and was left in certain pits, which
Time had made in the Rock, we could not have of it at all seasons, by reason
the Rock being small, and lying low, the waves came over the Island, and filled
the pits with salt water. We lived in that condition six weeks, comforting one
another, and finding some ease in our common misfortune, till that being left
alone, it began to grow insupportable to me. For one day awaking in the
morning, and missing my comrade, I fell into such a despair, that I had some
thoughts of casting my self down headlong, and so putting a final period to
that affliction, whereof I had endured but the one half, while I had a friend
divided it with me. I know not what became of him, whither despair forced him
to that extremity; or whether getting up in the night, not fully awake, he fell
into the Sea; but I am of opinion, he fell in through carelessness, as he looked
for Eggs in the crevices of the Rock, which as you saw was very steepy, on that
side; Inasmuch as having observed no distraction in him, I cannot imagine, he
should of a sudden fall into that despair, against which he had fortified
himself by continual and earnest prayers. I lost, with my comrade, the knife
wherewith we killed the Sea-dogs, and the Mews, upon which we lived; so that
not able to kill any more, I was reduced to this extremity, to get out of one
of the boards of my Hut a great nail, which I made a shift so to sharpen upon
the Rock, that it served me for a knife. The same necessity put me upon another
invention, which kept me the last winter, during which I endured the greatest
misery imaginable. For finding the Rock and my Hut so covered with Snow, that
it was impossible for me to get any thing abroad, I put out a little stick at
the crevice of my Hut; and baiting it with a little Sea-dogs fat, I by that
means got some Sea-mews, which I took with my hand from under the Snow, and so
I made a shift to keep my self from starving.

I lived in this condition and solitude above elevon months, and was resolved
to end my days in it, when God sent you hither to deliver me out of the
greatest misery th^^ ever man was in.

The Seaman having ended his discourse, the Master of the Ship treated him so
well that within a few days he was quite another creature. He set him ashore
at Derry in Ireland, and saw him afterward at Dublin, where such as had heard
what happened to him, gave him wherewithal to return into England.

Thus the Lord Major made us acknowledge, that in all we had suffered, there
was nothing extraordinary, and that long Voyages, are never without great
dangers and inconveniences. He urged it to us, that as Ships are now built, and
considering the knowledge men have of the course taken for the Indies, there is
no more danger in those long Voyages, then in such as are made in the sight of
Land, which Seaman fear most.

To this purpose he related a story, wherein we could no less admire the
strange Resolutions of two men, then the goodness of God in their deliverance
beyond all expectation.

Four Christian slaves being in the Ship of an Algire-pirate, A strange
resolution of two Slaves
resolved to make their escape in a boat, which one of them, who was a
Carpenter, undertook to build. The Carpenter set himself on work about making
on wooden Pins, and other pieces necessary for the fastening of the boards,
whereof the boat was to consist.

The Turkish Captain asked him one day what he did, and was satisfied with the
Answer the other made him, that it was only to avoid being idle, and to have
things in readiness to mend the long boat, when need were. Having appointed a
time for the execution of their design, they took off five boards from the
room, where the provision was kept, whereof they used two for the bottom, two
others for the sides, and the fifth for the prow and the poop, and so made up
somewhat that was more like a trough then a boat. Their quilt served them for
tow, and having pitched the boat well, they set it into the water: but when they
would have got into it, they found that two men loaded it so, that being in
danger of sinking, two of the four desisted from an enterprise, wherein they
thought to meet with more danger, then in staying a while longer among the
Turks, so that only two, one English man, the other a Dutchman, ventured
themselves in it. All the tackling they had was only two oars, and a little
Sail; all the provisions, a little bread and fresh water; and so they put to
Sea, without either Compass or Astrolabe; insomuch that being the first day
overtaken by Tempest, which at every wave filled their boat, they were forced
to go as the wind drove them, without keeping any course. They were continually
employed in casting out the water; the Sea had spoiled their bread; and they
were almost quite spent, inasmuch as they could not take any rest, when they
were cast upon the Coasts of Barbary. There they found a little wood, wherewith
they somewhat enlarged their boat; but they narrowly escaped being taken and
killed by the Moors, and had much ado to get to Sea again. What troubled them
most, was thirst; but they made some shift for that, with the blood of some
Tortoises they took, and at last, after ten days floating up and down, they
arrived upon the Coasts of Spain, at the Cape of St. Martin, between Alicant
and Valentia. Those of the Country seeing them at a distance, sent a boat to
meet them, carried them bread and wine, treated them very civilly, and found
them passage for England.

The sixth of January, being Twelfth-day, the King of England touched many that
were troubled with the Evil. The Ceremony ended, my Lord of Strafford brought
me to his Majesty, who was pleased to honor me with the kissing of his hand.
The next day, the same Lord procured me the like Honor from the Queen; besides
which he did me several other extraordinary favors, upon all occasions.
Afterward I went often to Court, where their Majesty's were pleased I should
entertain them with some particulars of my Travels; especially as to what I had
observed in Muscovy and Persia.

I continued at London near three months, partly to refresh my self after so
long a Voyage, and partly in expectation of some money from my own Prince, that
I night make some acknowledgments of my Obligations to those who had treated me
so kindly, from the day of my arrival at Surat to that time, and set my self in
a posture of returning into my own Country. Of the time of my abode in England,
I spent some at Court, where I had made several acquaintances, and some in
viewing the public and private Structures of the famous City of London; as
also several places near it; as among others, Enfield, Tibulls, White Hall,
Saint Iame's, Hampton Court, Windsor, Westminster Hall, and the Abbey, the
Tower, Greenwich, etc.

[Of the places above mentioned here in England, as also some of those he
passed through in the Low Countries, the Author gives a short description. But
in regard what he says of the former, is known to most Englishmen, who are in
any measure acquainted with the things remarkable in their own Country; and
what he delivers of the latter affords no extraordinary satisfaction to the
curious, for whose diversion works of this nature are intended; we thought fit
to forbear the insertion thereof, that we might make the more haste to bring
him to the end of his Travels, which shall be done according to his ordinary
method.]

March the 20. MARCH. I left London, Mandelslo leaves London.
taking water at Graves-end, whence I went to Rochester, and so came the twenty
fourth to Dover. The next day, I embarked thence for Dunkirk, whither I got the
same day.

The next, I embarked thence for Newport, where I stayed only one night, and
got the next day to Bruges.

The 29th. I came to Gaunt, which I left the first of April, and got that night
to Brussels the chief city of the Duchy of Brabant.

At Brussels I staid two days, and came the fourth to Louvain, which I left
the fifth, and got the same day to Macchlin, about four Leagues distant from
Louvain.

The 6th. I left Macchlin, and came to A^werp, where having staid two days,
and leaving it the ninth, I got the next day to Breda, where I stayed only the
remainder of it, and went the next day to Bois-le-due, or Bold^e, five Leagues
from Bred^.

April the twelfth, I went to Saint Gertrudenberg, with an intention there to
take boat for Rotterdam, as I did the same day.

The thirteenth I came to Rotterdam, whence I went the same day to Delf; thence
to the Hague, thence to Leiden, and thence to Haerlem.

The City is the biggest of any in Holland, next Amsterdam, and pretends to the
invention of PRINTING, and would have the Glory of it due to one of its
Citizens, named Laurence C^ster, who in the year M.CCCC.XX. framed the first
Characters of Beech-wood, and afterward found out the Ink, now used by
Printers, nay, changed the Wooden Characters into Leaden ones, and afterward
those into Tin^e; in so much, that in the year 1440. the Mystery was almost in
its perfection.

They are so fully persuaded, as to this in the City of Haerlem, that the
Senate would Eternize the Memory of LAVRENCE COSTER, by the Inscription set
upon the House he lived in.

Which is this;

MEMORIAE SACRUM. TYPOGRAPHIA* ARS ARTIUM OMNIUM CONSERVATRIX, NUNC PRIMUM
INVENTA CIRCA ANNUM M.CCCC.XL. I left Haerlem, about six in the Evening, and
came at nine the same night, to Amsterdam. Of this place I had heard so much,
even in the Indies, that I had framed to my self, a certain Idaea of its
greatness: but what the more surprised me, was, That going out of my Lodging
the next morning, I had much ado to get through the thro^g of people* walking
up and down the Streets, in such numbers, as if there had been some Fair. All
the other parts of the World seemed to have sent their Factours thither, and
that the East and North had brought thither all their Commodities; whereof
there were in the ^^ops (...) the Patterns, whereas the main Stock was disposed
into Storehouses, public Weighing-places, upon sledges in the streets, upon
the Kayes, in the flat-bottomed boats, which unload the great Ships, and others
which serve for Storehouses for the Wheat.

It was at some los^, which I should rather admire in that great City* whether
the Commerce of it, which is greater then that of all the other Cities of the
Low Countries put together; the neatness of its Streets, especially that of the
New City; the sweetness and cleanlines of its house, the Magnificence of its
public and private Structures; the abundance of Ships and Barks, which come
thither, and go thenec every day; the largeness of its Port, wherein there are
at all times seven or eight hundred Ships; or the Order and Policy observed by
the Magistrate, in all things relating to the (...) of the City, the well f^^e
of its Inhabitants, and the improvement of Trade, by which only the City
subsists, and causes to subsist that powerful State, whereof it is a
considerable part.

As to its Commerce there is no City in the world; where the Inhabitants of
Amsterdam have not their Factors and correspondents. All the maritime towns of
England, France, Spain, and Italy, are full of them, as are also those of the
Baltick-Sea, and Muscovy it self* It is in a manner impossible to number the
Ships it sends away every year to Archangel, (...), to the Coasts of Pomerania,
and into Norway where they put off their Spic^s and Silk, and Woolen sfuffs;
for Wheat, Timber, Pitch, (...), and other things they stand in need of, either
for the building of their, ships and houses, or the carrying on of their Trade
in the other parts of the world. These Fleets go away commonly twice or thrice
a year; but there go some every day Westward, and (...) hour, for the other
Cities of Holland, and the Neighboring Provinces; yet (...) hinder but that
(...) Ports and Clannells are so covered with boats and ships, that it may be
questioned, whether the water be not there as much inhabited as the land, and
whether there be more people in the houses or the ships. There is such abunof
Wheat, Wine, Hemp, Flax, Wood, and Spices, as if all other Provinces of the
world were emptied of their wealth, to make Amsterdam a public Treasury of all
they produce: so that it may be said, it is in this City properly, that a man
may see those Miracles, which the famous Scaliger attributes to all Holland.

Though a man should consider only the House belonging to the East India
Company, he would (...) all its Inhabitants. I ha^ (...) some Ship^ (...) at
(...) the Storehouses, and Magazeens reaching at a great distance, from the
East India House, full of Spices, Silk, Stuffs (...) what ever China and the
Indies afford that is most (...) had sent thithe^ all its Ci^amon; (...) all
their Cloves; ^he Islands of (...) all their Spices, China all its rich stuffs;
Iapan its excellent works of several kinds, and the rest of the Indies its
Pepper and Silk. Nay, it may be said this Company is a kind of particular
Commonwealth in that little world; since its Magistrates, Officers, Arntes,
^l^ets Generals, Governour^ of Provinces and Cities, and its subjects, seem to
have no other dependence on this City, then a particular State has on the
Universe.

It is since the year 1595* that the Dutch have made Voyages into the Indies,
upon the instigation of a Merchant named Cornelius H^^^man, who living at
Lisbon, informed himself, from the Portuguez, of all the particulars of those
Voyages, and prevailed so far with some Merchants of Amsterdam, that in the
year 1595. they sent out four Ships, which they sent along the Coasts of
Africa, and the Cape of good Hope into the Indies; inasmuch as the design,
which some others had to find out a passage Northward, had not proved
effectual. About two years and four months after these Ships returned to
Amsterdam; and though the profits of this first Voyage answered not the
expectations of the persons concerned, yet were they such as engaged several
other Merchants in the same design; so that in the year 1598. they sent thither
a second Fleet, consisting of ^ight great Ships. They would not stay the return
of this Fleeet, but in the year 159^. set forth another, and much about the
same time some other Merchants made up a new Company, and set out a particular
Fleet, insomuch as to prevent the destruction of Trade likely to be occasioned
by many different interests, the States of the United Provinces, in the year
1602. brought the persons concerned to an agreement among themselves, and
reduced them into one common Company, under their Authority, and the direction
of the Prince of Orange, as Admiral of those Provinces.

By this Agreement, thus authorized by a Grant of the States for one and twenty
years, there was a regulation made, according to which the oversight of all
that trade was put into the hands of the chiefest persons concerned therein,
divided into six Chambers or Courts, which were settled at Amsterdam;
Middleborough for Zealand; at Delf and Rotterdam for the Meuse; and at Horn and
Enckhuisen for West-Friesland.

The first consisted of twenty Directors; that of Middleborough of twelve, and
the four others of seven a piece, so that in all charges, that of Amsterdam
bore the one half, that of Zealand a quarter part; those of Meuse and
West-friesland each a half-quarter. It was also ordered, that to General
Assemblies, that of Amsterdam should send eight Deputies, that of Zealand four,
and those of the Meuse and West friesland, each of them two, with a
supernumerary for a casting voice, which was to be appointed by the Chambers of
Zealand, the Meuse, and West-friesland alternately.

The Stock of this Company amounted to six Millions six hundred French Livers,
which was laid out in the setting forth of several Fleets; and the first
Voyages proved so fortunate, that it was found in the year 1613. that the money
of the persons concerned had gained two hundred and sixty upon the hundred. But
the profits were much greater the year following, as may be seen by the
D^vidents which have been made from time to time.

In the house belonging to the same Company, I saw also all the Drugs, all the
Fruits, and all the living Creatures which I had seen before in the Indies.

It were impossible to imagine any thing more delightful, or more regularly
disposed then the Streets, Water-channels, and Houses of this City. All the
Rivulets are bordered with Line-trees, and the Quays paved at the extremities
with Brick, an^ in the midst with Flint. The Houses, especially those of the
new City, are so man^ Palaces; so neat without, that painting could add nothing
thereto, and so well furnished within, that there are some, whereof only the
Pictures were enough to enrich a man. But what most speaks the cost employed
about them is least seen: For all the Houses being built on piles, it must be
confessed, the foundations are no less precious then the rest of the Structure,
and that there is not so noble a Forest in the World as that which the City of
Amsterdam has under its houses.

Among the public Structures the Churches are remarkable; and among others,
those called the Old and the New, and the three others built some years since
by the Magistrate. In the former is the Epitaph of Jacob de Heemskerk, who,
having made two Voyages to Nova Zembla, and the Indies, was killed at the
Streights of Gibralter, where he set upon the Spanish Fleet, within reach of
the great Guns of the Fort.

What a noble and neat place is the Hospital and Convent of St. George, where
there are now received great numbers of Aged persons of both Sexes, who are
maintained there? What more charitable, then the care and tenderness wherewith
distracted persons are treated? And what severity do they not exercise in the
ordering of incorrigible persons; the men in a House, over the door whereof
there is in golden Letters,

VIRTVTIS EST DOMARE, CVNCTI PAVENT. Where they are constantly employed in
sawing Brasil with inexpressible pains, or some other work, according to the
nature of the Crime for which they were sentenced to that punishment; and the
women in another house by themselves? But there is not any thing so miraculous
as the order observed there for the education of poor Orphans, who are very
well kept, maintained, and taught; as also in the administration of their
Estates who are under Guardians; these being obliged to give an account thereof
to the Magistrate.

The Exchanges of London and Antwerp are indeed noble places; but there is
something more magnificent in that of Amsterdam; at least this may be affirmed
of it, that for the number of Merchants daily resorting thither at noon,
neither of the other two is to be compared to it.

I may put also among the public Structures, the Weighing places, the Gates of
the City, the three Sluices, which have not their like in the World; the public
School, or College, which the Magistrate has opened there some years since;
The Arsenal, the Theater for Plays, the Anatomy-Hall, the places appointed for
shooting with Long-bow, Cross bow, and the Arquebuse; and if I may be allowed
to speak of a thing which is not yet, but no doubt will be within a few years,
and whereof I have seen the draught, I mean the Townhouse, or Guild Hall, I
may boldly say there is not any in Europe comes near it.

I stayed at Amsterdam eight days, and finding something in that City which
pleased my fancy beyond what I had observed in any I saw before, I was
unwilling to see any more, but having my imagination full of it, I took
shipping the twenty third of April for Hamborough, whither I reached the twenty
eighth following. I rested my self there one day, and got the first of May MAY.
to Gottorp, where I presented my self to their Highnesses the Duke and
Duchess of Holstein, and so put a period to my long and toilsome TRAVELS.

FINIS.
A JOURNAL OF THE TRAVELS OF JOHN ALBERT De MANDELSLO, FROM PERSIA INTO THE
EAST INDIES, And thence back into GERMANY.
M.DC.XXXVIII.
IANVARY.
THe 16. Mandelslo leaves Ispahan, the Metropolis of Persia, and came to
Schiras the 28. 97. Leagues in 13. days. Page 1 The Sepulcher of Maderre
Soliman, which the Persians believe to be that of Solomon's Mother, but is
indeed the Sepulcher of Scach Soliman Calife; Tziminar, or the Castle of forty
Pillars; the opinion of the Persians concerning it; its description as now it
is. p. 2 A description of Schiras, Metropolis of the Province of Fars;
Schiras-wine, the best of any in Persia; the fertility of the Country; Shiras
women the handsomest of any in the Kingdom. p. 3 He continues at Schiras 7.
days.
FEBRVARY.
The 5. He leaves Schiras, and comes the 10. to the City of Laar, 48. Leagues
in 6. days. p. 4 A dangerous way, where the Author was like to lose his life.
ibid. A description of the City of Laar, its houses, Citadel; a kind of Worm
breeding between the flesh and the skin, about an ell long; how Laar came to be
united to the Crown of Persia: Well-water Salt. ibid. Leaves Laar the 12. and
comes the 23. to Gamron, where he stays five weeks. p. 5 The Authors
indisposition; his treatment by the Sulthan; a King of Gelkenda would marry his
own Daughter. Mandelslo's distrust of the Dutch. ibid.
MARCH.
An English Vessel comes to Gamron, from Surat; The 11. the Persians celebrated
their Naurus. ibid. The King of Persia pays the English 30000. Tumains; Arbola
de Rays, or the Indian Fig Tree; the Sepulcher of a Benjan Saint. p. 6
APRIL.
The 1. Comes to Gamron, an Envoy, to assure the Sulthan of Schach Sefi's
favor. ibid. A description of the City of Gamron; the error of some
Geographers, as to the situation of Persia; The situation of Gamron, its
houses, streets. p. 7 The Island of Kitsmich, its extent, fruits, abundance in
fish and Cattle, how the Inhabitants live; their clothing; nature of the
climate; the commerce, particularly that of the English, and Dutch. ibid. Their
Money, Weights, Pearls, the manner of fishing for them, the King of Persia's
Officers at Gamron; the privileges of the English there. p. 8 Persian Horses
much esteemed among the Indians; the City of Ormus described; taken by the
Portuguez. p. 9 Recovered out of their hands by the Persians, with the
assistance of the English, who are granted an absolute exemption for that
service. ibid. The 6. He embarks at Gamron, and arrives at Surat the 25.
following, above 250. German Leagues in nineteen days. He continues there 5.
months. p. 10 The course from Ormus to Surat; the description and situation
of the Island Zocotora; its inhabitants, their commerce, which consists in
Aloes. p. 11 Their Arms, their Religion; the Qualities of the Climate of
Surat; the year has but three seasons there. p. 12 The Presidents reception of
the Author, how the English live at Surat; their divertisements; their respect
for the President. p. 13 A general description of Indosthan; its Provinces;
Candahar. ibid. Kabul Multan, etc. p. 14, 15 The extent of the Mogul's Country,
a description of the Kingdom of Guzuratta; its extent. p. 16 Its principal
Cities, Rivers, Ports; its fertility. ibid.
MAY.
There came news to Surat, that the Governor of Candahor had revolted, and
delivered the place to the Mogul. p. 17 The City of Reniel described; Terry or
Palm-wine: Surat described; its Houses, Castle; the Kom of Suhaly. ibid Surat
the General Factory of the English Trade; the places about Surat. p. 18
SEPTEMBER.
The 14. Two English Ships arrive at Surat. ibid. A Dutch Vessel of 1400. Tuns
comes to Surat; The Rasboutes, what kind of people they are. 19 September the
last, the Author leaves Surat, and comes the 12. of October to Amadabat, 45.
Leagues, in 13. days. ibid. He continues there 8. days. Broitschia described;
Indico, the Sepulcher of a Mahumetan Saint. 20
OCTOBER.
The 7. He comes to Brodra, which described; where the best Lacque is made; the
Sepulchers of diverse Mahumetan Saints. p. 21 The 11. Comes eo Mamadebath. p. 22
The Indian Oxen as metalsome as our Horses; the Maidan of Amadabath. ibid. The
Castle; a Benjan Mosquey; Amadabath described. p. 23 The principal Commodities
there; a piece of Ambergreece that weighed eighty pound Musk. p. 24
Merchandises pay no Custom at Amadabat; the Revenue of the City; the Sepulcher
of Kasia; that of a mischievous Father. p. 25 Princes not subject to the Mogul;
Schachbag-Garden; an Alley. ibid. Leagues in length. p. 26. Parrots,
Cormorants, etc. ibid. Crocodiles and other Creatures; Amadabat maintains
twelve thousand Horse; the Governors wealth. p. 27 His Court and Expense; the
Authors visit to the Governor; their discourse; a second visit. p. 28. The use
of Opium. ibid. A Character of the Governor of Amadabat. p. 30 His cruelty.
ibid. The 21. He leaves Amadabat, and comes the 23. to Cambaya, 16. Leagues in
three days. ibid. Tschitbag- Garden, where Sulthan Mahomet Bergeran was
defeated. Cambaya described. p. 31 Its Markets, Inhabitants, Commerce, and
Gardens; an Indian widow burnt with her own consent. ibid. How that custom
came up. p. 32 The civility of an Indosthan Mahumetan: Bettele, Areca,
described, much used by the Indians. p. 33 Leaves Cambaya the 25. and returns
to Amadabat the 27. ibid. Comes to the Village of Serguntra, what they feed
traveling Cattle with. p. 34 Tschitbag- Garden described. ibid. Leaves
Amadabath the second time, the 29. and comes to Agra, 160. Leagues. p. 35 Agra
described, its Marketplaces, Caravanseras, Mosqueys; the Sepulcher of a Giant.
ibid. Its Sanctuaries, Baths; the Mogul's Palace described. p. 36 The Mogul's
Throne, the Seraglio, Treasury; a sort of Money of eight thousand Crowns the
piece; An Inventory of the Mogul's Treasure. p. 37 No hereditary dignity in the
Mogul's Country: the chief Officers, the Mogul's Revenue. p. 38 The Arms of
the Cavalry, they observe no order in fighting; their Artillery, the order of
their Armies. p. 40 The Mogul's Guard, the dignity of the Rajas, the Mogul's
ordinary Retinue; he changes the place of his abode according to the seasons.
p. 41 How the Mogul celebrates the first day of the year: the Mogul's
birthday: another Mahumetan Feast. p. 42 The Mogul descended from Tamerlane: a
pleasant story of him. ibid. The Mogul's divertisement, a combat between a Lion
and a Tiger, another between a Lion and a Man, armed only with Sword and
Buckler. p. 43 Another between a Man and a Tiger; Mandelslo discovered to have
killed an Indosthan at Ispahan. p. 44 He leaves Agra, and comes to Lahor, 70.
Leagues. p. 45 All the way from Agra to Lahor is planted on both sides with
Trees, which are full of Parrots and Apes. Lahor described; the Baths of the
Mahumetans. ibid.
DECEMBER.
The 19. He leaves Amadabath with a Caravan of a hundred Wagons, and comes to
Surat the 26. p. 46 Persons of Quality have Banners carried before them; an
engagement with the Country people. ibid. Another with the Rasboutes; the
English President resigns his charge. p. 47 The Sulthan's entrance into Surat;
how the Mogul came to unite the Kingdom of Guzuratta to his Crown. p. 48 The
Governor of Amadabath is Viceroy of Guzuratta; disposes of the Revenue of the
Kingdom; what the Revenue of Guzuratta amounts to. ibid. The administration of
Justice; the other Cities of Guzuratta. p. 49 The Inhabitants of Guzuratta;
their clothing. p. 50 Their Women; their Clothing; they account black teeth a
piece of beauty. p. 51 The Benjans are ingenious; their ceremonies of marriage;
Polygamy lawful; their Religion; they worship the Devil. p. 52 Their Mosqueys;
Purification; their God Brama; their opinion concerning the Creation of the
World. ibid. Brama's Lieutenants; the authority of the Bramans. p. 53 They
believe the immortality and transmigration of Souls; a strange employment of
the Bramans among the Malabars: the Sects of the Benjans: their clothing:
their belief. p. 54 Their Mosqueys; their extraordinary abstinences: their
public Assemblies: the Sect of Samarath. ibid. Their God, and his Substitutes:
a particular ceremony about the dead: the Women burn themselves at their
Husbands death: The sect of Bisnow: their God. p. 55 Their manner of life:
their firing: their Wives are not burnt: the Sect of the Goeghys: their God. p.
56 Their belief: hold not the transmigration of Souls: a strange manner of
life: the superstition of the Benjans. p. 57 The Rasboutes: their belief: a
story of five Rasboutes: their charity toward Birds: they marry their Children
young: a remarkable story. p. 58 The Parsis: their manner of life: the seven
Servants of God, twenty six other Servants of God. p. 59 They have no Mosqueys.
p. 60 The Badge of their Religion: their houses: fire accounted sacred among
them: they severely punish adultery: their manner of burial. ibid. The Indous,
Jentives: their belief: the Theers. p. 61 The Marriage ceremonies of the Indian
Mahumetans: the effect of Opium: Divorce lawful. p. 62 The education of their
children: their interments: are called Mussulmans: their stature and
complexion. p. 63 Their habit: their houses: the ceremonies of their visits:
their expense. ibid. Their Domestics: the condition of Tradesmen: their
Houses: Merchants: p. 64 The several Sects of the Mahumetans: no lnne in
Guzuratta: their expertness at the Bow: they have of Aristotle and Avicenna's
works. p. 65 Their Language: the Diseases of the Country: Winter begins in
June: the Commerce of Guzuratta: the manner of making Indico. p. 66 Saltpeter,
Borax, Assa foetida, Opium. p. 67 The Drugs of Guzuratta: precious Stones,
Weights, Measures, Money: much counterfeit money in the Indies. ibid. The
fertility of Guzuratta: their way of making Bread: no Oats in the Indies: their
Seed-time and Harvest: the Mogul Proprieter of the whole Country: their
Gardens, Trees, Horses, Beef, Mutton. p. 68 Their Fowl, Fish, Ships: their
trade to the Red Sea: to the Persian Gulf: to Achin: the Commerce of the
Malabars in Guzuratta. p. 69 The Commerce of the Portuguez. p. 70
M.DC.XXXIX.
IANVARY.
The first he leaves Surat, takes shipping for England, and comes to Goa the
eleventh following. p. 71 The way from Goa to Visiapour: the names and
situation of several Cities of Decam. p. 72 Visiapour described: the way from
it to Dabul. p. 73 The City of Dabul described: the City of Rasiapour. p. 74
The Inhabitants of Decam: the Money of Decam. p. 75 The King of Decam tributary
to the Mogul: the History of Chavas-chan: he is made Regent of the Kingdom:
engages the State in a war; the King implores the assistance of his Grandees
against him. ibid. He attempts the life of his Prince, but is prevented and
killed. p. 76 His friends would revenge his death: his ingratitude: the Mogul
concerns himself in Mustapha's fortunes; the King of Decam able to raise two
hundred thousand Men. p. 77 His Artillery. ibid. The English President visits
the Governor of Goa. p. 78 The Jesuits of Goa treat him; a Feast at the
professed House of the Jesuits there; with a Ball. p. 79 The advantage the
Jesuits make of those divertisements, in order to the propagation of Christian
Religion. Another Feast at the Jesuits College; the Sepulcher of St. Francis
Xaverius. p. 80 The Hospital of Goa: the Monastery of the Augustines; the
Portuguez pay the English 45000. Crowns. p. 81 The Viceroy's Presents to the
President; those of the General of the Gallions and the Jesuits. ibid. He
leaves Goa the 20. and comes the 29. near Ceylon. Goa described; how taken by
the Portuguez. p. 82 Its Inhabitants. Winter begins in June; the Diseases of
those parts, the Women of Goa love white men; the Herb Doutry, and its use; the
Women go not abroad. p. 83 The jealousy of the Portuguez; the Portuguez
Soldiers; their Marriages and Christnings, their Slaves. p. 84 The Inhabitants
of the Country, and their Houses, the Decanins excellent Gravers, etc. p. 85
Their Women delivered without pain; they live in perfect health to a hundred
years of age; the Jews of Goa; the Mahumetans; their Money; the Customs upon
foreign Commodities. p. 86 The Viceroy of Goa; a character of him; his power,
revenue. ibid. The Malabars; Zamorin Emperor of Calicuth and Cananer. p. 78
The privileges of the Nayres; the writing of the Malabars; the order of
succession in Calicuth; Cochim described; the power of the King of Cochim; a
great privilege of the Bramans. p. 88 The Zamorin of Calicuth sometime
Emperor of the Malabars; the Cape of Comory; the Isle of Ceylon. p. 89 When
discovered by the Portuguez; the History of Fimala Derma King of Candy, he
murders his Father and three Brothers; declares against the Portuguez. p. 9
The treason of a Portuguez Renegado, p. 91 The Dutch ill treated in the Island
of Ceylon: the Kingdom of Candy; its Inhabitants, their Religion. ibid. Kings
tributary to the Portuguez; Mines of Gold and Silve^. p. 92 The Maldives; the
Coast of Coromandel, the Inhabitants thereabouts Christians; a story of St.
Thomas. p. 93 He is martyred at Edesa; the City of Meliapour. p. 94 Bengala,
its Inhabitants: their superstition. ibid. Pegu, the Palace Royal: the Guard.
p. 95 The Kings forces; he makes war upon his Uncle, King of Auva; a just
Execution, but too severe: a Combat betwixt two Kings; the Pagodes of Pegu.
ibid. The Peguans Arms: they are Pagans: adore the Devil: their Feasts; how
the Kings Corpse are burnt: their Ecclesiastics. p. 96 A third part of all men's
estates falls to the King: a strange Sauce: other peculiar Customs: the
Commodities of Pegu. p. 97 The River Menan overflows as the Nile; India, its
houses. p. 98 The King of Siam of a very ancient Family: is absolute; his
manner of life; has but one Wife. p. 99 A magnificent Procession: a Procession
upon the River: the Revenue of the King of Siam. p. 100 His Expenses: their
Punishments: manners of justification: the Militia of Siam: p 101 Their Arms;
both the Kings of Siam and Pegu pretend to Sovereignty: the King of Siam a
friend to the Dutch. ibid. Elephant-hunting^ the occasion of the War between
the Kings of Pegu and Siam: Raja Hapi, King of Siam. p. 102 The King of Siam a
Pagan; a Hierarchy; Beguins a kind of religious women, the belief of the
Inhabitants, lights in the Mosqueys, Prayers for the dead. p. 103 The Siameses
invoke the Devil, their qualities, habit, houses, marriages, education of
children. ibid. The traffic of the City of India, the King a Merchant, the
money of Siam, the settlement of the Dutch in Siam. p. 104 The Kingdom of
Cambodia, the Palace-Royal, the Lords of Cambodia, the Portuguez keep out the
Dutch. p. 105 Malacca when discovered. p. 106 A description of Patana, its
Inhabitants. p. 107 The Air of Patana, Mahumetans. p. 108 Batusabar, Metropolis
of Patana its Inhabitants, the Language of the Malayans, the Island of Sumatra.
p. 109 Was sometime divided into many Kingdoms: the King of Achim, the City of
Achim, the Inhabitants. p. 110 Their Religion, food, the mournful tree, Cocoes.
ibid. How they make Wine, their Paper, Bananas, what. p. 111 Pepper, how
planted: the Island of Java, its Inhabitants: the King of Bantam. p. 112 A
sulphurous Mountain, the names of several Cities of those parts. ibid. The
Kings Palace, the Guard of the City, its Marketplaces, Armourers. p. 113 The
City of Tuban described, the Kings Palace, its commerce. p. 114 The Javians
Mahumetans, their Fasts, they marry their daughters very young, the ceremonies
of their marriages, Women of Quality are kept in restraint. p. 115 The
Magistrates of Bantam, the Kings Council, the train and state of the Nobility,
the qualities of the Javians, they are good Soldiers. p. 116 The Javians
sophisticate their Wares, how they employ their Slaves. ibid. The Commerce of
Foreigners there, the trade of China, the money of Java. p. 117 The Portuguez
commerce, Oysters of three hundred pound weight, Crocodile^, Civet, Hens, the
Rhinocerot, Ants. p. 118. The Fruits of Java, Areca, Mangas, Ananas, Samaca,
described. p. 119. Tamarinds, Tabaxir, Canes so big that Boats are made of
them, a fruit called Duriaons, its qualities. ibid. The Lantor-tree, Cubebs,
Mangosthan, Talasse, Jaca, wild Cinnamon, Carcapuli, Costus Indicus. p. 120
Zerumbet, Galanga, Benjamin, Sandal, Ginger, Anacardium, Pala de cuebra,
Calamba. p. 121 Lacquc, other Drugs of Java, the Dutch fortify in Jacatra. p.
122 They give it the name of Batavia: Madura a place of no trade; the Isle of
Baly, its situation, Inhabitants. p. 123 It abounds in Rice, Fowl, Drugs,
Fish, has Gold mines, the King of Baly, the Island of Borneo, its Metropolis,
the B^zoar stone. p. 124 The Haven, the Dutch treat with the King of Sambas
about the trade of Diamonds, the Island Celebes; its Metropolis; its
Inhabitants are Cannibals. 125 The Isle Gilolo, its Inhabitants and Fruits;
Amboyna its Inhabitants, discovery. p. 126 The Dutch take Amboyna Castle, the
Religion of the Inhabitants, their superstitions. ibid. Their circumcision,
marriage, oaths; their qualities. p. 127 Banda, its Inhabitants, their Arms,
they live long: p. 128 Nutmegs, Mace, Oil of Nutmeg; the Dutch Forts in Banda,
prodigious Serpents, the Moluccas. p. 129 Sagu, How Bread made of it, how Wine;
the Inhabitants of the Moluccas. p. 130 Are partly Mahumetans, a particular
piece of policy; the Clove trade, the Portuguez seize it, are dispossessed
thereof by the Dutch; a difference between the Castilians and the Portuguez
about the Moluccas, grounded on a false supposition. 131 Magelan finds a new
passage; the Isle Ternate, what Cloves it affords. ibid. The Clove-tree grows
without planting; Avicenna's error, wha^ Cloves the Moluccas yield yearly, the
Mountain of Ternate, but one season in the Moluccas. 132 A Wood incombustible,
leafes turned to Butterflies, Birds of Paradise; the King of Bachiam, the Isle
of Machiam. p. 133 The Philippine Islands, the hunting of Crocodiles. p. 134
The commerce of the Chinese and Spaniards in the Philippines, the Archbishop
of Manille is Viceroy, a description of the said City. p. 135 Whether Japan be
an Island or part of the Continent, the names and revenues of the great Lords
of Japan. p. 136 The revenue of the Ministers of State. p. 141 The Emperor of
Japan's policy; the Lords have three names. p. 142 Slaves die with their
Masters, their manner of ripping up their bellies: their Mesquites: the Cities
of Japan, not walled: no taxes in Japan. p. 143 The power of Masters over their
Servants: Gaming criminal: all the relations of Offenders die with them: a
particular punishment for theft. p. 144 The crimes for which all the kindred of
a criminal are put to death; an example of it. ibid. Lying punished with death:
the Emperors expense: Jedo Castle: the Palaces of the Kings. p. 145 The
Emperors retinue; the Dayro; the Emperors magnificence. p. 146 His Treasures:
the Emperor of Japan, a Viceroy: confines his Wife to a Castle. p. 147 How the
Emperor of Japan came to the Crown: Ceremonies at the choice of a Nurse for
the Dayro's Son. p. 148 A revolution in Japan: a Soldier of Fortune gets to be
General of the Army, and Sovereign, is poisoned. ibid. Bestows the Regency on
one of the Lords, who put to death the Heir of the Crown; the Emperor of Japan
raises his Armies upon the charge of his Subjects: is able to raise three
hundred sixty eight thousand foot, and thirty eitht thousand eight hundred
Horse. p. 149 Their Arms: their Companies and Regiments: the Council of State;
the expense of great Lords. p. 150 The magnificence of the Lords in their
buildings: three years requisite to provide an entertainment for the Emperor:
the Emperor marries all the great Lords: Women kept in restraint. p. 151 Women
never talk of business: the generosity of a Japponese Wife. p. 152 An example
of modesty in a Maid; the reservedness of their Conversation: the men jealous.
ibid. Adultery severely punished: fornication permitted; they have no devotion:
their Pagodes and Priests. p. 153 The Ecclesiastics divided into several
sects, the death they are put to for breach of Vows, their opinion concerning
the Soul, no disputes about Religion. p. 154 Thephate Christians, their
diabolical inventions to put them to death. p. 155 Their houses, their
civility. p. 156 No drinking houses in Japan; their Music, Wine; Tsia, how
prepared; their marriages, and education of children. ibid. They go not to
school till seven or eight years of age; are not swathed, the Japonneses tender
in point of honor. p. 157 What Foreigners trade thither; the occasion of the
rupture between the Chinese and Japponeses; Japan was not peopled by Chinese.
p. 158 No Custom paid in Japan: no correspondence between the Emperor of Japan
and other Princes: their Arithmetic: the Dayro writes the History of the
Country. p. 159 The money of Japan: its store of Cattle and Fowl, several sorts
of Mineral waters. p. 160 Their Physicians: the riches of Japan: a particular
way of melting Iron: the Roman Catholic Religion planted in Japan: the
Spaniards banished it; the Dutch establish there: the Air of Japan. p. 161 The
Japonneses distinguished into five Orders: the principal Ministers of Japan;
the procession of the Dayro and the Emperor; the Dayro's baggage: the Ladies
of Honor. ibid. Twenty seven Lords of the Dayro's Retinue; twenty four
Gentlemen; the Dayro's three Wives: the chief servants of those Ladies:
threescore and eight Gentlemen. p. 162 The Emperor and his Ward: the greatest
Lords of Japan; the Dayro's Concubines: his Secretary. p. 163 His Musick^ the
Dayro himself: the Emperors Presents to him. p. 164 The Isle of Tayovang: the
Dutch settle there, and call it New Zealand: the Government is absolutely
anarchical. p. 165 The places possessed there by the Dutch: the Inhabitants of
Fermosa, are civil, good-natured, ingenious: its Fruits. ibid. Their Wine; the
Women go a fishing; How the Men live^ their hunting. p. 166 The manner of their
War; their Arms; the Island Tugin. p. 167 Their Magistracy, and its authority:
their punishments. p. 168 The Magistrate has no power: their respect for old
age, men's age in order to marriage. p. 169 Their marriages, a pleasant kind of
married life, the women not permitted to bear children till thirty five years
of age. p. 170 Divorce lawful among them: their houses, their sustenance, have
no Festivals, Dogs-hair Stuffes, their Funerals. p. 171 They neither bury nor
burn the dead; a sure remedy in painful diseases, their Religion, their sins.
ibid. Their Gods, women only employed about Religious Mysteries, their
Devotion. p. 172 The Kingdom of China, its Frontiers, Extent, Provinces. p. 173
The Province of Peking, its Frontiers, Cities, Families, Revenue; Xuntien
described, etc. p. 174 The Palaces, the Provinces of Xansi, and Xensi, their
Frontiers, etc. p. 175 The great Wall, by whom built, the Province of Xantung,
its Frontirrs Cities, etc. p. 176 The Provinces of Honan, etc. the Province of
Suchuen, etc. Radix Sina; the Province of Huguang, etc. the Province of
Quangsi; its Frontiers, etc. ibid. Porcelane made at Kiangsi, the Province of
^anking, etc. the Prince of Checkiang, etc. p. 177 The City of Quinsay, Mark
Paulo vindicated, the greatness of the City of Huncheu, the Province of Fokien,
etc. the Inhabitants of Fokien trade most out of the Kingdom. p. 178 The
Province of Quantung, etc. the industry of the Inhabitants, the Province of
Quangsi, its Cities, etc. the Province of Quieucheu, its Cities, etc. p. 179
The Province of Junan, etc. both black and white Chinese, the difference of
Fruits in China; the Chinese hate idleness: China Fruits better then ours,
Wax, Honey, Sugar. p. 180 Flesh cheap, their Fishing, how they breed Ducks.
ibid. The Inhabitants, their clothing, their women, their money, the provision
made for the subsistence of the poor. p. 181 Printing in China before we had
it: their way of writing, their paper, the dignity of Loytia, the Chinese very
Ceremonious. p. 182 Their Feasts, their Plate, their New Years day, the honor
they do Ambassadors. p. 183 Their Weddings, Polygamy lawful, the Government of
China Monarchial. p. 184 Offensive war made defensive by a fundamental Law,
their King called Son of Heaven; the Council of State; Astrology requisite in
Counselors of State, Viceroys and Governors. ibid. Other Officers of
Provinces, Officers of the Crown, Debtors how treated, an admirable Order,
their tortures, Prisons. p. 185 Their punishments, the Visitours. p. 186 The
Religion of the Chinese, their Divinities, three China Saints, the Fable of
Quani^a. p. 187 The Fable of Neoma, the Chinese use incantations, they invoke
the Devil. ibid. Their belief concerning the Creation, they believe the
immortality of the Soul, Purgatory. p. 188 They believe the Metempsychosis,
their Religious men, they use beads, funeral Ceremonies, their mourning, the
present state of China. p. 189 The Tartars possessed of China, forced thence,
the Origin of the Royal House of Teimings: the beginning of the Tartarian war,
Leaotung taken. p. 190 Vanlie dies, and is succeeded by Tayohang, who forces
away the Tartars: but they reenter Leagtung, the Kings of China and Tartary
die, the Chinese betray their Country; Thien^ung King of Tartary dies. p. 191
Lizungzo enters the Province of Xansi, takes the City of Peking. p. 192 A
Chinese calls the Tartars to his relief against the Rebels, the Tartars will
not depart China. p. 193 They proclaim their King Emperor of China; Usanguei
made King, the Southerly Provinces chose another Emperor, the Tartars enter
the Province of Nanking; Hungquang strangled. ibid. Several Chinese Lords
retire to Hangcheu; Another Emperor, who is also strangled; other Princes;
this division proves the ruin of China; the Tartars reduce the Province of
Fokien, the treachery of a Chinese Pirate. p. 194 An Emperor chosen in
Quangsi; the Tartars absolute Masters of China. p. 195
FEBRVARY.
He leaves Ceylon the 20. and comes the second of July following to the Island
of Madagascar; where they stay six weeks. The Voyage continued; several sorts
of Birds. p. 196 Several sorts of Fish. ibid. Very changeable weather near the
Line. p. 197 Maurice Island discovered; its Haven; a prodigious Thorn-back; No
four-footed beasts in the said Island; the story of a Frenchman, who lived 20.
months in Maurice Island. p. 198 The Ship puts not into the Island; Pintados,
a Bird discovering nearness to Land. p. 199 Mangas de Veludo, a kind of Bird;
the Cape of Agulhas; Fish foreshewing change of weather. p. 200 Trombas, what.
ibid. Cabo falso; the Cape of Good Hope discovered; Pinguins a kind of Fowl. p.
201 The Inhabitants about the Cape of Good Hope; their clothing, food; know
neither God nor Devil; Lions their only enemies. ibid. Hurricans. p. 202
Madagascar discovered; they put in there; what Commodities go off there. p. 204
The Lord of those parts; makes an alliance with the English; Madagascar
described. p. 205 Dragons-bloud, Aloes; the Island abounds in Cattle; its
Inhabitants. p. 206 The Men are courageous; their Arms; Chief; Religion;
Mozambique. ibid. When discovered by the Portuguez. p. 207 The first landing of
the Dutch at Madagascar. p. 208
AUGUST.
He leaves Madagascar the 21. and arrives in England the 16. of December
following. Declination of the Lodestone; the Isle of St. Elizabeth;
Sea-wolves. p. 209 Badgers; St. Helens Island; planted by the Portuguez. p. 210
Ascension Island. p. 211 St. Thomas Island; Land Crevices; the Inhabitants;
Rolls Island. p. 212 Carisco Island; Capo Verde; its Inhabitants; their Arms;
the Women do all the work. ibid. The men drunkards; believe the immortality of
the Soul; D. Enrique discovers Guiny; the situation of Mina. p. 213 The
Religion of the Inhabitants; their superstition; are religious in their Oaths;
their clothing, Arms; the settlement of the Dutch in Guiny. p. 214 Diego-Can
discovers the Kingdom of Congo; its Provinces, Air, the Piver Zai^e; Seahorses.
p. 215 Gold Mines, Serpents, Cocos; their houses. ibid. They are all Architects
and Physicians; their clothing; the wealth of the Country; their Money; the
absolute power of the King of Congo; the Governor of Batta, Minister of State;
his Privileges: their Arms and manner of fighting. p. 216 How Christian
Religion was introduced there; the Kingdom of Beny; Cabo Verde described;
Ptolomy knew nothing of these people; the Rivers Gambra and Zanaga. p 217 The
Inhabitants about the Cape are Pagans; their way of raising forces; their
Nobility; the state of the Country when first discovered; the story of Beomi;
who is baptized. p. 218 The green Islands; peopled by the Portuguez; Flamencos,
a kind of Bird; St. Jago Island; the Voyage continued. p. 219 The Azores: their
number: they have good fruit. p. 220 Potatoes: Their Wheat will not keep;
Tercera, Oxen very large, the Island subject to Earthquakes, an Island started
of a sudden: A Spring that petrifies wood; a kind of wood hard as iron, Cedar.
p. 221 St. Michael's Island, St. Mary's Island, Gratiosa Island, St. Georges
Island, Fayal Island, Pico Island, the Island of Flore. p. 222 The convenience
of these Islands, the Air very sharp in the Azores. The Canaries when
discovered; Lewis Earl of Clermont conquers them; a French Gentleman conquers
them, by Commission from the King of Castile. p. 223 They belong to the Crown
of Castile, great Canary, Teneriffe, Fierro Island, a miraculous Tree. p. 224
The Voyage continued, the West wind reigns from the Azores to England, they
come into the Channel. ibid. The Isle of Wight, the Downs; the President and
the Author like to be cast away in the Haven, another Tempest. p. 225 The
Author comes to London. p. 280
M.DC.XL.
IANVARY.
The first be is treated by the Lord Mayor; a strange attempt of a Dutch
Mariner; an example of dreadful solitude. p. 226 A strange resolution of two
Christian Slaves. p. 227 The King of England touches some of the Evil. p. 283
The Author having continued at London near three months, leaves it the 20. of
March, in order to his return for Holstein. p. 228 A description of Haerlem,
where the Mystery of Printing was first invented. p. 229 The Inscription put
upon the house of the first Inventor thereof. ibid. He comes to Amsterdam, a
description of it, its commerce. p. 230 The first Voyages of the Dutch to the
East Indies. ibid. An account of several other places in Amsterdam. p. 231
MAY.
The first, the Author comes to Gottorp, where he put on end to his Travels. p.
232
FINIS.

