(...): OR, THE PICTURE OF THE Late King James Drawn to the LIFE.

In which is made manifest, That the whole Course of his Life has to this day
been a continued Conspiracy against the Protestant Religion, Laws and Liberties
of the Three Kingdoms.

In a Letter to Himself.

And humbly Dedicated to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, WILLIAM the Third,
Our Deliverer and Restorer.

By TITUS OATS, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms Inn in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCVI.

To His Sacred MAJESTY William the Third, By the Grace of GOD, of Great
Britain, France and Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.
GREAT SIR,
I Have here undertaken to draw the Picture of a Person that once was invested
with the Style, Title, and Dignity of a King, and certainly he might have been
the greatest in his time, could he but have complied with the ends of his great
Office in this Nation, to which he was admitted, and with the observation of
the Laws of the Realm, to which he was solemnly Sworn, according to the Customs
and Constitutions thereof at his Coronation. I did never in my whoLe life take
him to be the Wisest of Men; nor did I believe him to be so much behind-hand in
Understanding, but that he must needs know, That as Government was Originally
instituted by the Great God himself, and this or that Form of it, chosen and
submitted to by Men, for the Peace, Happiness and Security of those who are
Governed, and not for the private Interest and personal Greatness of them that
Rule; so that Government has been always esteemed the best, where Supreme
Magistrates have been invested with the Power and Prerogatives that might
capacitate them not only to preserve the People from Violence and Oppression,
but to promote their Prosperity, and yet where nothing was to belong to them by
the Rules of the Constitution, that might enable them to Injure and Oppress
them.

This unhappy Prince, was a long stander by in his Brother's Reign; from the
Year 1660, to 1685; and Experience and the Informations of wise Men, without
all doubt, taught him, That it had been the Glory of England above other
Nations and Countries where his Brother and he had Traveled, that its King
has had all Entrusted with him that was necessary for the advancing the
welfare of the People, or for his own Protection in the discharge of his Office
and support of his Dignity and Grandeur, and withal stood so limited and
restrained by the Fundamental terms of the Constitution, that without the
violation of his own Oath, as well as the Rules and Measures of the Government,
he could do them no hurt, nor exercise any act of Authority, but through the
Administration of such hands as stood obnoxious to be Punished in case they
Transgressed: So that according to the true Primitive frame of the Government,
the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Rights and Privileges of the Subject
were so far from justling one another, that the Immunities reserved unto the
People, tended to render the King Honorable and Great; and the Prerogatives
settled on the King, were in order to the Subjects Protection and Safety.

Notwithstanding all this, it is well known to your Most Excellent Majesty,
that in the two last Reigns there was a dismal and an unaccountable alteration
of the Government attempted by this Prince and his Popish Accomplices, and the
most excellent Monarchy endeavored to be changed into an absolute French
Tyranny: For tho our Religion and Liberties were fenced and hedged about by as
many Laws as the Wisdom of Men could devise for our Preservation, from Popery
and Arbitrary Power; yet our Religion was in those unaccountable Reigns
Undermined by Popish Counsels, and our Privileges ravished from us by the Fraud
and Violence of the two last Kings, who were in a continued Conspiracy against
the Protestant Religion, and the Rights of the People of England, of which your
Majesty may take a full Account in the following Memorial.

I must confess to Your Majesty, that to discant on the Misfortunes of a Person
that is fallen from so high a Dignity, and is reduced to a State that is next
to Death, is neither a thing that I coveted or desig'nd, tho I was a great
Sufferer by him both in his Brother's and his Reign; but the Insolency of his
wicked Conspirators that are here among us, has so provoked me, that I cannot
in point of Duty that I owe to God and Your Majesty, forbear letting the Nation
know what we must trust to if ever that Man should return again and Reign over
us.

This present Conspiracy against Your Majesty and Government, has not only
provoked me to publish the Arts and Methods of the late King, used for the
destruction of our Laws, Liberties and Religion, in conjunction with the Popish
Party, but it has encouraged me to Dedicate the same to your Royal Name and
Patronage, and to no other, because I am well assured, it will not only
justify the truth of the Popish Plot, for the discovery of which I have
undergone a fierce Fiery Trial, out of which I was delivered by Your Majesty's
coming to Save us, when we were even upon the brink of Ruin and Destruction;
the sense of which has created in me an undelible Love and Loyalty to Your
Majesty and Government; and I question not, but that Your Majesty will Pardon
the Human Frailties that may appear in this Memorial in the manner of my
expressing the Truths therein Contained.

The Villainous Party, against whom I now Write, have used many Arts and ways
to traduce your Majesty and Government, merely because you promote the Grandeur
of your People, and the Ease and Welfare of your Subjects, rather than entrench
in the least upon any of their Immunities and Privileges; some of whom would be
thought to be good Protestants; but their late Conspiracy to Assassinate Your
Majesty, shows them to be very Traitors and Rebels to your Majesty and
Government; and it proves that Party to be obstinately restless, and never be
brought to Reason by Mercy and Clemency. How little therefore these Criminals
will deserve from Your Majesty, the World will better judge, if they will but
consider how Graciously Your Majesty has dealt with them, ever since Your
happy Accession to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, to the very day that their
wicked Purposes were discovered to Your Majesty. I have seen some of the very
same Spirit, caressed by some that were about You, whist your real hearty
Friends were Slighted and Abandoned. Nay, I shall be so plain to say with
truth, that your Majesty hazarded the Hearts and Affections of your best
Subjects, and much of your Royal Honor, in conniving at the Carriages of these
Men, though with frustration, to win and oblige, if possible, these everlasting
holy Cutthroats.

But Sir, what Arguments of Clemency and Grace can persuade such Men to be true
to your Majesty, their Rightful and Lawful King, maintaining the Laws and
Liberties of your Subjects, since they profess an Allegiance out of Conscience
to a contrary Sovereign, who destroyed our Laws and Liberties, and made them
sharers in his many Designs and Conspiracies against us? Or how can your
Majesty expect Truth and Sincerity from these Conspirators, where Treason and
Lies are Virtues and Merits? You have in this Tract many Tragical Instances
within fresh Memory of their Wicked Purposes and Designs; look back but to the
beginning of your Majesty's Reign, since which time your Majesty cannot but
remember how many Proofs they have given out of their own Mouths of their more
than Villainous Disaffection to your Majesty and Government, and Traiterous
Intentions against your Royal Person, both at Home and Abroad, nay, before your
happy Accession to the Throne. I may, without offense to your Majesty, take
notice to you of your being abandoned by King Charles, in Compliance with the
French King, at the Instigation of the then Duke of York, and his Popish
Adherents; and not only so, but your Ruin and Destruction, when you only had
the Title of Prince of Orange, was designed by the Popish Party; my Affection
and Respects to you then, though wholly a Stranger to your Person, made me then
discover the Conspiracy against you, but none of the Council took any notice of
what related to your Self, but Prince Rupert and the Earl of Arlington, and
another considerable Peer, who, I suppose, did transmit the same to you when in
Holland.

But blessed be God your Majesty as a Monument of the Mercies of the most High,
is once more delivered out of their Hands, and in your Deliverance we that have
Espoused you are delivered; and we question not but you will remember to
distinguish between those that have testified their Sincere Loyalty to your
Majesty, and those that have openly appeared Traitors to your Royal Person and
Government, and question not, Great Sir, but that God who has now so
Miraculously delivered you, and in whose hand are the Hearts of all Kings and
Princes, will fully Convince your Majesty of all the unworthy Principles of
your secret Enemies, and of my Integrity too, how strange soever they have
endeavored to represent me to your Majesty; till then, with all Patience and
Humility, I shall commend my Cause to the All-seeing Judge, with a Resolution
to persevere through his Assistance in my Truth, Integrity and Loyalty, against
all Discouragements, or Terrors, or Neglects, or Blandishments either, to my
last gasp.

What Peace can these Brutes have in their Souls and Consciences, that do
surrender their Liberties and Religion to the Mercy of a Person that would have
inslaved them, and being through the Mercy of God to us, driven out from these
Kingdoms for his Tyranny, he neither can nor will he own them, if he were to
return. It is strange to any thinking Man, that of these Conspirators, who
profess the Protestant Religion, that they should not consider the whole Series
or Course of Life of that pretended King, for whom they venture Body and Soul,
has been a continued Conspiracy against them and their Religion. Why should
they not sit down and consider his Contriving the Burning of London; his
instigating a Confederacy with France, and two ungodly Wars with Holland; his
fomenting the Popish Plot, and contriving the Murder of Justice Godfrey, to
stifle it; his forging of Treason against Protestants, and suborning Witnesses
to swear the Patriots of our Religion and Liberties, out of their Lives; his
hiring execrable Villains to Assassinate and Murder the Great Earl of Essex,
and causing several others to be clandestinely Murdered in hopes to conceal
it; his advising and procuring the Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliaments,
in order to prevent inquiry into his Crimes, so that he might escape the
Justice of the Nation? Why should not these Protestant Professors remember his
Poisoning the King his Brother, in order to his Invading the Throne; his
Murdering Algernoon Sydney Esquire upon the Deposition of one scandalous Witness,
and the cutting off the late Loyal and Brave Lord Russel, and Murdering him for
Crimes alleged against him, in reference to which, if all had been Truth which
was sworn against him, yet there was nothing that according to Law could have
reached his Life?

Give me leave, Great Sir, to acquaint your Majesty, that none murmured more
against the Proceedings of the late King than the Protestant Jacobites did: I
can remember how confounded they were when he began his Reign, with a
barefaced avowing himself of the Romish Religion, and calling into the Nation
a multitude of Priests and Jesuits, and empowered them to Exercise their
Idolatries: Nay, who were so much concerned as some of these Men, and in my own
hearing, have owned that he was ill advised to trample upon those Laws which
concern our Property, seeing that by two Proclamations, whereof the one
required the Collecting of the Customs, and the other, the continuing the
Excise, which was to expire at King Charles's Death; he violently, and against
all the Laws of the Land, broke in upon the Estates of many of the People of
England; and they did own that the seven or eight suborned and forsworn Judges,
that countenanced him in doing so vile a Thing ought to have been hanged; and
they have often said, that if he proceeded thus he would soon bring the Kingdom
about his Ears, and he must take it for his pains: How can these Men look
Mankind in the Face, who have been in a barbarous Conspiracy, for the restoring
of a King that had thus acted in oppressing his People, and for the Murdering
of your Majesty's Person, that had delivered the Nation from these Oppressions?

When I reflect upon the Reign of that late King, I cannot but be filled with
the greatest Horror, to think that there should be a number of Men left in
England, that should so much as attempt his Restoration, when they well knew
that he had precluded his Subjects of all hopes of Redress in Westminster Hall,
and deprived us of all Succor where our Ancestors found it. I thought that all
Men would have joined with your Majesty to have declared the late King James a
Tyrant, Traitor and Murderer, and all that did adhere to him should have been
treated as Banditti and Freebooters, and not as Gentlemen and English Men; but
instead of this, that in the compass of seven Years, behold two or three
Conspiracies against your Majesty's Person and Government, detected and proved,
and yet these People will scarce so much as blush at the self-contradicting
Carriage of themselves and Party.

Some of these Protestant Jacobites have been at St. Germains, and then they
must Experience the late King's usage of his Protestant Friends there; and if a
certain Writer may be depended upon, their usage is hard and severe; first he
denied them a Protestant Chapel and Chaplain; nay, if a Protestant be any
thing zealous for his Religion, they want not Irish Papists to swear a Plot
upon them, and so they are confined notwithstanding their Quality, and the
signal Services performed for their pretended King. Many Instances might be
given of this nature; and a reasonable Man might have judged that the many
Instances of those Slights and Contempts that have been put upon them, should
have convinced them of the Folly and Madness of any of those that pretend to
the Protestant Religion and Church of England, who should Espouse the Cause of
a Man that hates their Religion and Liberties. Can they think that the present
Misfortunes that the late King James lies under, would, if he should be
re-invested with Power, frighten him to alter his Measures and Resolutions of
invading our Laws and Liberties for time to come, seeing, that neither the
abandoning of Wives, Children and Estates, nor the hazarding, nay, loss of Life
in his Service, can render him just and favorable to those Protestants, who
have made a Sacrifice of all these things to follow him, and yet that these Men
should be found in so Villainous a Conspiracy, to Murder him that delivered the
Nation? What Tongue can speak for such brutish and senseless Wretches, I must
leave to the Judgments of wiser Men than my self. And what can they expect from
a Man whose Father's Misfortunes, his Brothers Exile, wherein he himself was a
sharer, have not wrought a Reformation in him? Can we expect that ever he will
be more cautious of violating our Laws, intrenching upon our Liberties, or
subverting our Religion; or that ever he will be made more pliable? For if he
denies Men that have followed him into France, the Exercise of their Religion,
what hopes have they of obtaining and enjoying it, whenever he shall return?
Nay, what then must your Majesty's Protestant Subjects expect, who have
renounced him, and associated to defend your Majesty, as our Lawful and
Rightful King, against this pretended King and all his Wicked and Traiterous
Adherents?

But Sir, give me leave a little further to plead with your Majesty concerning
these People, that certainly never give themselves leisure to think; I am sure
no Man in his right Wits but must judge it the highest degree of Stupidity and
Folly, that these very Men should expect good Terms from a Person who does not
only treat his Protestant Adherents very ill, who have followed him in his
Misfortunes, but also whose Religion lays him under the necessity of using them
thus. What Obligations did our Church lay upon him when he was a Subject? Did
she not, like a Prostitute, save him from being Prosecuted for the Popish Plot,
and from being Excluded from the Succession to the Crown? Who were so Hot in
that point on his behalf as the then Prelates in the House of Peers, and
afterward from being driven out of the Kingdom, by the late Duke of Monmouth?
yet all those Obligations were of no more value with him than his
Coronation Oath, which he violated without the least regret, and spared not to
invade the Protestant Religion in general, but the Liberties of the Church of
England in particular.

What wicked Traitors are these wretched Men, that shall assist the Popish
Party in their attempts to pervert the Church, and to bring that about in
effect which even to mention, makes every Loyal Subject of your Majesty's to
tremble? For certainly had these Conspirators been all of them avowed Papists,
your Majesty's Person and Government had not been in that danger; but some of
them that have undertaken this Horrid Design, are such as lie under no
Temptations of Religion; Men thought to be secure; that these, now the Mystery
of Iniquity is revealed, are found Men obliged by all the Sacred Ties of Malice
and Ambition, to assist in the advancing your Majesty's Ruin, and the Ruin of
the three Kingdoms; and much better qualified than others, under the Name of
Good Church of England Men; nay, Preachers of Passive Obedience and
Non-Resistance will not be shut out of this Hellish Conspiracy for Wranglers,
but will have a hand against your Majesty's Person, rather than so Eminent a
piece of Service shall go unperfected. Give me leave therefore Sir, with the
greatest Duty and Submission, to observe to your most Excellent Majesty the
Excellency of that Religion they would subvert, by showing the Vileness of that
they would introduce, and the happy Government they would destroy in the
attempt they have made upon your Majesty's Person.

These Conspirators that say they are Protestants, cannot but own that we are
exceeding happy in relation to our Religion, since by your Majesty's happy
Accession to the Throne; that we are once more freed from the Romish Yoke,
which so great a part of Europe do yet draw and labor under; that Popery is
such a thing as cannot but for want of a Word to express it, be called
Religion; nor is it to be mentioned with that Civility which is otherwise
decent to be used in speaking of Differences of Humane Opinion about Divine
Matters; were it open Judaism, or plain Turcism, or honest Paganism; there is
yet a certain Bonafides in the most extravagant Belief, and the Sincerity of an
Erroneous Profession may render it more pardonable: But this Popery is a
Compound of all the three, an Extract of whatsoever is most Ridiculous and
Impious in them, incorporated with more peculiar Absurdities of its own, in
which those were deficient, and all this deliberately contrived, and knowingly
carried on by the Rascally and Villainous Clergy, under the Name of
Christianity. The Wisdom of this fifth Religion in this last and most Insolent
Attempt upon the Credulity and Conspiracy against the Liberty of Mankind, seems
to all Understanding Men, principally to have consisted in their owning the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, and the Rule of Faith and Manners; but
wickedly prohibiting at the same time their common Use, or the Reading of them
by those of their Communion, there being no better or more rational way to
frustrate the very design of our Lord Jesus Christ, (who first planted by the
miraculous Power and extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost) than to forbid the
use of them in such a Language as the People could understand; for having the
Scripture, which by all Christians are avowed to be of Divine Authority, but
appointing it to remain in such hands as were entrusted to undertake and carry
on their holy Cheat, they had the Opportunity to vitiate, suppress, or
interpret, to their own advantage, for the support of their Villainous
Priestcraft, those admirable Evidences, by which the common People hold their
Salvation; and they having by this Fraud gained their Point, there was from
that time nothing so monstrous to Reason, and so abhorring from Morality, or so
contrary to Scripture, which they might not in prudence venture on. The
Idolatry of Adoring and praying to Saints and Angels, and worshipping Pictures,
Images, and incredible Miracles, and palpable Fables, to promote that
Veneration. The whole Liturgy and Worship of the blessed Virgin, the saying of
Pater Nosters and Creeds, the Honor of Saints and Ave-Maries too, not to her
Honor, but of others. The Public Service, which they can spare to God among,
so many Competitors in anunknown Tongue, and entangled with such Vestments,
Consecrations, Exorcisms, Whisperings, Sprinklings, Censings, and Fantastical
Rites, Gesticulations and Removals, so unbecoming a Christian Office, that it
represents rather the Pranks and Ceremonies of a Jugler or a Conjurer: The
refusal of the Cup to the Laity, the necessity of the Priests' Intention to
make any of their Sacraments effectual, debarring of their Clergy from
Marriage, Interdicting of Meats, Auricular Confession, and Absolution, as with
them Practiced; Penances, Pilgrimages, Purgatory. But above all, their other
Cheats and Rogueries, in the Villainous Solecism of Transubstantiation, whereby
that Glorified Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which at the same time they allow
to be in Heaven, is Sold again and Crucified daily upon all the Altars of their
Communion; for God indeed may now and then do a Miracle, but a Rascally Priest
of their Synagogue can, it seems, work in one moment a thousand
Impossibilities; and this by a new and Anti-scriptural Belief, compiled of
Terrors to the Fancy, Contradictions to Sense, and Impositions on the
Understanding. The Laity of their Communion have turned Tenants for their
Souls, and in Consequence Tributaries for their Estates, to an abominable
nonsensical Priesthood.

But I confess my self under great Obligation to do their Synagogue right, and
I do humbly acknowledge to your Majesty, that out of an equitable and vas^^^ble
Consideration and Recompense of such a religious and faithful Servitude, the
Priests have quitted and discharged the People of all other Services and
Dependence, and given them full and perfect liberty from all Duty to God or
Man, insomuch that those of the Clergy, who have been more learned, and the
managers and directors of their Consciences, have so well instructed them in
all the most villainous Arts of circumventing their Neighbors, and of making a
Jest of Heaven; that were their Disciples as apt as their Spiritual
Schoolmasters, there would for some Ages since have been a Period put to all
true Piety, and common Honesty, and no other Endowments remaining with them,
but authorized Hypocrisy, Licentiousness and Knavery, had not the natural Worth
of the better sort, and the good Simplicity of the meaner, in a very great
measure preserved them; for truly nothing but an extraordinary Temper of Soul
and that too assisted by the Divine Influences of the Grace and Spirit of God
could possibly restrain those within any Terms, or bounds, or laws of common
Humanity, who at the same time receive the Doctrine of their Casuists as the
Oracles of God, and own the Authority of the Grand Impostor at Rome to be of
Divine Right, as it is by him claimed and exercised. This Man of Sin by his
pretended Indulgencies says, That he delivers the Souls of those that are of
his Communion, out of the pains of the other World: So that what Man is he that
believes that Doctrine, that would not please his vicious Appetite, that has so
good a Security? He, by his Dispensing Power annuls Contracts between Man and
Man; dissolves Oaths between Princes, and of Princes with their Subjects, and
gives Allowance in Cases which God and Nature prohibits. This Impostor and
deceiver of the the Sons of Men, as a Clerk of the Ecclesiastical Market, has
set a Rate upon all Crimes, the more villainous they are, and the deeper their
dye, and abominable, the better Commodities, and the Votaries advance in the
Price as for greater Rarities: So that the worse they are in their Morals, the
better Customers they are to a lewd Priest; just as if God had published his
holy Commandments on purpose to erect an Office for the Conscience-mongers of
that cursed Synagogue. And thus that Strumpet enlarges her Borders, increases
in her Numbers, just as the Pagan Interest did the City of Rome, by opening a
Sanctuary to all Malefactors. And why should it not be so, if the Papal Power
be of such virtue and extent as is by that Jugler of Rome so violently
challenged? He calls himself the Ruler of Angels, Purgatory, and Hell, and
says, That his Tribunal and God's are all one; and has proudly boasted, that
all that God can do, he can do, and what he does is as God, not as Man: That he
is the universal Head of the Church; the sole Interpreter of Scripture; the
Judge of Controversies: That he is above General Councils; that his Power is
Absolute, and his Decrees are Infallible: That he can change the nature of
things, making what is Just, to be Unjust, and what is Vice, to be Virtue: That
all Laws are within the Cabinet of his Breast; that he can dispense with the
New Testament; that he is the Monarch of the World; and that he can dispose of
Kingdoms and Empires as he pleases. Now, if there be one word of Truth in all
this, the Styles they have given him at several times, is not such an
extraordinary piece of Courtship as we reckoned, but it would be a piece of
Rudeness in Men not to treat him accordingly.

The exercise of his Power and Dominion is in all points suitable to his Claim
and Pretense; he antiquates the Precepts of our Great Redeemer, as things only
of good Advice, and not Commanded; but makes it Mortal Sin for a Man only to
doubt of any part of his Religion, and with all the Insolence imaginable, under
pain of eternal Damnation, demands the Obedience and Subjection of all
Christian Princes and People to his Papal Authority and Power; the denying of
two things so reasonable, as blind Obedience to his Power, and an Implicit
Faith to his Doctrine, being the most unpardonable Crimes under his
Dispensation. He has, I confess been of late Years somewhat more retentive
than formerly, as to his excellent faculty of Disposing Kingdoms, the thing not
having succeeded so well with him in some Instances; but he lays the same Claim
still, and has the same Inclination; and tho Velvet-headed, has the more itch
to be pushing; but however, in order to any occasion he keeps himself in ure
always, by Cursing some Prince or other upon every Maundy Thursday; nor is
there any, whether Prince or Nation, that oppose his Usurpations, but are
marked out under the notion of Heretics, for Ruin and Destruction, whenever
he shall give the Signal. That word Heresy, misapplied, has served the Romish
Beast for many Ages to justify, or rather give a color for so many
Executions, Assassinations, Wars, Devastations and Massacres, by which his
Faith has been propagated, of which our Times have not wanted Examples; and
more is to be expected for the future, if these Conspirators can but at any
time carry their Point; for by how much any thing is more false and
unreasonable, so much more Cruelty is requisite to establish it; and to
introduce that which is absurd, there must be somewhat done that is Barbarous
and Inhuman. But nothing of any Sect in Religion can be more recommended by all
these indearing Qualities, than Popery: The Pagans are excusable by their
natural Darkness without Revelation: The Jews are tolerable, who see not beyond
the Old Testament: Mahomet was so honest, as to own what he would be at; That
he himself was the greatest Prophet, and that his was a Religion of the Sword:
So that these were all, as I may say, of another Allegiance; if they were
Enemies, yet they were not Traitors: But the Romish Beast avowing Christianity
by Profession, does in Doctrine and Practice renounce it; and presumeing to be
the only Catholic, does presume to prosecute those to death who dare Worship
the Author of their Religion, instead of his pretended Vicegerent.

And yet there is nothing more manifest, notwithstanding all his most notorious
Forgeries, and falsifications of all Writers, than that the Prelate of Rome was
for several hundreds of Years an honest Bishop, as other Men are, and never so
much as dreamed of the Seven Hills of that Universal Power, which he is now
come to: Nay, he was the first that opposed that Pretension. But some of them
at last growing Wiser, by foisting a Counterfeit Donation of Constantine, and
wresting another Donation from our Savior, advancing themselves in a Weak,
Ignorant and Credulous Age to that Temporal and Spiritual Principality that
they are now seized of, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church: Of this I may say to your Majesty; That never was a Bishopric and a
Text of Scripture so Improved by good Management; thus by exercising in the
quality of Christ's Vicar the Public Function under an invisible Prince, the
Pope like the Majors of the Palace, has set his Master aside, and delivered
the power over to a new Line of Papal Succession. But who can, unless wilfully,
be ignorant what wretched doings, what Bribery, what Ambitions there are; how
long the Church is without a Head upon every Vacancy, till among the filthy
Crew of bandying Cardinals, the Holy Ghost has declared for a Pope of the
French or Spanish Faction? Surely Sir, your Majesty will judge it one of the
greatest Miracles of the Synagogue of Rome, that it should still continue, and
that in all this time the Gates of Heaven should not prevail against it.

Give me leave, Great Sir, to observe to your Majesty, that it is almost
inconceivable how Princes can yet suffer a Power so pernicious, and Doctrins so
destructive to all Government, that so great a part of the Land should be
alienated and condemned to Pious Uses, as they call it: That so many Thousands
of the People that are Clergy, should by remaining unmarried, either frustrate
Humane Nature, if they live chastely; or if otherwise, adulterate it, that they
should be privileged from all Labor and public Service and exempt from the
power of all Secular Jurisdiction, that they being all bound by strict Oaths
and Vows of Obedience to the Pope, should evacuate the Fealty that is due to
the Sovereign; nay, that not only the Clergy, but the Laity too, if of the
Cursed Communion of that Synagogue, should be obliged at any time to Rebel at
the Pope's pleasure: And yet how many of the Neighboring Princes are content,
or do choose to Reign upon those Conditions, which being so dishonorable and
dangerous, surely some great and weighty Reason does cause them to submit to,
whether it be out of personal Fear, having heard, perhaps, of several attempts
which the blind Obedience of Popish Zealots has executed against the Princes,
or whether aiming at a more absolute and tyrannical Government, they think it
still to be the Case of an Usurping Emperor, and an Usurping Bishop; and that
this, as other Cheats, is to be managed by Confederacy. But Sir, as far as I
can apprehend, there is more of Sloth than of Policy on the Princes side in
this whole matter, and all that pretense of enslaving Men by the assistance of
Religion, is neither more nor less than when the Bramine, by having the first
Night of the Bride, assures himself of her Devotion, for the future, and makes
her more fit for the Husband.

This Reflection upon the state of our Neighbors, in respect to Religion, does
sufficiently illustrate our Happiness we enjoy by your Majesty's Accession to
the Crown, of ours: Therefore it spares me the labor of describing it further,
than by the rule of Contraries, our Religion and Interest, standing upon all
points in a direct Opposition to the abovementioned Errors, our Doctrine being
true to the Principles of the first Institution of Christ, the Ministry being
formed upon the Primitive Model, and no Ecclesiastical Power, justling with the
Civil, but all concurring in the Common Obedience to the chief Magistrate: Nor
therefore is there any, whether Prince, or Nation, that can at this time with
less probability be reduced back to the Romish Communion, than the Protestant
Interest here in England: For if we respect our Obedience to God, what
appearance is there, that after so durable and general enlightening of our
Minds, with the sacred Truth of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, we should
again put out our own Eyes to wander through the palpable Darkness of that
Gross Superstition? But for as much as many Men are less concerned for their
Interest in Heaven, than on Earth; this seeming the nearer and more certain,
also on this account, our Alteration from the Protestant Religion, is the more
inconsistent with temporal Advantage, when besides the common ill Examples and
Consequences observable Abroad, whereby we might grow wise at the Expense of
our Neighbors, we cannot but reflect upon our own Experiments at Home, which
would make even Fools docible. The whole Reign of Queen Mary the First, in
which the Papists made Fuel of the Protestants; the Excommunicating and
Deprivation of Queen Elizabeth by the Pope, pursued by so many Treasons and
Attempts upon her Person, by her own Subjects, and the Invasion of Eighty-Eight
by the Spaniard: The two Breves of the Pope, in order to exclude King James the
First from the Succession to the Crown, seconded by the Gunpowder-Treason: In
the time of K. Charles the first, besides what they contributed to the Civil
Wars in England, the Rebellion and Horrid Massacre in Ireland, which ended in
the Ruin and Destruction of the Person and Government of that King: In the time
of King Charles the Second we saw several visible Effects of the same Spirit,
as the Firing of London, the Popish Design carried on against the Person and
Government of that King, not that he was a Protestant; but because he came not
up to the Measures of the Jesuits and his Brother the late King James: But as
for him, his whole Life was nothing else but a Contrivance or a Plot against
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties: But this Horrid Conspiracy against your
Majesty's Person and Government, being so happily discovered, we cannot but
hope that the Discovery of such a tremendous Villainy, will so rivet the
Protestant Interest and Religion, that it shall stand so sure, that the Gates
of Hell and Rome shall not prevail against it. It Is true Sir, before the
Discovery of the Popish Plot, in the time of King Charles the Second, many
loose People, some also of Note, were perverted to the Church of Rome; but when
that Villainy was detected, then a Check was put for a time to the Popish
Parties making such a number of Converts, till the Priests saw that King
Charles the Second did not Prosecute the Discovery of that Conspiracy, he being
in every part and particular thereof, but that of his own Life; then they let
loose their Seducers, who were not only encouraged, but also recompensed for
such a piece of Treachery. But when the late King invaded the Crown, then large
steps were taken to ruin the People, and to Pox them in their Religion.

Upon your Majesty's Landing in the Year 1688, the Keeper of the Prison of the
King's Bench gave me some liberty, and I went amongst some of the most
substantial of my Friends, who did inform me under what a Consternation our
Great Conspirators were, and how ready they were to have given up all their
Ill-gotten Estates, by which they had been enabled to prosecute the wicked
Designs of the late King, to subvert our most Excellent Religion; and none of
us did question but that they would have been called to an account for all
those traiterous Devices of theirs; of this, I am sure, they would have given
up their All to have saved their Lives: But your Majesty being resolved not to
begin your Reign with Blood, was inclined not to make any severe Examples of
these Men; which a thinking Man might judge would lay such an Obligation upon
them all of Gratitude and Obedience to your Majesty and Government, nay, these
abovenamed fresh Instances of the Papal Tyranny in Religion, might have been
enough to have cautioned the Kingdom from giving them little hopes of being
able of being brought to restore King James, who was so bigoted to the
Arbitrary Proceedings of the Romish Synagogue; our Noblemen some of them had a
great part of Church Lands in their hands, our Clergymen great Preferments,
all which must have gone notwithstanding their Zeal for the Divine Right of
Succession and Passive Obedience and Non-resistence: Therefore the
Consideration of Temporal Interest one would have thought might have gone a
great way to have engaged them to be true to their own Cause and Quarrel. In a
word, a Man that observed the Insolences of the Popish Party against those
Prelates that were committed to the Tower, would have made them for ever to
have declared an everlasting War against that Party of Red-letter'd Men, and
heartily have come into your Majesty's Interest, in order to have secured our
Liberties, Properties, and Religion: But to conclude this Head, the Excellency
of that Religion, of which some of the Conspirators had made a Profession,
since they were English that had Bodies, Souls and Estates to save, and found
your Majesty resolved (if they had pleased) to save all, they upon the score of
your Royal Grace and Mercy to them showed at the beginning of your Reign, and
continued Clemency, would have invited to have joined in with your Majesty to
have preserved that Religion they profess, and not in stead of that to have
attempted the Murder of your Person, and the Invasion of your Realm with a
Foreign Power, in order to restore an Abdicated King, who hates their Religion,
and will violate their Liberties.

I come Sir, now to observe to your Majesty, the Excellency of this Civil
Government, which these Conspirators would change into Slavery. The Kings of
England Rule not upon the same Terms with those of our Neighbor Nations, who
having by Force or by Fraud Usurped that due share which their Subjects had in
the Government, are now for some Ages past in Possession of an Arbitrary Power,
(which yet no Presciption can make legal) and Exercise it over their Persons
and Estates in a most Tyrannical Manner, but here in England the Subjects do
retain their Proportion in the Legislature, and the very meanest Commoner of
England is represented in Parliament, and is a Party to those Laws by which the
Prince is sworn to Govern himself and his Subjects: No Money is to be levied,
but by common Consent, no Man is for Life, Limb, or Goods, or Liberty, at the
discretion of the Supreme Magistrate, but we have the same Right (modestly
understood) to our Property, that the Prince has to his Regality.

In all Cases where the King is concerned we have our just Remedy as against
any private Person in the Neighborhood in the Courts of Westminster Hall, or in
the High-Court of Parliament; his very Prerogative is no more than what the Law
has determined: His Great Seal, which is the Stamp of his Legitimate Pleasure,
yet is no longer current than upon the trial it is found legal; he cannot
commit any Person by his particular Warrant, he cannot himself be Witness in
any Cause, the balance of Public Justice being so delicate, that not the Head
only, but even the Breath of the Prince would turn the Scale; nothing is to be
left to the King's Will, but all is subjected to his Authority, by which it
follows, that he can do no wrong, nor receive wrong; and a King of England
keeping these measures, may without Arrogance be said to remain the only
Intelligent Ruler over a Rational People; in recompense therefore, and
acknowledgment of so good a Government under his Influence, his Person is most
Sacred and Inviolable, and whatever Excesses are committed against so high a
Trust, nothing of them is imputed to him, as being free from the necessity or
temptation, but his Ministers only are accountable for all, and must answer it
at their Perils: He has a vast Revenue, constantly arising from the Sweat of
the Laborers and the Rent of the Farmer, and the Industry of the Merchant; and
consequently out of the Estate of the Gentleman a large competence to defray
the ordinary Charge of the Crown, and maintain its Grandeur and Luster; and if
any extraordinary occasion happen, or be but with any probable descency
pretended, the whole Land at whatsoever season of the Year, does yield them a
plentiful Harvest. So forward are the People to give, that a Foreigner would
think that they could neither will nor choose, but that the asking of a Supply
was a mere piece of Formality, the People of England being so ready to give it.
The King of England is the Fountain of Honor, and has the distribution of so
many profitable Offices, of the Household, of the Revenue, of State, of Law, of
Religion, of the Navy; and when it is necessary that the King has an Army, he
disposes of a multitude of Military Offices, that it seems as if this Nation
had scarce Men of Abilities to supply all these Employments. So that the Kings
of England are nothing inferior to other Princes, saving in being abridged in
injuring their own Subjects, but have as large a Field as any of external
Felicity, wherein to exercise their own Virtue, and to reward and encourage it
in others. In a word, your Majesty has enlarged our Liberties, in consenting
to the Bill to Regulate Trials in Cases of High Treason; in which there are
large Immunities granted to any that fall under that black Circumstance, that
their Lives may not be at the mercy of a Mercenary Judge, or Judges, if God
should in his Judgment leave poor England to such Men: But your Majesty has
begun, and I question not but your Royal inclination will carry you on to
complete our security from such Vermin. Therefore to conclude, what a
Government is this we enjoy, than which nothing can come nearer the Divine
Perfection! The Monarch enjoys a capacity of doing all the good imaginable to
Mankind, but under a disability of doing any thing that is Evil.

This Scheme of the Civil Government the Late King did well know, and therefore
in Council on the day of his Accession to the Crown, he was pleased to say,
That the Laws of England were sufficient to make the King of England as great a
Monarch as he could wish or desire; so that your Majesty may see that he could
own that the Greatness of the English Monarchy had its Birth and rise from the
Laws. Who then would have lessened himself as he did, by breaking in upon those
very Laws that had made him Great? And who would have broken so excellent a
Government as made him Secure and Happy? And what Subject of England, Papist or
Protestant, that would lose such Immunities and Privileges, by joining in with
that unhappy Man to destroy themselves: Were they so in love with King James,
that they were not satisfied till they had him? Nay, he and they waded through
King Charles's Blood that he might Reign: Why then did they not keep the terms
of the Government, which would have been the most effectual way of continuing
him on the Throne. Besides all this, we cannot forget that the Parliaments
under Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the First, and King Charles the
Second, made it Treason in whosoever that should attempt to Seduce any one of
the meanest of your Majesty's Subjects to the Church of Rome. And the Long
Parliament held in the time of Charles the Second, to all Penalties of the
Statute Law added an incapacity for any Man to say, that that King was a
Papist, or an introducer of Popery. What Lawless and incapable Miscreants were
these! What wicked Traitors were those Men who did endeavor to pervert the
whole Body of Protestants, and to bring that about in effect, which even to
mention, was penal; at one Italian stroke, attempting to subvert the Government
and Religion, to kill the Body and damn the Soul of the Nation.

Your Majesty finds to this day, there are such a Set of Men in this Nation,
who have undertaken and have made it their business under your Majesty's happy,
legal and perfect Government by the intended destruction of your Royal Person
to introduce a French Slavery, and instead of so pure a Religion that your
Majesty ventured hard to preserve, to establish the Roman Idolatry; either of
which Crimes are of the highest nature; for if we look upon the Government, if
the Murder of your Royal Person be a fact so horrid as no Man can find words
enough to declare his detestation and abhorrence of it; how much more then is
the Murder of your Royal Person, with an intent to Assassinate the Kingdom?
And Sir, none will deny, but that to alter the Monarchy of these Kingdoms into
a Republic, is High Treason. So by the same fundamental Rule, the Crime is no
less to Murder your Royal Person, in order to make the Monarchy Absolute.

Sir, I beg your Majesty's leave to tell you, that my Heart is much enlarged to
your Majesty; I beseech your Majesty that your Royal Heart may be for this one
time enlarged to me in your Grace and Pardon, for this trouble I now give your
most excellent Majesty: Let me undertake upon serious inquiry to give your
Majesty some satisfaction who these Men are that have from the Year 1660, to
this day, attempted to Subvert our Government and our Religion. Had these Men
been the old honest Cavaleers that fought for Charles the I. or suffered much
in the time of Charles II. it would have been allowable in them, as often as
their Wound did break out at Spring or Fall, to think of a more Arbitrary
Government, as a sovereign Balsom for their Aches, or to imagine that no
Weapon-Salve but that of the Moss that Grows on an Enemies Skull, could cure
them; or could they (to have kept their Hands in ure) have fought their Cause
over again, since they saw they were neglected and left to Starve, yet their
Age and times they lived in, and their unjust usage they met with from two
Kings, might have pleaded something on their behalf in mitigation of Damages.
But Sir, give me leave to make this Remark to your Majesty concerning those
Gentlemen, that they were and are still (if any of them remain) too Generous,
too good Christians and Subjects, too affectionate to the English legal
Government, to be capable of such an Impression; whereas these Conspirators
that carried on the design of subverting our Religion into Popery and changing
the Government into downright Slavery, are such as have not one drop of
Cavaleer Blood, or no Bowels at least of a Cavaleer in them, but such as
starved the Cavaleers, to revel and surfeit upon their Calamities, making their
Persons and the very Cause by pretending to it themselves, almost Ridiculous.

Or had these Villains been all of the Popish communion, and avowed so to be,
give me leave to say it over again to your Majesty, your danger would have been
the less; their Religion would in some measure have been answerable for the
Errors and Extravgancies they might have been guilty of to promote it; but
these render their intended Villainy more black, they were Protestants, and of
the Church of England too, that joined with Papists to Assassinate your Royal
Person: What can any Man say for them? Your Majesty knows what to do with them:
These Villains, because I perceive they lie under a great difficulty to find
Accomplices enough at home to Mutiny and Rebel and Murder your Majesty's true
and loyal Subjects, therefore they put themselves under the Banner and Pay of
the French King, to complete their wicked designs and purposes, to bring a
foreign Enemy to Invade us; that King being endowed with all those which in a
French Prince, or in an Abdicated King, may pass for Virtues; but in any
private Man they would be Capital; and moreover, so abounding in Zeal for
Popery and Slavery above all other Princes, that none else could engage both
Body and Soul in such a Villainous Undertaking; to which Consideration, adding
that their Interests are both one, and the one is, and the other would be the
Master of absolute Dominion, and both are inveterate Enemies to your Majesty
and this Protestant Kingdom; and the French King is in all respects the most
likely to support, maintain and uphold them in those Attempts, they being so
exactly suitable to the inclinations of his Soul, yea, and of the Late King's
Soul too, notwithstanding your Majesty's being his Nephew and Son-in-Law into
the bargain.

Sir, these Conspirators have made it their business to asperse your Majesty's
Government, because of the great Taxes that are upon the Nation; but I never
find them to take notice of the Treasure that K. Charles II. wasted. It Is true,
he was engaged in two most impious Wars against the Dutch, and these Wars were
very chargable to the Nation: But besides those two Wars, he spent abundance
upon his Whores, Pimps, and Bauds, under the notion of secret Service, and yet
we find nothing to be said of that: Our Taxes are greater than ever the Nation
paid; but your Majesty's Loyal Subjects do not believe them so heavy, but that
they can and will hold it out many Years. In a word, there are none that retain
their Loyalty and Duty to your Majesty, but are highly pleased with your
Majesty's being fully supplied to carry on so necessary a War; and there is no
good Man but will rather hazard his Person to keep the Enemy abroad, than see
either a French or Irish Army within your Kingdom of England, destroying our
Substance, burning our Habitations, and committing those Barbarities that were
done in the Palatinate by the one, or in Ireland in 41 by the other; so that
your Majesty may see, that we that are English Men are not so much concerned at
our Taxes, as at the imminent Dangers your Majesty is daily exposed to, both at
home and abroad. And (being more confident than perhaps becomes me, to judge
the thoughts of Men;) I believe the Conspirators are more concerned that your
Majesty is yet in the Land of the Living, than at any of these Taxes, of which
I suppose their proportion is but small.

But your Majesty is not the first and only Prince that Fugitive Conspirators
have traduced, as these have filled the Ears of the French King and the Late
King, with monstrous Stories of your Majesty's Oppressing the Nation with
unheard of Taxes, thereby insinuating to him and his chargeable Guess, how easy
it would be to reduce the Nation, that they might have farther opportunity of
revelling and surfeiting upon his Treasure. So the Fugitive Conspirators in the
time of Q. Elizabeth, were perpetually whispering in the Ears of the then King
of Spain, with prodigious Stories as false as Hell, thereby to Exasperate that
then great and Powerful Monarch against the Kingdom, and did disparage the
Forces of the said Queen, and the posture and conduct of her Affairs; in order
to make him believe, that the Conquest of England to be a matter of no great
difficulty: They did calumniate that Queen's Justice, and blamed her
proceedings against Seminaries and Romish Priests, and for having a jealous eye
upon those of their Communion, for receiving those Priests and Jesuits thus
sent into this Realm to seduce her Subjects, and to withdraw them from their
Obedience; but our Conspirators could not traduce your Majesty, or blacken your
Government with those Points; none might have been more easy and quiet under
your happy Government than they, if their Villainous Principles would have
suffered them; and not only so, but they might have had Preferments too, whilst
poor Sufferers, and your hearty Friends were Starving, had not their damnable
Insolences and implacable hatred of your Majesty's Person and the welfare of
the Kingdom been an obstacle in their way; but that which I shall observe to
your Majesty, that they traduced that Queen with overcharging her Subjects with
heavy and unaccustomed Taxes: But it was then well known, that no Prince could
maintain such a Fleet at Sea, and such an Army at Land without great Expense
and Charge; for her main end was to prevent a Foreign Invasion, by which that
wise Queen certainly knew would be more Expensive and Chargeable to the Nation,
than a Maintenance of a Force at Sea and Land would be to prevent it.

It is not unknown, that your Majesty's Prudence and Conduct has appeared,
that tho your Majesty found the Nation in a Lamentable Condition, the Trade
Sunk, Liberties Seized, the People in a Ferment, the Ensigns of the many
Murders committed in the Reign of the Late King, upon the Gates of the City,
and upon your Majesty's accession to the Throne, a necessary War to be
commenced, yet the Trade has in some measure been preserved, Liberties
restored, the condition of the Nation much mended, and like to be more and more
improved, both as to its Honor and Interest, the People Quieted, and Reprizals
about to be made for the Murder of our Friends. Your Majesty has Reigned now
Seven Years, and never raised one Penny without the consent of Parliament, and
by the Authority of the same; and the Late King had not Reigned seven Hours,
but he Levied Money without Parliament: But I would fain have these Fugitive
Cutthroats that envy and malign your Majesty's easy Government, to compare
the necessities of Queen Elizabeth with the urgent occasion your Majesty has
of greater Taxes than ever that Princes could pretend to; for it is most plain
beyond all contradiction, First, that Wars are now more chargeable in this Age
than in that which she Reigned. Then it is plain, your Majesty has had but
little or no Assistance (the Dutch excepted) from any Protestant Prince, or any
other Prince of the Confederacy; but you have been rather necessitated to help
them; in the last place, your Majesty has every year of your Reign, been
obliged to have great Forces both at Sea and Land; the Charges of your
Majesty's Predecessors have been for the most part Voluntary; their Soldiers
fought upon these Terms, no Purchase, no Pay; and therefore the Subjects were
not so much burdened by Foreign Wars, but they went forth to Conquer. Now its
plain, that for a King to defend his own Realm and the Liberties thereof, is
more Expensive than to Conquer other Princes Countries, for the Conqueror would
always pay himself and Army in his new Conquest: But Sir, that which is a
wonder to me is this, that they should complain to King Lewis and King James of
the greatness of the Taxes here; ca^ ^hey think that although he should comply
with them once more to Invade us, yet at the same time to charge your Majesty
with that thing as a high Crime, must be an unmannerly Charge, since the French
King himself does the same every Year, by his own Arbitrary Despotick Power,
that your Majesty has only done by the Advice and Consent and Authority of a
dutiful and loyal Parliament. But truly Sir, I must here acquaint your Majesty,
that some People have condemned the French King and King James too, for giving
Credit to these Conspirators; for first they ought to have considered, That
none of the vain Pamphlets that either Ferguson or L'Estrange, or any of that
rascally Crew ever writ, were ever able to shake the natural and dutiful
Affections of our English Nation to your Majesty; and of this I am sure they
have had sufficient Experience. In the next place, many of these Conspirators
are Priests and Jesuits, more fit to manage a Pen than a Lance, to dispute of
Philosophy, than to discourse of War; to have a low opinion of their own Parts,
than to be prodigal in their Assurance; and let them say no more than what is
true, and judge that to be the great truth that is best made out. In the last
Place, if that those have not been of the Tribe of Levi, yet then they have
been Fellows of desperate Fortunes, which they are ambitious to advance by Lies
and the ruin of their Country.

I do not wonder why they traduce and asperse your Majesty's Government, for
they are and have been for many Years plotting your Ruin and Destr^^tion, both
before and since you were our King; and the business is plain, that they can
never hurt your Person, till they have destroyed your Interest, and have
withdrawn a considerable Party from your Majesty, by which they may make a
Stand; then they may possibly (if not discovered) make an attempt upon your
Person, which they cannot do till your Interest is destroyed by their many
traitorous Aspersions (and they believed) thrown upon your Majesty.

Nay, tho King Charles the Second did comply with them in many things; yet
because he did not comply in every thing, they spared not him, but made it
their business to traduce him; it is true, his Government was Censurable,
because he complied not with the Terms and preserved not the fundamental
Constitutions of an English Monarchy; therefore his Government was exposed to
the Censure of some that opposed even his proceedings, when they had liberty,
as they were Members of Parliament, for they had just Ground to believe that he
closed with the French Interest, against that of his own Kingdom, and with the
Popish Party, in order to betray the Protestant Interest both at Home and
Abroad; and the Conspirators they let lose their Tongues against him, because
he was not wholly theirs, but ever and anon gave them the slip, by which they
were disappointed in their Designs; therefore in a Letter of theirs to their
Party in Scotland, they plainly say, That he was so addicted to his Pleasure,
that he was not fit to Govern; and in another Letter they charge him with
unsteadiness in his Resolutions as to Religion; and when they had a design to
hasten his Exit, then they charge him with all the Falseness and Vileness that
might be imagined to be in the worst of Men; so that your Majesty is not the
only Prince that these Miscreants have Traduced: And truly it filled me with
great Horror when I saw their Industry in dispersing their filthy and
scandalous Libels against your Majesty and Government, it being the method of
those Men first to beget a disaffection in your Subjects against your Majesty
(if it were possible) that your Destruction might be the more easily
accomplished by them, but your Majesty has been very happy; for nothing these
Villains could either Write or Speak, ever made the least impression upon the
Hearts of your Loving Subjects; but on the other hand it filled them with Zeal
against that party of Men, especially since they were so highly sensible of
that Grace and Clemency by which their Lives had been continued to them, for we
all know that this was not the first Conspiracy that they have been engaged in
against your Majesty; I pray God it may be the last.

Give me leave to put your Majesty in mind of a Passage in one of Mr. Coleman's
Letters to the French King's Confessor which is this; he says there. The
Design prospered so well that he doubted not, but the Business would be
manaaged to the utter ruin of the Protestant Party. So the design of these
Cutthroats prospered so well, that they did not doubt but that in a little
time their Business would be managed to the Destruction of your Majesty and
your Protestant Subjects; for they carried on one Design to Murder your Person,
and another to Invade your Kingdoms with a Foreign Force; and they were much in
the right, for it would have been impossible for them to have Restored the Late
King by an Invasion, and to have set up Popery and Slavery, without destroying
a Protestant King and the Protestant Interest in England. All good Protestants
I hope will find to their great Satisfaction, that these Traitors have brought
Destruction upon themselves and their Party; and that not a Man of them shall
Escape; for your Majesty's Proceedings with such, will be as quick as their
Gunpowder, and much more effectual: So that your humble Subjects may rejoice in
your Majesty's Justice upon these Men, since Grace and Clemency could not
Reform them.

Sir, I was a Discoverer of a Conspiracy carried on by the Popish Party, for
the Destruction of King Charles the Second, and your Majesty when Prince of
Orange, and for the Subversion of the Government, and the Protestant Religion
in England, and all over Europe; but it was my Misfortune to discover a
Conspiracy to a King, that was engaged in every part thereof, but that of his
own Life; and I met with such Opposition from the then Duke of York and his
Conspirators, that it was scarce possible for me to have withstood it had not I
had a more than an ordinary Presence of Mind to have supported me: This, Sir, I
say, was my Case, yet notwithstanding all the Opposition I met with all, I gave
the Popish Party such a deadly Wound, that they could not be cured of it, no
not in the Reign of the late King, though they had all the Encouragement that
Men could have, because the Villainy of that Party of Men stuck so upon the
Minds of the People of England, that no Stone was left unturned to rid our
Hands of them, and their Popish King, which was effectually done, when your
Majesty undertook and completed the Deliverance of this poor bleeding Nation.

Many Men have wondered that the late King when he was Duke of York, should
have such an Ascendency over his Brother King Charles the Second; since it is
well known that when King Charles was upon his return Home to enjoy his Crown,
that the Duke of York, with the Queen Mother, was in a Conspiracy to have
destroyed King Charles, to the end, that he, the said Duke of York, might have
returned Home and enjoyed the Crown himself; the Lord Arlington discovered the
same, and so the design was baffled, yet no Man was so much in favor as the
Duke of York, and as a Testimony of the King's Grace and Favor; He was made
Lord High Admiral of England, and held that Office till he openly refused the
subscribing the Test, according to an Act made in the Year 1673: But he
enjoying that great and mighty Office of Lord High Admiral of England for
several Years; He obtained the King's Favor; the Court was at his Will and
Commandment, either for love to him, or for fear of his Greatness and
Authority: He so demeaned himself to the King his Brother, that that King would
never believe that the great Interest that he had acquired by the Greatness of
his Office should ever be abused to the prejudice of the Government; but for
the King's Service and Benefit he increased the number of his Friends and
Followers, by gratifying some with Naval Preferments, and others with Money,
always employing his Purse, his Credit, and his Countenance for the
strengthening his Party; and that in such a manner as that the King could not
but perceive it, yet he so dissembled the Matter, and pretended to such a
degree of Obedience and Affection to the King, and gratified him in his sinful
Pleasures, that the King did not distrust his Proceedings, and that he might
continue in the King's Favor, he made it his business as much as in him lay to
comply with his Humors and Humane Frailties: And when he was forced to lay
down that great Office, by reason of his refusal of the Sacramental Test
abovementioned, he obtained of the King, that his Friends and high Church
Conspirators might be put in Commissioners of the Admiralty in his place, he
made all the Ministers of state sure to him, so that when he was banished into
Flanders, a first and a second time, and after his return he procured that the
Duke of Monmouth should be banished the Court, he judging him to be his Enemy,
and then his Conspirators endeavored not in vain to keep the said Duke of
Monmouth in discredit with the King: But the then Parliament being sensible of
the dangerous Conspiracy against the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, and the King's Person, carried on by the Popish
Party, and finding that the Duke's being a Papist had encouraged them in that
Hellish Plot, they having great hopes of his coming such to the Crown, they
fell upon the Duke, and to prevent the Storm from falling upon the Duke, the
King sends him into Scotland, after that he had bridled and sadled that Kingdom
in some measure to his Hearts content: He applies himself to his Friends to
procure his return, he is accordingly permitted to return, to the great Joy of
his Party: He fawns upon the King's Whore that he kept in the Matted Gallery at
White hall, and who he created Duchess of Portsmouth, who had a great Interest
in the King, and obtained at first or last whatsoever pleased her of the King,
that whosoever he was (were he never so high in the King's Favor) that
displeased her in time lost the King's good Will and good Opinion; this Duke
carried himself so toward her, that he seemed to affect nothing more than her
good liking, and yet not so desirous thereof as that he would wholly depend
thereupon, knowing that the King although he always attributed much to this
infamous Whore, and was pleased that she was Reverenced and Respected, yet he
could not well bear that her good Will should be sought above his own Royal
Favor: But the Duke did continue his Friendship with her, hoping in time to
command them both; and when ever he found any of the King's Ministers not
thoroughly complying with him, and not ready to follow his Designs, he labored
by all means to have them removed and others put in their Places, who would not
fail him in his wicked Designs and Purposes, nor to depend wholly upon his
Favor, and also to make him privy (if need were) to whatsoever Business and
Affair of State they were commanded by the King to dispatch; whereby he came
(tho he were out of the Council upon the same account as he had left the Office
of Lord High Admiral) to the perfect knowledge of all that was purposed and
determined by the King's Privy Council; and he was in such Favor and Credit,
that even the principal Officers about the King, either for Faer or Love, or by
other Men's Examples, submitted themselves wholly unto his Devotion; and he had
such Interest in the King's Court and Courtiers, that all, or most part of
them, seemed to be at his sole Disposition, and to affect him more than the
King himself. He having Installed himself in this manner in the Court, and in a
great measure withdrew the Hearts of the principal Officers thereof from their
Duty and Love to their King: He thought it also not enough to be invested in
their Favors, but all the endeavors were used that he might have the
Affections of the Common People; to procure this, he obtains the help of a
filthy Strumpet called High-Church, whose Blasphemous Preachers of
Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance, did him mighty Service in order
thereunto: And what Feasting there was provided for the Apprentices of the City
of London, who were a sort of young Men who were to be by his Conspirators
debauched in order to his Service; and by the great promises of his Grace and
Favor he easily and quickly persuaded the Conspirators to favor his Cause and
Conspiracy: Nay, all the legal Force throughout the Kingdom, from the Lord
Lieutenant of a County, to a Deputy Lieutenant, and Captains, Lieutenants, and
Ensigns and Sergeants, were all and every of them his Creatures; the Justices
of Peace and Sheriffs were his Admirers, and the Custom-house and Excise were
all at his Devoire, from one end of the the Kingdom to the other; and generally
Vintners and Ale-drapers were of his Interest; and so was old L'Estrange the
Guide, and his little Scoundrel Clergy of the Church; by which means many of
the Common People were so ready, willing, and desirous to perform and
accomplish his Pleasure, as that in respect of their Obedience to him, he
seemed, to lack nothing but the name of a King, to be one. Notwithstanding the
great Honor and Reverence the Court showed him in the Reign of his Brother,
and the Love and Affection the Commonalty did bear him; the nearness of his
relation to the King, and the mighty Interest he had, and the unaccustomed
Authority he had in so sly a manner Usurped, the high Attempts and
Imaginations he had lodged in his Heart, and the great Opinion he had of
himself, yet he was so far from appearing puffed up with Pride and Disdain to
those that were much below him, that he thought not scorn to give Audience to
the meanest Man that had business with him.

Now, how could a Man of my Circumstances, having provoked him by the Discovery
of the Hellish Conspiracy, carried on by him and his wicked Popish Party, and
Popishly affected, stand against such a Man of such an Interest; for he and his
Party when they could not hurt me by their Subborned Witnesses against me, not
only to destroy my Reputation, but my Life? Then they procured King Charles to
take away my Maintenance and Protection; and this angry Duke he Sued me for
charging him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then Suborned
Witnesses against me, and procured me in his Brother's Reign to be Indicted of
two pretended Perjuries; but he being impatient in his Expectation, he snatched
the Crown from his Brother's Head, and mounted the Throne, and then he and his
Popish Witnesses, his Packt Juries, and Impudent, Lawless, Senseless and
Mercinary Judges completed my Ruin; and I must have been destroyed, had not
God by your Majesty's coming to England rescued me beyond all Expectation.

Give me leave Sir, with the humblest Submission to your Majesty, to observe,
that where there is a Subject of such Credit with the King, of such Authority
with the Court, and such Power in every County of the Kingdom, as the Duke of
York had when he was a Subject, and to have such an Interest in the Church and
Civil Government, and Military Employments, and Naval Preferments: Could it be
possibly hard or difficult for him to insult over and suppress those Truths I
then Revealed, for the service and preservation of the Religion, Laws and
Liberties of my Native Country, against him and his numerous Party. And how
much more was it easy for him to destroy me when he had the Crown it self upon
his own Head? But above all, Great Sir, how can it be, that such a Subject,
perverted to such a Villainous Religion, should not be most dangerous to his
Prince and Country? And to what a lamentable State and Condition he brought it
when he had Possession? your Majesty well knows.

It was therefore high time for the Protestants of this Kingdom to implore your
Majesty's Aid and Help in that Hour of Distress, that the Nation was brought
to, by that unhappy Person, and his wicked Accomplices; and blessed be God, for
putting it into your Royal Heart to come over to us, and to bring along with
you a Force sufficient to defend your Person from him, and his Conspirators;
and tho he and they would have insinuated, that your Majesty came to Conquer
us, and Enslave us; and notwithstanding the villainous Scribbling of some that
would to this day assert your Majesty's Title to be by Conquest. We that are
Protestants, do from the bottom of our Hearts believe, That your Majesty had no
other design in your Royal Undertaking, but to procure a settlement of
Religion, Liberty and Property of the People of this Nation, on so sure a
Foundation that there might be no danger of this Nation's Relapsing into the
like Miseries at any time hereafter: And for the Justice of your Cause, your
Majesty may appeal to God, and to all Protestant Kings, Princes, States and
People, in bringing a Force sufficient to suppress the Conspirators and their
damnable hellish Conspiracy: And with the like Justice your Majesty then might
require and adjure all English Protestants to assist you against those Enemies
of God, his Christ, his Gospel, and the Rights of this Nation and Liberties of
Mankind. And your Majesty might with the like Justice have Punished those as
Banditi and Free-booters, and common Rogues and Traitors to their Country, that
should have appeared to Oppose your Majesty in so Glorious a Work you had
undertaken for the Rescuing three Kingdoms out of the Jaws of Hell, Rome, and
France.

Since God engaged me in asserting the Laws and Liberties of England, and the
Protestant Religion, and in discovering the Malicious and Hellish Designs of
the Popish Party against us, the Opposition of that Party and the
Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance Clergymen grew strong and thick upon me,
and how those Varlets run in with the Popish Party, together with their Guide,
Sir Roger L'Estrange, to decry the discovery of the Popish Plot, and would to
this day decry by the very same Method they then used, the present Discovery of
this Hellish Design against your Majesty's Royal Person, and the Religion and
Government of this Nation, if they had but hopes to go off with Impunity, and
by your Majesty's leave I dear challenge any of these Men to tell me what
particular there was by me discovered, that did not in process of time come to
pass: It will be to tedious to recite all particulars of the discovery of the
Popish Plot, that did come to pass, and from the dismal and sad Consequences of
that Conspiracy your Majesty under God has delivered us, or else these
Villainous Traitors would insult, and ask why and to what end your Majesty
exposed your Royal Person in your late Glorious Undertaking, in the Year 1688?

The evil usage I have had from our Popish high Church, Non-juring
Conspirators, has so hardened and inured me to suffering, that I praise God,
who has taught me some weak Rudiments of his heavenly Art, of drawing Light
out of Darkness for mine own use; I have not been trampled upon for so many
Years to so little purpose as to remain yet either ignorant or insensible of
mine own Vileness, and to what Element I am nearest allied, or so tender or
querulous as either to complain of the weight of those who still go over me as
the Stones in the Street, or to project the suffering of any Man in order to
please or solace my self, my long Deprivation and want of respects from some
that should have treated me as a Christian, a Gentleman, and a Presbyter of the
Church of God, is now turned into an Athletique habit, some what after the
manner of those, who through long Fasting lose their Appetites, and withal
either Contract or find an Ability or Contentedness of Nature, to live with a
little or no Meat afterward; I can, through the Strength of Christ, suffer my
self to be oppressed, and from my poor Dunghill whereon I sit, behold both
Friends and Enemies, that with much Contentment, and sufficient Enjoyment of my
self, partaking of the good Things of this Life, the more, because that God
still preserves your Royal Person from the Attempts that the Traiterous
Conspirators have so often made to destroy You and the Nation, from the
intended Invasion by our implacable Enemies, that would destroy and enslave us.

Next to Christ and this Truth, I shall, with the utmost Breath and Power I
have, according to my Oath and Duty, in what Place and Station soever I am,
endeavor to be found Loyal and True to your Majesty, as my Rightful and Lawful
Sovereign Lord and King, as all good Subjects and Christians ought to be; and I
cannot forbear, out of the great and sincere Zeal and Affection that I bear to
your Majesty; bless God for the great Concord there is between your Majesty and
Protestant Subjects, which your Majesty has found to have turned to a good
account to your Ease, Comfort and Peace, in the managing your Affairs of
Government both in Church and State, and it is a great Comfort to your good
People to see your Majesty relying upon your two Houses of Parliament, for your
necessary Ease and Help in this day of your Just War with the French Nimrod,
and Destroyer of Mankind.

It was a great Blemish in the two last Reigns to those two Kings, for that
rather than they would trust in a Parliament, according to the fundamental
Constitution of this Realm, they chose rather to follow the Advice of their
never to be forgotten corrupt Ministers of State, who pretended great Loyalty
to those Princes in their several Reigns, or rather Compliance with the Humors
and Humane Frailties of those two Monarchs; but they were neither true to those
Kings nor their Country, or themselves herein, for they erected and preferred
an Imperial Paramount, Self-end or Lust, before all which those two Kings were
brought unworthily to serve and promote to the disturbance of the Public Peace
and Welfare of the Nation. It was a false Suggestion that those Conspirators
did use to those Kings, that a King that Rules by his Will is more great,
glorious, or strong, than a King that Rules by Law, the quality of the Retinue,
best proves the State of the Lord, the one being but a King of Slaves, while
the other, like God, is a King of Kings and Hearts, notwithstanding that
Hellish and Traiterous Doctrine, made such an Impression upon the Hearts and
Souls of those Princes, that nothing prevented them from putting that sort of
Doctrine into Practice; but the want of a competent Stock, with which they would
have certainly set up the Trade, especially since they saw the Example of such
an Allie, whose Interest, and theirs was all one; but God that has preserved
your Majesty in so many Dangers, has also preserved you from such wicked
Councils and Counselors too, which is a great Specimen of your long and happy
Reign over us.

Sir, my Pen has transgressed the Line and Law of my Intentions, these
confined me to a much narrower Compass in this my Epistle Dedicatory to your
Majesty, and prohibited me the troubling your Majesty to such a degree as now I
have done; the truth is, my Zeal, Duty, Loyalty and hearty Affection to your
Majesty has interposed and occasioned this Transgression. Your Majesty knows
that Love is bountiful, and I trust, will produce a Pardon from your Majesty,
as it has brought forth this Transgression from me, in which I have with all
my Heart designed nothing but what may be consistent with your Service and
Interest: And, I must say thus much, that your Majesty being thus often marked
out for Destruction by these Conspirators, shows, that your Majesty is neither
a Friend to these Men, nor their Principles, either in Religion, or in
Politics; and that we ought to make use of it as a proof of your Majesty's
Affections to the English Nation, and as an acknowledgment thereof, by me be
pleased to accept of this poor Endeavor of mine, and give me leave in all
Humility, to lay these Papers at your Royal Feet: Many of your Loyal Subjects
are capable of presenting your Majesty with what is more Suitable to the
greatness of your Understanding; but nothing can be laid before you that may
satisfy your Majesty of the truth of those things which these Conspirators
stood guilty of for these twenty Years last past, and have now given your
Majesty a plain demonstration how Restless they have been, and still are,
notwithstanding all the Arguments of Grace and Mercy that have been used to
reduce them to Reason and Obedience.

There is now no more danger (if your Majesty pleases) from these Men that have
Conspired against your Life; for the danger of Conspiracies lies in being
Concealed; none ever Perished by a detected Plot, but such as have abandoned
themselves to be Destroyed; and this was the Case of Charles the Second; he
chose rather to desert himself and Safety, rather than the Discoverer should
not be exposed to the implacable Malice of those who Conspired against his
Person and Government. But Sir, with your Majesty it is clear another thing,
you will let the World know that you are not joined in this Conspiracy by any
Personal Accession, as that unhappy Prince was in that that was against him.
Therefore Sir, it is past the Malice and Strength of your Adversaries, either
to destroy your Royal Person, or subvert your Government: Besides Sir, your
Majesty using those Endeavors that becomes so great a Prince, to have these
Conspirators farther detected and brought to Justice, puts your Majesty within
the promise of the immense Wisdom and Almighty power to interpose, to save and
preserve you.

I have great grounds of assurance that your Majesty is fully satisfied of the
Duty and Affection of your ever dutiful and Loyal Protestant Dissenting
Subjects, who have been for many Years Persecuted for the Testimony of a good
Conscience, in the two last Reigns, for no other reason but because they would
not part with their Civil Rights as English Men, nor their Spiritual Rights as
Christians, to these Murderers of the Soul and Body of the Nation.
Nevertheless, in the two late Reigns they continued more quiet under their many
and great Persecutions and Oppressions, than the Conspirators did under their
daily Favors and Caresses. The Principles of your Dissenting Subjects teach
them to obey a Lawful Authority, whilst the Principles of these High-Church,
Non-Juring and Popish Cutthroats, carry them on to Murder Kings, and Invade
their Countries with a Foreign Force and Power. They could not find one of
these Loyal Men that would so far undervalue themselves as to have the least
acquaintance with these Villainous Cutthroats, much less to engage with them
in such a barbarous Design; and no Man questions, but that your Majesty will
now put a distinction between those Men who would (if they might) serve your
Majesty, and those who would have Traitorously destroyed your Person and
subverted your Government, by introducing Popery and Slavery among us.

That your Majesty may long Live, to assert and preserve Laws; the Laws of the
most High God in your own Soul to your Eternal, and the Laws of the Land to the
Temporal high Peace and Felicity of your Majesty and People, and abound in all
the Blessings of this and the other Life, Health, Grace, Wisdom, Wealth, Power
and Victory over all your Enemies, both at home and abroad, shall ever be the
Prayers of

Great SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Loyal, and Dutiful Subject and
Servant, TITUS OATS.

(...): Or, The Picture of the Late King JAMES.
SIR,
THE Kingdom in general, and my self in particular, having received so many
indearing Obligations from you, and your Partisans, that I judge my self
concerned to take notice to you, and your Friends at St. Germains, That since
you left us, or rather, by the Just Judgment of Heaven, that the Kingdom was
departed from you; you were pleased not to forget us, but from Year to Year,
till 1693. you were pleased to bless your old Friends with a Declaration, or
Letter, in which you were pleased to express your self in a different style: In
some of your Papers you write your Heart and Soul in words at length, and not
in figures; then it is your pleasure that we are to know to what we are to trust
when ever you shall return to your Native Country, and enjoy your pretended
Right. Sometimes you intimate, as if England were to be the Field of Blood, and
that Man, Woman, and Child, should be a Sacrifice to your Revenge, which made
your little scoundrel Party here to prick up their Ears, and look as if a Leg
or an Arm were not sufficient to appease your Wrath; or a Carts Arse, or a
Pillory, could not make satisfaction to your self, and Party, for the wrong
you, and your Friends, have suffered from us; nothing less than death and
damnation of the Honest Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of England, can atone
for the delivering themselves from your Tyranny, and the Oppression they
suffered from you, and you Insolent Party: Nay, the poor Fishermen, men of
Feversham, must not escape your Fury, and Vengeance. But in your latter Papers
you are pleased to express your self in softer terms; and the Vengeance
threatened in one Year's Papers is hushed up, and fairly laid to sleep; and, I
remember, in the last you are pleased to give us a French Grimass, and smile
upon us, as if you were made up of nothing but Grace, Mercy and Peace, and
unparalleled Humility, in order to create in us a good thought of the
bitterness of death being past, notwithstanding you have in some of your former
Papers given us to understand, That in regard you have sustained such Affronts
from the People of England, you might justly have proceeded severely with us;
yet in your younger Papers you think fit by a more gentle Method to use means
to regain us to your self, which is the first Born of all the Cunning you, and
your Friends at St. Germains, have been pleased to bless this Nation withal.

But, Sir, it has been your will and pleasure not to give your self the
trouble of emitting any more Declarations of your good Intentions toward us
for these two or three Years last past; therefore I do think fit to acquaint
you, and your Trusty Friends and Counselors at your Court at St. Germains,
that are now with you (for I understand some of your old Partisans have)
sometime since left you) that you must have but a very mean and low opinion of
the English Nation, if you think ever to return hither again upon the strength
of your last Bantering Paper, called, A Gracious Declaration to all your loving
Subjects: For the People of England have not forgot, but very well remember,
That for diverse Years in the Reign of King Charles the Second, your dear
Brother, that there was a horrid Design carried on by him, your self, and your
Party, to change the Lawful Government of England into an Absolute Tyranny, and
to convert the Established Protestant Religion into downright Popery, than
both which there can be nothing more destructive, and contrary to the Law and
wellbeing of this Nation: And whilst you your self was pleased to usurp the
Throne, these Three Kingdoms were highly sensible with what violence you and
your wicked Party overthrew our Laws, Liberties, and Religion; and what Ruin
and Vengeance attended these poor Nations, notwithstanding all your Oaths and
Promises made to the contrary, in Council, and in a Packt Parliament, that met
in May 1685. which as bad as it was, it could not keep pace with you, and your
Popish Cutthroats, in your Intentions of enslaving the People of these
Kingdoms, and of totally overturning our Laws, Liberties, and Religion.

Before I begin my designed Method of laying before you, yours, and the
Practices of your Accomplices, to put you in mind of some Passages in your
Brother's Reign, of which the Parliaments of England had just cause to
complain, as worthy of your Consideration; and when they did address, they
found it was to very little, or no purpose; for no redress could be obtained
from him: And by whose Advice and Counsel such Misdemeanors were committed,
your self can best tell that it was your self.

King Charles the Second was no sooner restored, but contrary to the
Expectation of all those good men that were the Instruments of his
Restoration, they found to their sorrow, 1. That Justice was corruptly
administered, and Offices appertaining to Justice dearly bought and sold. 2.
Benefices and Ecclesiastical Dignities unworthily collated upon Men that
deserved no other Titles than of common Rogues and Cheats; Men that were many
of them unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, and others that were Persons of
unsound Principles, and of worse Morals; their Doctrines tending highly to
enslave the Nation, and their Morals to debauch it. This was the Advice of an
old Friend of yours, and a great-Prop of the Church of Rome, Cardinal Mazarine,
whose Counsel and Advice it was, To debauch the Kingdom of England, and make
them Atheists, and then they would be soon good Papists. This was in the Year
1654. at which time you, and your Party, were but at a low ebb; but how much
you pursued the Counsel of the old Cardinal, I leave all reasonable and
unbyassed Men to judge; and how your sneaking Eccleastical Parasites
contributed toward it. It is plain enough to any man that will look back into
those Times, There was one Jones, your Chaplain, who you ruined, because he
would have contributed to the advancing the Protestant Religion in your Family,
according to his Office and Calling of a Minister in the Church of God. You may
remember by whom Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Dignities, were thus
procured truly by your Popish self, and Popish Whores; Popish Pimps, and Popish
Bowds; and not without Money, or some Promise to favor your Catholic Designs;
and how they suffered your quondam Consort to apostatize to the Church of Rome,
it is well known. But they poor Prelates are gone to their Places, and there
let them remain till God shall reckon with them and others of that Oorder; for
betraying of God's Cause, which they pretended to espouse, tho in truth they
were Enemies to him and his Gospel.

3. In the third place, They saw new Impositions daily invented and levied, and
the Public Treasure of the Nation, and the Revenues, prodigally consumed. Sir,
you know, how 200000 l. was spent, and in order to what; and the Parties that
received the same were in a Conspiracy against our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion: And did not you your self join in the wasting of the King's Treasure;
and procured great Sums of Money to be issued out of His Majesty's Exchequer
to keep your Priests, Jesuits, Monks, and to find your Irish Officers with
Subsistence-money, till that you should have occasion to make use of them for
those Ends and Purposes that might advance your Cause and wicked Purposes
against the English Interest, and the Protestant Religion. Well therefore might
you, in your Speech to the Council, Feb. 6. 1684. call Charles the Second your
kind and loving Brother; for he joined with you in those wicked Designs and
Purposes which you were carrying on to destroy and enslave us, and too often
took your Faults upon himself, to screen you from the public Justice of the
Nation.

4. They saw old Officers unjustly displaced, and men of base Quality
unworthily advanced, by which Contrivance you, Sir, may very well remember, you
created a great disaffection in the King's best Friends, both of the old
Nobility and Gentry, and others that had espoused the King, your Brother's
Quarrel, upon just English Principles; and chose rather to advance a parcel of
base Irish Papists, and vile Frenchmen, to the great discouragement of the
English, and those that heartily would have served the King, your Brother, upon
English Protestant Principles. It is well known, that some of those you
preferred were so insolent, that when they came to have, and enjoy great Places
in the Ministry of King Charles the Second's Government, that they assumed to
themselves, by your direction, the Regal Power; treating in Matters of War and
Peace with Foreign Ministers and Ambassadors; giving Instructions to the said
King Charles's Ministers abroad, without communicating them to those that ought
to have been privy to the same, contrary to Law; and all this I can prove has
been done by your direction. How many honest Old Servants were displaced by the
influence you had on the King, your Brother, some are yet alive to tell;
especially those who were well affected to the Protestant Religion, and in
Parliament had appeared for the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, in
opposition to Popery and Slavery.

5. They saw King Charles the Second carried away with Vanities, and wholly
governed by his Whores. You may remember, that some of those Whores you your
self put upon him; as Jenny Roberts, who was in part kept by you as a Spy upon
him; and for this end, at your Command she turned Papist; and when she could be
of no use to you, nor was constant to King Charles, you and he put her off, and
left her to starve: Cleveland and Porismouth, two Metropolitan Whores that
governed him as they pleased; and what Sums of Money (through the ascendency
they had over him) they obtained from him, I shall not need to tell you; and
how many Bishoprics they disposed of, we have not forgotten: And in all this,
Sir, it is plain, you promoted them to advance your Cause and Interest.

6. He entered into a League with England's morta^ Enemies the French; and such
strong Alliances were made with that Savage Prince, and Nimrod of Europe, by
which means we were hurt in our Trade, and impaired in our Riches and
Greatness; and to effect this Work, what Arts and Contrivances you and your
Conspirators did use, by introducing French Whores, French Fashions and
Customs, and French Officers, and French Servants, whom we have nourished and
cherished with all the Caresses imaginable; and to the meanest Valet de
chamber, or Contemptible Lacquey or Fiddler, who pretended to be but alamode de
France, your Parasites paid more respect to, than to our brave Englishmen; nay,
so amorous too had your fine, but (debauched) Ladies been of a French Kick
shaw, that they have even hugged them in their very Bosoms; and have lamented
the loss, tho but of the meanest French Skips; witness the Tears that fell from
diverse great Personages of the Feminine Sex, that on their Knees made
supplication for that insipid High way-man Du Vall, who at last, though with
great difficulty, was hanged at Tyburn for Robberies committed on the Highway.
It is true, he was a man of excellent Parts, and singular Learning, only he
could neither Write nor Read.

But had this been all, I should not have mentioned this Particular. There wae
more in this then some unthinking men at that time were aware of; for you, and
your Accomplices made further steps to maintain this strong Alliance with the
French, our mortal Enemies; for you did not only introduce the Modes and
Customs of France amongst us, but the Yoke of France that must be put on too. I
have heard of a cer certain Knight, called Sir James -- that in a Coffe-house
was heard to say, That it would never be well in England, till our King was as
Absolute as the King of France. He was an Alderman of London, and, Sir, your
very humble Admirer; and at that time you had made a very gracious promise to
him of obtaining of your Brother the great Park near Dublin for him, for the
great Services he had done your self, and the French Interest: And truly, Sir,
he has deserved that Boon at your hands, were it but for the aforesaid wise
Saying of his; and had that Rascal had but Brains suitable to his Impudence, a
man might easily have taken him for one of the Chief of the Conspirators with
your self, against the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the People of England:
This Fellow, I say, was an Alderman of London, and his Residence was in the
City; but by his Discourse a man would have sworn he had always lived with your
Conspirators at St. James's, or at Whitehall, or with the French Tailor, an old
Companion of yours, who thanked God, That his great King of France could send
for his Head, and his Estate, when he pleased.

Blessed be God, Sir, your Residence is in that sweet place of St. Germains,
where you enjoy your self, and Friends, in a most comfortable manner; and you
have your health as well as if you had 100 Sail of Ships at your Devotion, and
an Army of 50000 men, which is a mercy. I pray, let me ask you, What sort of
People are your French Neighbors? Is there not such a slavish temper in those
poor Wretches as is astonishing?

Just to such a slavish and knavish Temper you were about to bring the People
of this Nation to; your Conspirators had made a considerable progress in this
mighty Work; and had not Divine Providence interposed, you had completed the
same: Your Party, to complete this Work, found out the only true way, which was
first to enslave our Souls, by subjecting them; and our Reason, to the blind
Superstition of the Church; for that Priest craft having once so far won upon
Englishmen, as to make them trust and pin their Faith and Reason upon their
Sleeves, they may after that bring them to any thing that they shall direct;
and therefore, as in your Day, so in all Ages heretofore, nothing did show more
the Cunning of your Banditti, than to drive on these two together, Popery and
Slavery; only sometimes they have driven on the one by the other; sometimes
Popery led the Van to bring on French Slavery, and sometimes French Slavery led
the Van to bring on Popery. Your Friends well knew that Popery and Slavery,
like two Sisters, they go hand in hand; sometimes one goes first, and sometimes
the other: In England your Council resolved that Popery was to bring in
Slavery; in Scotland, Slavery was to have brought in Popery; and this was done
by our Priests blind admonition to the people, of obedience to our Governors,
be it good they command, or be it evil; whatever they command, it must be
obeyed: And what Nation soever came under the misfortune of being robbed of
their Rights and Liberties, it was chiefly brought to pass by Priestcraft, in
preaching up blind obedience, and extolling Vicious Kings, and calling them
excellent, tho the vilest of Tyrants, who were riding Post to swallow them up:
This was the Practice of our Pulpit-hunters in the time of the Reign of your
Brother, and in the beginning of your Usurpation of the Government; and so they
would have done to this day, had not the Tythe-pig been in danger: Nothing, I
say, contributed more to the confirming and establishing the late King your
Brother's Alliances with France, as that progress your Priests and Jesuits made
in perverting the people, as to their Religion; and our Ecclesiastical Brokers
debauching their Morals by their immorality, and looseness of living, and
enslaving their minds by their damnable Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and
Non-resistance, and the Divine Right of Succession to the Imperial Crown of the
Realm.

7. He being fully resolved to follow his Pleasure, he left the Administration
of the Three Kingdoms to your self, and Cutthroat Party, who were Enemies to
the people of England, and were in a damnable Conspiracy against his person and
Government, and the Protestant Religion. That he was resolved upon his
Pleasures, you, nor no man can deny; and that you had the ascendency of him, it
is too plain and manifest to admit of the least doubt or scruple: But that
which was most wicked, you kept him plied with those vile Wretches, who
promoted that Vice in him. And tho he was the vilest of all the Kings that went
before, for his many Immoralities; yet how did his Ecclesiastical Parasites
flatter him, and admire him as a Prince of the greatest Virtues; a King of
Peace (they called him) and a King of Righteousness.

I am sure he engaged the Government in two unjust Wars against the Dutch; and
thanks be to God, he was by them worsted in both those Wars; and it proved
fatal to the Conspirators; for the great Design of ruining the Dutch, was the
advancement of Popery and Arbitrary Power here in England, which you durst not
attempt till they were weakened; you fearing their joining their Forces
together to rescue us from your damnable Designs against our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, as you know they did, and that to very good purpose; the effects of
which will not be gotten out of your old Bones as long as you live.

Before I conclude this Head, give me leave, Sir, to observe, that whilst the
King, your Brother, was swallowed up in his Pleasures, you, and your Minions,
did make it your business to beget in the people a low opinion of the method of
Governing; and by your Priests (you taking opportunity, by reason of our then
villainous Caterpillars of the Church countenancing it in a very high manner) to
beget in the people a mean opinion of the Protestant Religion, and Interest;
and you may remember you gained not a few to your Party: Therefore, when we
consider our danger, we cannot but be astonished at our deliverance: For had
your Banditti been avowed Papists, our danger might more easily have been
conquered; for some, nay the most of them, when the Test came in force, quitted
their Employment at Court; amongst them, Sir, your sweet self quitted the
Office and Title of Lord High Admiral of England; but, Sir, you had gotten a
Crew about you, that did undertake with you, to ruin and destroy the
Government, which lay under no temptation of Religion; these joined their
Forces and Interest against King and Kingdom, and truly, I think, our greatest
danger was from them.

You having this fair opportunity of your Brother's being so addicted to his
Pleasures, and he leaving the Administration of Affairs to you, and your
Hellborn Crew; it was a great wonder you did not strike sooner, and leap into
the Chair an Age or two before the time you did: It Is certain you came not in
without Murder, and Murder would have been but Murder if it had been done
ten or a dozen years before. Truly, tho you had Villains that one would have
thought were bad enough, yet you had not enough for so black a Design, as the
overthrow of the Government, and the Protestant Religion; they were not, I say,
ripe enough; your Popish Party at home were keen enough, but they wanted a good
back to their edge; therefore, Sir, you fearing your strength at home, you
applied you self abroad to the French King, he being endowed with all those
Qualities, which in a Prince may pass for Virtues, but in any man of a private
Station, they would be capital: He being a Champion for Popery and Arbitrary
Power, with him you joined to ruin the Government, and the Protestant Religion,
your damnable Conspiracy being a Project every way suitable to the Inclination
and Interest of that Bloody Monster of Mankind. You may remember the Traiterous
Correspondencies you maintained with him, and he with you, by your most
Excellent Secretary Coleman, who you honestly left to be hanged for that great
piece of secret Service he did you in that time.

8. We well remember how careless he was in the maintenance of our Religion.
Truly when Princes are given up to their Pleasures, it is no great matter what
Religion they profess; you may well call to mind what breaches you and your
Party made upon our Religion through his carelessness and remisness; how you
advanced the Popish Interest, and discountenanced the Protestants; and as your
Secretary Coleman observed, that you would not forget the Tricks the Parliament
of England had played with you; so we cannot but remember what Tricks you played
with us; for it is plain, that there was not a considerable Preferment in the
Church that fell, but either he that was preferred was one of no Religion, or
else that which was worse, he was a person that engaged in your unrighteous
Cause and Quarrel.

Sir, by your means, and the means of your Partisans, such men were made use of
in the Church, that through the ignorance and insufficiency of some of them,
and oscitancy and remisness of others, to whom the Guardianship of her was
committed, our Religion and Worship became lamentably dismantled, misfigured
and defaced, and this well nigh in all the integral and principal parts of it
(more or less); insomuch, that a man that understands the Doctrines, and holy
Intentions of our first Reformers from the Synagogue of Rome, and shall compare
things with things, could, nor yet can hardly be able to say this is the
Protestant Religion.

But how can any man wonder that King Charles the Second should be careless in
the support and maintenance of our Reformed Religion, since that he was in his
heart and soul engaged to the Doctrines and Communion of the Church of Rome;
witness his being reconciled to that Church by Father Richard Huddleston, who
was related to John Huddleston, of whom the said King Charles had such a tender
care; and not only so, but Received the Sacrament from Father Ireland the
Jesuit, in the Duchess of Portsmouth's Lodgings, and the same day afterward he
received it according to the Usage of the Church of England, it being the
Sunday called Easter Day. In the last place, witness those Papers that were
found under his own hand in his Strong Box, all which testify his inclinations
were bent that way; and therefore how can any man wonder at his being careless
of supporting the Protestant Religion.

Nay, Sir, I must not forget one Instance more of his being of the Romish
Persuasion; that is, that most Excellent Memorial that he put in by his
Protestant Envoy to the Court at Poland; wherein there was a passage to this
effect, That he had a great Esteem of the Roman Catholic and Apostolic
Religion, as being most consistent with Monarchy; give me leave to Cite a
passage of a Letter of his to the Governor of St. Omers, when it was by
Conquest reduced to the Obedience of the French King; which was, That he should
take care of the Jesuits according to the Contract he had made with his Master,
they being men upon whom the hopes of England did depend.

Give me leave, Sir, to put you in mind of his promises he made to the Jesuits
in Spain after he was reconciled to the Church of Rome (upon their Contributing
Three thousand Pistols for his support) of restoring the Catholic Religion
when ever he should come to the Enjoyment of his Right in England; and not only
to them, but to the Nuns in Ghent when he borrowed Money of them, for which
they waited several Years; Then I say, he declared he would restore their
Religion when ever he should come to his Right. When the Princess Henrietta
came to Dover, you know what her Errand was to press the King to restore the
Romish Religion here in England; and that the breach of the Peace with the
Dutch was then and there contrived by you and your Conspirators and consented
to by the King, and all in order to the reducing those State to the Catholic
Faith: And it was determined to begin the Public Exercise of the Romish
Religion in Ireland; and to facilitate that work, you may well remember who was
sent over Lord Lieutenant. Upon all these Considerations a Man may not now
wonder at King Charles's carelessness in the Support and Maintenance of the
Protestant Religion.

You well remember that you your self and your other Conspirators had begot in
the King your Brother a full persuasion of the Truth of this Proposition, That
the Roman Catholics were the greatest favorers of Monarchy; therefore in his
Letter to the French King, bearing Date June 1676. that he resolved to be like
his Neighbors in Religion; but you know that he was prevented by the Lord
Arlington and the Parliament, for which you were pleased to tell Father
Lacheise, in your Letter of July. 1676. that the Lord Arlington and others by a
Thousand deceits endeavored to break the good Intelligence that was betwixt
the King, your Brother, and his most Christian Majesty, and your self, to the
end they might deceive you all Three; and therefore the Parliament, and the
said Lord Arlington and his party were by you declared in that Letter as
useless and dangerous, for that the said Arlington and his Friends did work
incessantly to advance the Interest of the Prince of Orange and the Dutch, and
to lessen the Interest of the French King. Now the King, your Brother, being a
man unsteady in his resolutions, he sometimes failed your Brother of France, as
well as your self, and other Conspirators.

9. We in his Lifetime saw there was no likelihood of his having any
legitimate Issue to Succeed him in the Government; Truly, Sir, I think I may
say that was contrived by your Father Clarendon, and your self, and in it you
intended the hurt of the People of England; but God, who governs the World,
has made his want of legitimate Issue to be the greatest Blessing that ever
England saw; for by that means we have a King that well knows that it is most
certain and evident to all men, that the public Peace and Happiness of any
State or Kingdom, cannot be preserved where the Laws, Liberties, and Customs
Established by the Lawful Authority in it are openly Transgressed and Annulled;
more especially when the alteration of Religion is endeavored, and that a
Religion which is contrary to Law is endeavored to be introduced: Upon which,
those who are immediately concerned in it are indispensably bound to endeavor
to Preserve and Maintain the Established Laws, Liberties and Customs, and above
all the Religion and Worship of God that is Established among them; and to take
such an effectual care that the Inhabitants in that State or Kingdom may not be
deprived of their Religion, nor of their Civil Rights, which is so much the
more necessary, because the Greatness and Security both of Kings and Royal
Families, and of all such as are in Authority, as well as the Happiness of
their Subjects and People, depend in a most especial manner upon the exact
Observation and Maintenance of these their Laws, Liberties, and Customs. This,
Sir, is the Sentiment and Blessed Resolution of King William; and this he and
his Ministers put in Execution, which is a blessed Change, which we could not
have lived to enjoy, had Charles your Brother left any Issue behind him that
had been capable of the Crown; but that which you contrived for our Mischief,
is turned to our greatest Good, for we have the best of Kings upon the Throne,
and the worst of Men taking of the Air at St. Germains.

10. The late King Charles, your Brother, did obstinately refuse to enter into
a League with those who intended to uphold and maintain the Protestant
Religion: This I must say of the Dutch, that ever since they delivered
themselves from the intolerable Yoke of the Crown of Spain, their great aim
and design has been to promote the Interest of the Reformed Religion, and have
endeavored to make Alliances with those Princes that were, and are of the
Reformed Religion, and have endeavored to make good these Alliances; but how
King Charles your Brother, your self, and the rest of your Partisans, treated
the Dutch ever since his Restoration to the Crown, it is well known, and how he
in the compass of Ten years made Two ungodly Wars; but as I said before, I must
say again, The Dutch did most commonly send us home with broken bones. Our
Cause was Wicked, and God gave us Success suitable thereunto; and for what ends
and purposes these Wars were made, you, and your most Christian Brother can
very well tell; but least, Sir, you should have forgotten those Wars, give me
leave to give you a brief note of them.

In the year 1665. it is well known that a War was made upon the Dutch; I could
wish it were as well remembered what the provocation was that occasioned it, and
what success it had. I think, Sir, as I said just now, the success was
suitable; in the first fight you had the Command of the Fleet; and truly it was
a Victory you obtained; but how came we of at Bergon, and how in the year 1666.
when Monk had the Command? your Conspirators got vast supplies from your Band
of Pensioners for the defraying the charge of this wicked War, yet after all
there was no Fleet set out in the year 1667. but the Flower of the Royal Navy
burnt or taken in Port to save charges; but you know your Brother and your self
had good health of Body at Bruxelles, when you had no Ships, and therefore you
were the less concerned.

But that which is the greatest Riddle to some of your Conspirators, Why the
French should at that time a day join with the Dutch against England? Therefore
be pleased to remember that the French did not join with the Dutch to Support
and Maintain the Protestant Religion, or to advance the Interest of the Dutch;
but whilst he was in Friendship with the Dutch, he had an interrupted leisure
(though contrary to all Oaths and Treaties) whilst the Dutch and we were
embroiled to Invade the Spanish Netherlands, which had been by Wise men
considered as the natural Frontier of England, and took a great part of it. The
Dutch could not oppose him because of the pretended Alliance; We could not
interpose because we were engaged both against the Dutch, Dane, and France, so
he went forth Conquering, and to Conquer that part of the Dominion of Spain, to
whom, Sir, your Brother and your self were very much obliged when never a
Prince in all Europe durst own you, he did; and how basely your Brother, and
your self, and Conspirators have treated him, let all Europe judge.

But what was the reason we had not a Fleet set out in the year 1667. since
such large Supplies were obtained for to carry on this ungodly War against the
Dutch? The reason was this; notwithstanding he had joined with the Dutch
against us, yet by the Credit he had with the Queen your Mother, he by her so
far deluded the King your Brother, that upon the assurance the Dutch would not
have any Fleet out that year, he forbore to make ready, and so incurred that
notable loss and disgrace at Chatham. This was the fatal end of all our
Sea-undertakings against the Dutch for that War; and as the French King, and
your self, and Conspirators were the persons to whom we were much obliged for
that War, so we were glad to receive Peace from his favor, which was agreed at
Breda betwixt England, France, and Holland.

Well, what was the Event of this Peace, which, if I am not out, we were forced
to pay for it, for we stood in need of it, and the Dutch stood in need of our
Money, which they had; but the Event of this War brought the King to some
little consideration, of which he was seldom guilty, for he saw that the French
King had in the year 1667. taken the time of us; and whilst we were both made
weak, he had played his Pranks in the Spanish Netherlands, hereupon he judges
it necessary to interpose before the flame that consumed his next Neighbor
should throw its Sparkles over the Herring-Pond and affect him.

Therefore, he having some good Counselors about him (you may well remember,
that neither you, nor your Conspirators, had any hand in this affair) he
generously slighted all Punctilios of Ceremony, or Piques of Animosity, for
being so well beaten, and so horribly disgraced: He sent first into Holland,
and invites them to a nearer Alliance, and to enter into such farther Counsels
as were most proper to quiet this public disturbance the French had raised.
This work was wholly designed by the King, your Brother, and those few honest
Counselors he had left him; and it being so good a work, it did succeed;
accordingly you by this, Sir, may see what felicity attends that King who
follows the Counsels of Honest Wise Men, and excludes the corrupt Politics of
Rogues that aim at nothing but the advancement of themselves and Families, though
it be upon the ruin of their Country; for it is a thing scarce credible, though
very true, that two Treaties of such Weight and Intricacy, and various aspect
as that of the Defensive League with Holland, and the other for repressing of
the further Progress of the French in the Spanish Netherlands, should in five
days time in the year 1668 be concluded, when yours, and the Politics of your
Conspirators were excluded. Such was the secresy and expedition then used in
prosecuting the King, your Brother's, Instruction; and so easy a thing it is
for Princes when they have a mind to it, to be well served. You may remember
that the Swede also shortly made the third in this Consort, whether wisely
judging that in the Minority of their King Reigning over late acquired
Dominions, it was their true Interest to have their hands in all the Councils
that tended to Peace and Undisturbed Possession: Or whether indeed those
Ministers, like ours, did even project in so glorious an Alliance to betray it
afterward to their own greater advantage, from their joining in it, it was
called the Tripple Alliance; the King, you know, was so fond of it, that he
ceased not to solicit other Princes, according to the Seventh Article of that
Treaty, to come into the Guaranty of the same, and he extremely for a time
delighted himself in cultivating by all good means what he by the Counsel of
some good men had so happily planted; and what satisfaction this Tripple League
so made, gave to the English Nation, and how it did charm the more ready Votes
of the House of Commons into a Supply, and justify the necessity of it in the
very face of the whole Kingdom: For it was of so good report, and so generally
acceptable to the Protestant Party, as being a Hook in the French Nostrils,
that the Pensionary Parliament (who were wont, whether it were for War or Peace
to make the Nation pay for it) could not have desired a fairer pretense to
color their Liberality.

You know, Sir, what vast sums were obtained and lavished in the first War with
Holland; that Parliament in the Month of April 1670. giving the Additional
Duties upon Wines for eight years, which did amount to Five hundred and Sixty
thousand pounds, and confirmed the sale of the Fee-Farm Rents, which was no
less their gift, being a part of the public Revenue, to the value of Eighteen
hundred thousand pounds; nay, not only so, but they met again upon the 24th of
October in the year 1670. and upon the Speech of the Lord Keeper Bridgman, who
telling the Parliament what a multitude of Beneficial Leagues the King had
made, and naming to them the Tripple League, they could no longer hold, gave
again a Subsidy of One shilling in the pound, to the real value of all Lands,
and other Estates proportionably, with several more Beneficial Clauses into the
Bargain, to begin the 24th of June, 1671. and to expire the 24th of June 1672.
together with this they gave the additional Excise upon Beer and Ale for Six
years, to reckon the same from June the 24th. 1671. And lastly, the Law-Bill
commencing from the first of May, 1671. and at nine years end to determine. If
you, now you are at leisure, will cast up these Three Bills, you will find them
not a penny less than 2500000 l.

Thus, Sir, you may see what a Reputation this Tripple League gave the King,
your Brother, both at home and abroad; at home this Triple League obtained a
Tripple supply, which some men thought would as with three Golden Nails have
revetted it. All the Princes of Europe courted him abroad, and were highly
pleased with it; the Emperor used all the pressing means that became him, that
he might partake of the benefit of that Alliance, and was refused.

The Duke of Lorain, who had been always a true Friend to your Brother, and
your self, and by his affection to the Tripple League, did incur the
displeasure of the French King, and lost his whole Territory: It was seized in
the Year 1669. against all Laws, not only of Peace, but of Hostility too,
because of his not being admitted into the Alliance; for which he had so great
a regard, that the honor he had for it proved fatal to him; he was left by
your means to be a Sacrifice, notwithstanding King Charles's Invitation of all
Princes to come in; yet when they desired to be admitted, they were refused.

But in a short time, all those Honest Counsels which had taken effect with so
great satisfaction to the Nation, and to the great honor of your Brother, were
all changed; just as if Treaties, as soon as the Wax is cold, do lose their
virtue; the King, your Brother, went down to Dover in the Month of June, 1670.
to meet, after a long Absence, Madam, his, and your only remaining Sister; and
if the Duke of Buckingham and Sir Thomas Armstrong were alive, they could tell
what a pleasant Meeting they had, and how pleasantly they passed the time of
the interview; and what passed I shall not now relate, you knowing all of it
well enough: But as the days were the more pleasant, because the King had not
seen her for a long season; so the Interview proved fatal to that Princess; for
though she left England in good health, yet upon her arrival in France, she
suddenly expires.

Well then, she dies, what was the consequence of her death? The Marquess
Belfonds is immediately dispatched hither, and a Person of great Honor sent to
the Court of France; and before ever the inquiry and grumbling at her death was
over, in a trice there was an invisible League, in prejudice of the Tripple
one, struck up with France, to all the height and dearness of affection; as if
upon diffecting the Princess, there had been some State-Philtre been found in
her Bowels, or the Reconciliation with France were not to be celebrated with a
less Sacrifice than the Blood Royal of England. The sequel of this Interview
was fatal to the Princess; and the consequence of her coming was fatal to
England; for as the Treaty was a work of darkness, and could not presently be
discovered; so the Parliament, I told you, must meet again, to give a Tripple
Supply to maintain the Tripple League; and they being ignorant of what was
done, thinking all had been secure, gave the aforesaid supply.

Sir, You got the Supply; what use did your Conspiritors make of it? Was not
the Parliament prorogued, and met not again till the 4th of Febr. 1672. by
which means you, and your Accomplices, had a convenient scope for the mighty
work you had upon your hands to ruin the Protestant Religion, and the
Professors thereof; and that you might be free from the inspection of a
Parliament till this mighty Work was finished, I observed to you, That the
King, your Brother, before the Interview, was inciting of the Princes to come
into the Alliance, but from hence forward it ceased; and, as I said before,
when any did offer themselves, they were basely refused.

Oh! what joy, Sir, you, and the rest of the Conspirators, did conceive! with
what diligence was Smith, the Jesuits Agent in London, dispatched over to St.
Omers to acquaint your Friends there of the English Jesuits; and from thence to
Doway, to acquaint the Crew there in what a happy way you were in to do the
Catholic Religion service, and that the King was clearly come over; he having
promised to do all things now that might tend to the destroying of the Interest
of the Dutch, and to advance the Power and Interest of France; and if that the
Tripple League were once dissolved, the King, your Brother, would never more
make any such Alliance with those Rebels. I have seen your Letters dispatched
by the said Smith: You indeed, with the help of your Hellish Crew, your Brother
being gained to your side in this particular you resolve upon the annulling of
that Alliance, which was of very little use; for some time before it was
totally dissolved.

In order to the dissolving this Treaty, old Henry Coventry, one of your
Conspir^tors, was dispatched to the Court of Sweden; and he with as much
impudence as truth, affirmed at his departure, That the end of his Journey to
Sweden was to break the Tripple League; and this is apparent, that after his
juggling with the French Ministers there, and the King of Sweden, the said King
did never more prosecute the Design and ends of that Alliance, until the breach
between us and the Dutch; What, did he arm himself at the expense of the
League, and did first, under the disguise of a Mediation, act the French
Interest, and at last he threw off the Vizor, and drew his Sword in their
Quarrel.

Truly, Sir, I cannot but admire how successful you were in gaining that great
Point of ruining Europe in general, and this Nation in particular; by this way
designing the utter subversion of the Protestant Religion, and all our English
Liberties, as I shall show you in the sequel of this Memento: Nevertheless, I
cannot but much more admire, that Mr. Coventry, that in his Embassy at Breda
was so instrumental in putting a period to that first wicked and unfortunate
War with the Dutch, should at length be made a Tool of a Second, and break such
an Alliance as rendered England honorable to all Europe, and by which all
Christendom was fastened: And that which rendered his Carriage in that Affair
more vile and base, since no man understood the Theory and Practick of Honor
better than himself, and yet could in so eminent an Instance forget it, and
himself too, the employment being more fit for a Butler, or a Downing, or some
such Dunghill Rascal; all that I shall say in his excuse, is, that upon his
return he was made a Secretary of State by your procurement, for such a set of
Devilish Services that he had done for the French King, the King your Brother,
and your self; by this means he had made a Tripple Confederacy to ruin us, in
opposition to a Tripple League that might have preserved us, and all Europe in
perfect peace. If my poor Judgment might pass, Mr. Conventry, if he had
continued an honest Gentleman, he might have been an Instrument of good to
Europe, and more honorable here at home.

But this Gentleman was not the only Sinner that was employed in the Devil's
Service; for Sir William Lockyard, and several others, were dispatched to other
Courts upon the same Errand. This Lockyard was grown as great a Villain as your
heart and soul could desire; and had in the basest manner prostituted himself
to do your Popish Drudgery; and would have gone along with it to the utmost
tedder of your Designs.

Well then, what was next to be done? Your Designs looked with as fair an
aspect as your heart and soul could desire: You had France, your Brother, and
your self, linked together, that a man would have thought you could not have
been parted; what then is the next Intention? truly a War with the Dutch; and
that you might reasonably expect, for all your Affairs were disposed toward
it. Here, Sir, I must remind you of two things. 1. What you did to procure a
War. 2. What you did to carry on that second wicked War.

1. What you, and your Conspirators did, to procure a War with the Dutch. For
it cannot be conceived, that after the King had made so firm a League with the
States General of the United Provinces, but that therefore you, and your
Counselors must have some fair Pretense for breaking with them; or else to
spill so much Blood, and spend so much Treasure without cause, must occasion
your Neighbors to think you were men that would keep no Faith, or that you did
not understand your own Interest; nay, they must have thought the same of all
the English Nation; but that they well knew, that this second, as well as the
first War, was against the Judgment, and Genius, and Interest of the Nation in
general. But a War you would have: And therefore,

1. You set up a Si quis, if any one could give Evidence for you, and the rest
of the Conspirators, against the Dutch, let them come forth, and they should be
heard; therefore an O yes was made, and the East India Company was sent for, to
know what they had to say against the Dutch; but the Dutch had so punctually
performed the Treaty at Breda, and especially as to the honor of the Flag that
nothing could be objected against them; so here you failed of your aims of
picking a quarrel with them.

2. You would have quarrelled with them for having their Fleet abroad; tho that
Objection vanished, their Fleet was upon their own Coasts, pursuant to the
Tripple League, and in prosecution of that Treaty; so, Sir, you failed here.
But what then? you was resolved upon a War, and therefore you would not leave
one Stone unturned, but you would find some cause or another to ruin, if it had
been in your power, that Protestant State.

3. You were put upon a third Experiment; to commence a War, and to make a Case
which never happened before, or could have been imagined by any sober man, you
had a pimping Yatcht, which you caused to bear an English Jack in the Month of
August, 1671. which you ordered to sail into the midst of the Dutch Fleet, and
singled out the Admiral, and shot twice at him; which Action was certainly very
ridiculous and unnatural, as for a Lark to adventure upon a Hawk:
Notwithstanding this impudent Action of the Commander of the Scoundrel Boat,
the Admiral, in respect to his Majesty's Colors, paid our Yatch-Admiral a
visit, to know the reason of such a Carriage, found it was because the Dutch
had refused to strike Sail to his little Bum-boat; the Dutch Admiral excused
the matter with all the civility that could be desired, it being a Case of the
first impression; and therefore he could have no Instructions as to that Point;
and therefore, as it became him, he promised he would acquaint his Masters in
the Affair, and take their directions, and so they parted; and the noble
Commander, with his Oyster Boat, returned, being fraught with the Quarrel for
which he was sent, which yet was for some time passed over here in silence,
without any complaint, or demand of satisfaction; but your Conspirators were
resolved to improve it afterward: When the Conspiracy against those Protestant
States was ready to take effect, then this Point began to be debated, and a
reason for the intended wicked War. The Conspirators assigned the Dutch had not
veiled their Bonnets to the English Dung-boat, it carrying the King's most
Excellent Jack; tho it is plain, the Dutch had all along, both at home and
here, as carefully endeavored to give, as the Conspirators, that were
Ministers, to avoid the receiving all manner of satisfaction: Nay, our Villains
would not so much as let the States General know what would be received and
owned as satisfaction; nay, they were so afraid that the Dutch would comply in
the business of the Flag, and by that means the Rogues should be disappointed
of a hopeful War, the Clock was set forward some minutes; so that by their
roguery they did happily obtain a War: And what joy there was at St. James's,
and amongst your Priests, some of whom were so drunk, that the news they wrote
of this Breach with the Dutch in their Letters, could not be read: And it is
well known, that upon the arrival of the News, Te Deum was sung very devoutly
at the Queen's Chapel at St. James's, and Money ordered by the Queen for to be
distributed to poor Catholics; a token of Joy and Thanksgiving.

4. Pictures and Medals, This was another Pretense which you, and your Banditti
took up to commence a War against the Dutch; but your Conspirators handled this
Point very nicely, fearing the Dutch should give them satisfaction in this very
Point, and thereby prevent a War. It is very plain that the Dutch were not
conscious to themselves of any Provocation given to England; but did solemnly
protest, That if any provocation were given by them, (nay, they went so far,
that they were ready to make satisfaction for Offenses taken) the English
should make their Demands. You, Sir, and the rest of the Conspirators against
the Protestant Religion, do accuse them of these Medals and Pictures; what
then, Must you have a War? I confess, I have read of a Poet, by a dash of his
Pen, was the Cause of a War against Poland; but that, Sir, was the first time
that ever a Painter could by the stroke of his Pencil occasion the breach of so
considerable a League as was made with the Dutch.

5. To fill up the measure of the Iniquity of the Dutch, they bring in against
them the Charge of detaining some English Families in Surinam, after the
dominion of that Colony by treaty of Peace was surrendered up to the Hollander.
What a noise you, and the rest of the Conspirators made about this Business!
for upon the strict examination of the Business, It was found that there was no
such thing as the detaining of any English Families, but leave only given them
to abide there, if they pleased: Nay, when that Firstborn of all Roguery and
Villainy, Banister himself, who was one of your Banditti, whom you had employed
as an Agent and Contriver of all this Misunderstanding in all that Affair,
could not at last forbear to cry shame of it.

Can you, Sir, reflect upon these things without blushing? Ought you not, now
you have time, to think and consider the invalidity of all these Allegations?
Were these the Pillars that you made use use of to add strength? And were
Medals sufficient to give weight, and Pictures color for such an Enterprise as
this? But this is nothing, a War you, and your Conspirators, were resolved
upon; and therefore a Manifesto was on March 17. 1671/2 published, all these
Crying Sins of the Dutch were made public, and War proclaimed; and with what
joy to the Conspirators, and with what grief to the good People of England,
Christendom well knows.

You, and your Partisans, did, I say, rejoice, but what was the consequence of
that wicked Rupture proclaimed on that fatal 17th day of March, but your making
your self, and your devilish Party, Principals to all the Horrid Destruction,
Devastation, Ravage and Slaughter, which from that aforesaid 17th of March,
1672. that has been continued to this very Year of 1696.

2. I come to remind you with what you did to carry on that wicked War; and
here the heads of your Rogues were hard at work, for there was great need of
good consideration in the Affair; for if I am not much out in my memory, the
King, your Brother, was Two Millions in debt, notwithstanding the vast Sums of
Money he had obtained by the strength of the Tripple League, which he had so
basely broke and dissolved. What therefore shall we do for Money? your People
had several Projects on foot; but there were four resolved on, and put in
execution.

1. The Conspirators were to try their utmost Efforts with the French King, who
had made them mighty Promises of his Purse, and Credit, to extirpate the
Dutch-States, and by this had decoyed you into the War; But what was your
Success, I pray? Truly you were not so success^ul as you expected; the Aid he
contributed was but narrow, and could go but a little way in the managing of so
great a War; for all the whole Revenue, and the French Contribution, could not
last ten Months War; even this your Conspirators foreknew, and therefore they
resolve upon a second Project.

2. The shutting up the Exchequer, into which you, and your Friends, had
decoyed in the wealthy Goldsmiths, and they the rest of the Nation, by due
payment of Interest, till you had run the King in debt two Millions, no body
can certainly tell upon what occasion, but your self, your Priests, and other
Conspirators; but then your Resolution was taken, that not one penny should be
expended otherwise than to carry on your Holy War for the pious Catholic Uses,
to which the Conspirators had dedicated the same. This Resolution of yours, and
your Party, was carried on with all the Secrecy that became so black a Design,
that you might not by venting it, unseasonably spoil the wit and malice of it;
you on a sudden, upon the 1st of January, 1670/1 for a New Year's Gift to the
Kingdom, to the great astonishment, ruin and despair of Interested Persons, and
to the terror of the whole Nation by so Arbitrary a Fact; the Proclamation
issued, whereby the Crown, amidst the confluence of such great Supplies,
published it self a Bankrupt, and made Prize of the Subject, and broke all
Faith and Contract at home, in order to break with the Dutch, and to carry on
the War with more advantage.

But, Sir, your Politics failed you here; for the Sum you obtained by this
Impudent Cheat upon the People, did not answer the Expectation of your Party,
nor the Ends for which the Rapine was committed: I find that you were still
straightened, and the War could not be carried on with that application that was
requisite, without a far greater Sum than that which was afforded you by this
course you took.

3. Therefore, in the third place, your Counselors put you upon showing your
self a most Impartial Robberr; for after this Exploit, of shutting up the
Exchequer, was so bravely managed, you resolve that the Dutch should furnish
you with Wealth for that Pious Design: The Dutch, you may remember, were not
consulted with in that Affair, therefore they continued to pursue their
Traffic and Navigation through our Seas with the least suspicion of being
Pirates; and accordingly a very great and Rich Fleet of Merchantmen from Smyrna
and Spain were on their Voyage homeward bound, near the Isle of Weight, under
the small Convoy of five or six of their Men of War: Had it not been for this
Fleet, the War had broke out much sooner; but oh, how you, and your Pirates,
hugged your selves with the hopes of enjoying the Riches that was on board
them! this Fleet you imagined would put you in stock for the carrying you on in
all the Wickedness that you, and your Party, were capable of; and that you
should never, after the obtaining of this Prize, stand in need again of, or
fear a dangerous and useless Parliament: But how did the Design of Plundering
and Robbing your Neighbors, in time of Peace, prosper the carrying on of your
wicked War?

Be pleased, therefore, to remember, that you having equipped a Fleet with
great stilness, and quiet, and expedition, and early in the Year; not too big,
lest the Dutch should suspect you; nor too little, lest you should meet with an
unexpected Repulse in your intended Action: Sir Robert Holmes is made choice of
as a Commander; you know he had given you experience of his Pyracies in the
Years 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664. for he commenced the first Hostility against the
Dutch; and in the same War he had signalized himself by burning the Dutch Ships
at Schelling, which the Dutch revenged upon us at Chatham; he therefore was the
man appointed to commit this Intended Pyracy upon the Dutch Smyrna Fleet: You
judging him a Person of Understanding, Experience, and Courage, and every way
capable of accomplishing such a villainous Enterprise, or of any black devilish
Design of a higher nature. Sir Robert being thus appointed Commander in Chief
of this designed Fleet, sails away, and upon the 14th of March, 1672. as they
sailed on to the number of 72 Ships, whereof six were Convoys, near our Coast,
he fell in upon them with his accustomed Bravery, and could not have failed of
giving a very good account of them, would he but have joined Sir Edward
Spragg's assistance to his own Conduct; for Sir Edward was in sight of them at
the same time with another Squadron, and Captain Leg making sail totward him
to acquaint him with the Design, till called back by a Gun from his Admiral, of
which several Persons have their Conjectures; possibly Sir Robert Holmes,
considering that Sir Edward had sailed all along in consort with the Dutch, and
did but now return from bringing the Pirates of Algiers to reason, thought him
not proper to engage in this Enterprise before he understood it better. But
some have believed, that it proceeded partly from that jealousy of admitting a
share of Honor and Profit in this Piracy, and partly out of too strict a
regard to preserve his Commission secret, but two of a Trade could not agree;
and by this means the whole Affair miscarried; and through the Bravery of the
Dutch Merchantmen, and their little Convoy, Sir Robert was forced to quit the
Enterprise; and all that was got by this piece of Piracy never answered the
great damage his Fleet and Seamen sustained: When the News arrived of Sir
Robert's Fate, I well remember with what a sad Countenance the Conspirators
walked about St. James's Park, and Whitehall; you your self was much out of
humor at the Defeat. Your Confessor Beddingfield told me, That that Defeat was
of such ill consequence to their Design, that it had almost broke all their
Measures.

4. Notwithstanding all this, a War the Conspirators were resolved upon: And
if, Sir, you will give me leave to descend to the bottom of your Hellish
Conspiracy, and that was that of Religon for so Pious and so Just an Action, in
which, Sir, you employed Sir Robert Holmes, could not be better accompanied
than by a Declaration of Liberty of Conscience; you doubting that he could not
find that admirable Commodity in the Hole of an Amsterdam Flyboat; therefore
while he was trying his Fortune in Battle with the Smyrna Merchantmen on the
13th and 14th of March, 1672. the Indulgence was printing off with all haste,
and was published on the Fifteenth as a more proper means than Fasting and
Prayer, to obtain a Blessing from Heaven upon his Enterprise, and upon a wicked
War that was to second it; upon which you may remember, that the King, your
Brother, at your persuasion, and the Counsels of your Conspirators, took upon
him the Dispensing Power; just as you did when you usurped the Throne; for by
this Indulgence all the Penal Laws against the Papists, for which former
Parliaments had given so many Supplies to the Crown; and against
Nonconformists, for which the Pentionary Parliament had paid more largely, were
at one instant suspended in order to cheat the whole Nation at once of all
their Religion which they had so dearly purchased.

But you, and your Conspirators, may say, How was Liberty of Conscience to get
Money? You well remember, Sir, that the Popish Party were so well affected to
this Point of suspending the Penal Laws and Statutes that were against them;
and that the King your Brother, and your self, making such solemn Protestations
to the Gentlemen, and Noblemen, and the Monks, and the Dominicans, that this
Indulgence was but a step to the establishing the Catholic Religion: That
several Gentlemen's Estates were so impaired in contributing to this wicked War,
that they have not recovered the same to this day: The Monks at the Savoy were
so undone, that they could scarce hold up their heads: And the Dominicans
having parted with their All, were forced to fly for the Debts they had
contracted in that Juncture of Affair: But the whole amounted to so little,
that it did turn to little account; for the whole you got, and paid into the
Conspirators Bank, amounted to no more than 356000 l. As for the Protestant
Dissenters, tho they made use of the Liberty you procured for them, yet they
parted with no Money; they remembering what a Cheat was so lately put upon the
Nation in the business of the shutting up the Exchequer: And considering that
the Indulgence it self was but an Arbitrary Act in the King your Brother, and
would never pass for current Law when ever a Parliament should meet; your
Jesuits they pleaded that they had no Cash, they having let great Sums upon the
security of several Estates belonging to the Noblemen and Gentlemen that were
of the Catholic Church: And besides all this, they had met with a loss from
one that had lately fallen from them; so that then they had not ready Money to
part with, all this Project did not answer your Expectation. Tho your
Conspirators did assure you, If it were done, it would bring a Million into
your Conspirators Bank; but such a Sum as it was, it has caused many a Popish
Gentleman to sing Lachrymae, till your Accession to the Crown; and as a Reward
and Plaster, they were put into Employments both Civil and Military; which
Employments never let them see the fortieth part of the Interest of their
Money, the Principal being totally lost.

A War being proclaimed, you must now carry it on: What did you do with the
small Stock you had? you equip out a Fleet. The French King seeing you, and
your Conspirators, engaged beyond retreat, comes into the War, according to
agreement, and proclaims War against the Dutch, not in so sneaking a manner as
you did; for he would assign no Cause; but said, It was for his glory, and that
such was his pleasure. But by his Ambassador to the Pope, he gave the Pope the
true Cause; which you durst not for your Ears give to the Pope, or any body
else; tho that was the Design of King Charles, and your self: His Ambassador
said, That his Master had not undertaken the War against the Hollander in
conjunction with the English, but for the extirpating of Heresy: And the
French King to the Emperor of Germany says, The Hollanders were a People that
had forsaken God, and were Heretics; and that all Christian Princes ought to
associate together for their Extirpation: That it was a War of Religion, in
order to propogate the Catholic Faith. You know, that your Brother's, the
French King's, and your Interest and Religion, were the same; And what other
Design then could you have in that wicked War, but to advance the Religion of
Rome's Church, and Power of France both at home and abroad? and that the
Declaration of Indulgence was but a step toward the setting up the Romish
Religion, according to the Agreement that was made with Madam, your Sister, at
the Interview in June 1670. and by that means you met with that Contribution
from the Romish Party to carry on this War of Religion against the Dutch, who
you judged to be Heretics.

Give me leave, Sir, to make a little digression: You know that the late Duke
of Buckingham, who was then in the Conspiracy with you, was sent into France to
borrow 40 Sail of French Ships; and by agreement our King was to Man them. The
French King judged that too great a Point to be gained by King Charles upon
him, and wheedles with the Duke of Buckingham, and offers him 100000 l.
Sterling to consent that he should Man the Fleet; against which the Duke urged
it was against the Agreement the King his Master had made with him the French
King, and so would not accept the 100000 l. withal, telling the French King,
That if he would let us be Neptune at Sea, he should be Jove by Land: The
French King seemed contented, and so the Discourse ended. But the French King
deals then with the Lord Arlington, and gives him 60000 l. and Arlington
prevailed, Sir, with you to press the King, your Brother, not to insist upon
Manning the French Fleet with English, for that it would be less charge to him,
if the French King did Man the Fleet himself; and withal, urged to the King,
That they were but low, and they should have occasion enough for Money
otherwise: So Arlington got by the Bargain his 60000 l. and the French King the
advantage of setting out his own Fleet.

Well, Sir, you remember the French Fleet was set out, and joined the English;
the English Fleet was commanded by your self, and the French Fleet by Monsieur
d' Estree; and upon the 28th of May, 1672. you were attacked in Soul-Bay by De
Ruyter, who commanded the Dutch with a great deal of Bravery, and the Attack
was made with great advantage on the Dutch side; you did what you could to have
beaten the Dutch, and the French Admiral did what he was sent for, and that was
to look on till you both were well worried; Vice Admiral Montague was
sacrificed, and your Fleet so damnably mangled, that a man would have thought
you had met with another Smyrna Fleet; but our Bells did ring for joy, but God
know there was no occasion on your side to boast of a Victory; but you may see
what it is to be in ill Company; and, I think, they served the Dutch the same
Trick, when they joined with them in the Year 1666. a remarkable Year, you know
for what; but of that in its proper place.

What is next? You may be will not own you were beaten by the Dutch; but it is
plain, that if you had a Victory, it was not worth the name of one; but we have
no more fighting under your Command. How fared it with your Brother of France?
truly, very well; for the rest of the Year passed with great success to the
French, but none to the English: What shall we do now? What did you begin that
War upon Hopes, yes, and great hopes too; the French King's supplying us
toward the carrying of it on, and taking the Smyrna Fleet, and a multitude of
Dutch Prizes; but Prob Dolor! all these Hopes vanished, and the Revenue
exhausted, and the Exchequermoney spent; then, Sir, you were put to your last
shifts. Since Liberty of Conscience turned to so little account; well, you
resolved once more to permit your Brother's Calling his Parliament to set down
on the 4th of February, 1672/3. the very day appointed, for God knows you were
so disappointed, that I wonder you were able to set out a Fleet that Year.

5. You come to your last Project for the carrying on the War, and that is the
Parliament; and so by the good leave of your Banditti, they do set down; but
that which is the greatest astonishment to me, that they could look a
Parliament in the face, after they had advised and completed so many Rogueries
in an interval of Parliament; and how you your self could sit with ease in the
House of Peers, whereas you could not but be conscious to your self of abetting
and joining in with these these Rogues in their Villainy: Well then, What said
your Conspirators to the Parliament? truly they communicated the War to them,
and the Causes of the War; the Necessity of the War, and the Danger of the War,
if not supplied; but not a word of your hopes of never wanting them any more;
not a word of the Design of Propogating the Catholic Cause; you mentioned the
Medals, and Pictures, and the Flag, but the Devil a word of the Northern
Heresy, and the reducing the States General to the Popish Religion. Truly, Sir,
this House of Commons took pity upon you, and according to their never failing
Loyalty to the Crown, knowing that a good Gratuity would appear to themselves,
put you off with the small Pittance of 1250000 l. tho those Pensioners would
wash their hands of the War; and therefore would not give this Money for the
carrying a War against the Dutch, but for the King's Extraordinary Occasions.
But was this all they did? no, it was not all; there was something else done
that did some what allay the growing Greatness of you, and your Conspirators;
for tho they were to be supplied for their private Occasions out of the 1250000
l. they had given, yet they were sensible that the Nation began to smoke the
true Causes of this wicked War, and the End for which it was undertaken. There
was an Act prepared before the Money-Bill was passed, by which your Popish
Conspirators were obliged to pass through a new State-Purgatory, or to be
uncabable of any Public Employment. I remember, when I was abroad, what Curses
were laid upon the Parliament for that scurvy Bill, and upon the Earl of
Shaftsbury, who, tho then Lord Chancellor, yet engaged so far in that Act, and
in defense of the Protestant Religion, that in due time it cost him his Place;
which notwithstanding the Popish Parties bitter Curses, he won a fair
Reputation, and became, to their great grief, a zealous Assertor of the Rights
of the People of England. Was this all? No, your first step to the
Establishment of Popery (the Indulgence I mean) was called in question; and tho
the Popish Party had contributed more than it was worth for the carrying on of
the War, the King was pleased to cancel it, and promised that he never would do
so any more, and passed the Test-Bill: Did he so? Had he not promised the
Princess, your Sister, that he would restore the Roman Catholic Religion, and
that he would begin first in Ireland; in order to which, you know the Lord
Roberts was removed, and another that was base enough to do such a Jobb, was
sent in his room; and you, in your Brother's Name, engaged the same to your
Popish Contributors, and he engaged in his own name the like. It is scarce
possible to believe it; how could he answer this to Lewis the French King? For
it was his Agreement with him, to have the same Government, and the same
Religion; truly he could not tell how to help it, the Sons of Zerviah were too
many for him.

And 1250000 l. was not to be lost for want of a compliance with the
Parliament; and to you the King promised that he would make it up to the Roman
Catholics another way; but how, and when, I could never learn: But, Sir, was
it not hard, that they should be incapable of Offices and Employments, since
they had purchased them at so dear a rate, but these Arguments prevailed not;
so the Bills were passed, and the Parliament was dismissed till the 27th of
October, 1673. and good reason there was for their dismission, for their
sitting was grown very uneasy to your Popish Conspirators.

But, Sir, we could not but laugh in our Sleeves to see some of the
Conspirators take up the Cross, and quit their Employments; as the Lord
Clifford, the Lord Bellasis, and Sir Thomas Strickland, and others, who had
long appeared zealous Sons of our Church, yet discovered to be of the Synagogue
of Rome, as soon as the Test or Purgatory Bill passed; and truly, Sir, we were
not sorry when you appeared to be of the same Complexion with those other
Conspirators; tho at the same time, I must tell you, That your going off did
astonish many men, there being no Record in History of any Prince that changed
his Religion in your Circumstances.

But, did your Conspirators stand still, and put up the Sword that was drawn
against the Dutch? No, they had got 1250000 l. therefore you and they strove
with all imaginable strength to regain by the War that part of the Cursed
Design that was lost by Parliament, tho some of you forsook your Places, rather
than your Consciences; yet, Sir, you never wanted some double-dy'd Sons of the
Church of England to succeed in your Places, upon the same Terms your Popish
Conspirators held them; so that they were but your Conspirators Deputies, who
followed the same Councels, and carried on the same Design, for this Year was a
fruitful Year of Engagements with the Dutch; the French carries all before him
by Land; but we got nothing from the Dutch, but maimed Ships, and broken Bones;
we had indeed changed our General, but our Success was the same: For you
remember with whom we were in Conjunction, we may thank our selves for keeping
such ill Company: So that in a word, I may say those Heretic Dogs, as they
were termed by the Great Lewis, were too many for our English Popish
Conspirators.

What then? Did we nothing by land? had we not an Army at Black Heath, and
General Schomberg at the head of them; Yes, we had, but that good Gentleman,
when he saw the Army, and understood that they were not an Army against the
Dutch, but were designed against London, he fairly quitted his Post, and the
Kingdom at the same time, as being ashamed of your Conspirators Intentions in
the raising that Army: He being a Frenchman, you imagined he would join with
you in bringing in the French mode of Government; and your Irish Papist that
was Major General, was to have brought in the Irish Religion; the latter would
have been true to the uttermost of his power, and Irish Discretion; but the
former was a Protestant and so washed his hands of the business.

You will say, that the French were on our side; yes, Sir, they were; but it is
as plain as the Sun shining at Noonday, that the French in this second War
against the Dutch, intended nothing less than really to assist us, for he was
no Changeling; for he had practiced the same Art at Sea, in the first War the
Conspirators had against the Dutch, when he was in league with them, for his
Navy never did them any service, for his business was only to see us batter one
another; and it is well known, that when he pretended to be on our side, and to
assist us, they then only took an opportunity to sound our Seas, to spy our
Ports, and to learn our Building, and contemplate our way of Fight, to consume
our Navy, and preserve his own to increase his own Commerce; and to order all
so, that the two great Naval Powers of Europe being crushed together, that he
might remain Prince and Lord of the Ocean; and by consequence, Master of all
the Isles, and the Continent into the bargain: To which purpose you, and your
Banditti, furnished him with all possible Opportunities, as I shall by and by
relate; as well to put you in mind of what you, and the rest of the
Conspirators, did do, as to inform those of your Party here that are still
ignorant of the Transactions of those Times.

Notwithstanding that we were always worsted by the Dutch, yet they having a
regard to the preservation of our Religion and Liberties; which you had agreed
to part withal to the French Court, made strong Applications for a Peace; and
the Conspirators for a Supply to carry on the War; and all Endeavors were by
you, and your Friends, used to render the Dutch odious to the Parliament;
witness the Importunities that were used, and great Assurances given: In a
word, nothing but the Voice of War was in their Mouths. But you know that there
was an unhappy Accident fell out, which I shall show you in its proper place,
that made the King put off the Parliament that sat down the 27th of October,
till the 7th of January following; and in the mean time, what Artifices your
Accomplices used for to prepare the Parliament to have an ill Opinion of the
Dutch, you may see in the Speech made by that Villain of a Keeper, who was your
Tool to all intents and purposes; you may remember how he represented the
Dutch, how averse they were to Peace and Reason, and how uncivil and indirect
in their Overtures of Treaty with His Majesty; and therefore a demand was made
of a proportionable and speedy Supply: But the Dutch, who sound themselves
abused and obstructed, and hitherto in a manner excluded from all manner of
Application; and whatever means they had used, was still misinterpreted and ill
represented, they were so wise and industrious, as by this time to have
undeceived most of the Members of Parliament; therefore the House of Commons
were for a Peace to be made with the Dutch; and in order thereunto, would not
part with one Penny judging that to be the best means for a Peace to follow;
and began to call some of your Rogues to an account, that had been principal
Contrivers of that most ungodly War; this was an excellent, but a new way of
negotiating a Peace with the States General. I well remember, that some of your
Friends began to look blew upon the business, looking every day to be called to
an account for their Conspiracy against our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, in
the contriving and carrying on this War, as aforesaid: (By this means, Sir, but
full against your will) I can tell how it grieved your Soul, to see the general
bent of the whole Nation to be against the War, especially because the French
were engaged in it: In a word, The House of Commons advised your Brother to a
Just and an Honorable Peace with the States General, which the King put off
till it could be no longer opposed; then a Peace was concluded with the Dutch;
and when that was done, the Commons still had an evil Eye upon the
Conspirators, and got eight New Regiments to be disbanded; that as the
Exchequer had been shut up, London might not be plundered, and the Citizens
might not be Dragooned out of their Estates, Liberties, and Religion, all at
once. Upon this Peace being concluded with the Dutch, oh, what complaining
Letters did you send to your Friends at St. Omers! charging the King, your
Brother, with the greatest breach of Promises and Oaths made to Madam, the
Princess; and also Letters were sent to Doway, to the Monks there, yet assuring
them you would never leave the Cause so; for you still hoped that his Most
Christian Majesty would do the work, and ruin the Dutch States, that they might
not be a Nest for Rebels and Heretics:

I was saying just now, How could King Charles answer the Cancelling the
Declaration of Indulgence, and the passing the Test-Bill, to Lewis his great
Ally? But now, Sir, I much more wonder, how he could answer to that King, his
Concluding a Peace with the States General of the United Provinces? for this
seemed to me, and many others, the greatest Riddle how this would stand with
the Holy League that he had made with that King to root out Heresy, and to set
up Popery? for could we have but ruined the Dutch, the work had been done to
all intents and purposes.

Your Party well knew, that Charles, your self, and the then Lords of the
Admiratly, fell under the displeasure of the French King by consent; and since
you could not humble the Dutch, how willingly you condescended that the High
and Mighty Monarch of France should have the humbling of the English Nation;
for by your Advice and Procurement it was agreed, That he should let loose his
Privateers among our Merchantmen; so that from that time there was no security
of Commerce and Navigation, notwithstanding the public Amity that was between
the two Crowns; but at Sea they murdered, plundered, made Prize, and
confiscated those they met with; their Pirates laid before the Mouths of our
Rivers, hovered all along upon our Coasts, took our Ships in the very Ports;
insomuch, that we in a manner were blockt up by Water; and if any made
application at his Sovereign Port for Justice, they were insolently baffled, if
not cruelly beaten: This you know, and the Nation well knew, that Charles, your
self, and the Admiralty, were Accomplices in this matter, and that it did turn
to a good account to the Conspirators, as can be made appear even, Sir, to your
face at St. Germains: And this way of using the Nation continued till the
latter end of the Year 1676. even from our concluding the Peace with the
States General of the United Provinces.

Was this all? No, this way of Pyrating was only a mark of his Most Christian
Majesty's Displeasure. It was no reparation for our good King Charles's not
keeping his word with him; therefore all diligence was used to supply him with
Recruits, and those who would go voluntarily over, were encouraged; others that
would not, were pressed, imprisoned, and carried over by main force, even as
the Parliament here was ready to set down, notwithstanding all the former
frequent Applications to the contrary: Nay, yet further, How did you empty all
the Magazines of the Kingdom to furnish the French with all sorts of
Ammunition? of which, Sir, a particular Account was taken, and can be given, if
demanded.

It is, Sir, well known, that King Charles having broken the Tripple League,
and made a War upon the Dutch without Cause, and had made Peace with them; he
would never enter into a League Offensive and Defensive with them; yet he could
make one with the French, tho he had taken the Kingdom's Money to enter into an
actual War: Nay, that Conspirator Conventry, had the League Offensive and
Defensive, made with the French King, in his Pocket, when the House of Commons
voted the Money for an actual War with France.

It may be, Sir, you may say that King Charles did make an Alliance with
Holland; and the Articles of the League were, on April 30. 1678. laid before
the House by the King's especial direction: It may be so; But will your Party
call that a League Offensive and Defensive, fit for a Parliament of England to
agree to? No; for see how the House resented that Sham-League; and to this end
observe their Vote, May the 4th, 1678. Resolved, That the League Offensive and
Defensive with the States General of the United Provinces, with the Articles
relating thereunto, are not pursuant to the Addresses of this House, nor
consistent with the Good and Safety of the Kingdom. That was one Resolve. But
there was a second Resolution of the House upon the same day. Resolved, That it
is the Opinion of this House, That His Majesty be humbly advised and desired
forthwith to enter into the present Alliances and Confederations with the
Emperor, the King of Spain, and with the States General of the United
Provinces, for the vigorous carrying on the War against the French King, and
for the good and safety of His Majesty's Kingdoms; and particularly, That
effectual Endeavors be used for continuing the States General in the present
Confederation; And that it be agreed by all Parties Confederate, to prohibit
all Trade between their Subjects, and Countries, and France, and all other
Dominions of the French King. And that no Commodities of France, or of the
Dominions of the French King, be imported into their Countries from any place
whatsoever: And also that all endeavors be used to invite all other Princes
and States into the said Confederation; and that no Truce or Peace be made, or
agreed to, with the French King, by His Majesty, or any of the Confederates,
without the general Consent of all the Confederates had first therein. Both
which Resolves were sent to His Majesty by the Members of Parliament that were
of the Privy Council; and what a message they receive on the 6th of May
following, shows plainly his unwillingness to enter into League with the
Confederates against France: And, Sir, you know the Reason why, Because the
Interest and Religion of Lewis the French King, was the Interest and Religion
of the King your Brother, and your self, and Conspirators.

But, Sir, that which testifies your Brother's Obstinacy, is refusing to enter
into such a League Offensive and Defensive with the States General of the
United Provinces, etc. For notwithstanding the Treaty of Peace with the States
General, had not you, and your Conspirators, furnished the French King with Men
and Arms, and Ammunition, against the very Tenure and Intent of the said
Treaty? Therefore the Lords and Commons join in an Address on the 10th of
November, 1675. in which they earnestly pressed the King, your Brother, to call
home his Subjects from the Service of the French King; but instead of that,
more were sent, and many of them by force, or fraud, call to mind the Address
made by the House of Commons, on May 20, 1675. where great Complaints were made
by the House, of the Conspirators supplying the French King with Men, not a
few, but considerable numbers, to the great discouragement of the Confederates
engaged in the Common Cause against that proud Monster of Mankind. So the Vote
of May 23, 1677. Resolved, That an humble Address be presented to His Majesty,
That he would be pleased to enter into a League Offensive and Defensive with
the States General of the United Provinces; and to make such other Alliances
with such other Confederates as His Majesty shall think fit, against the Growth
and Power of the French King, and preservation of the Netherlands. And what was
done upon all these Addresses? truly, very little; but up starts a League made
with the Dutch, that was not worth one Farthing; and how that Sham-League was
kept, we all very well remember.

But as a further proof of your Brother's Being unwilling to enter into any
firm and hearty League with the Confederates engaged against the French King,
remember this; Th^^ through yours, and the Power the rest of the Conspirators
had over him, he could never be brought to enter into, and be engaged in an
actual War with France, notwitstanding all the humble Applications made to him
by Parliaments; nay, tho he passed a Bill to enter into a War with France, and
had the benevolence given in that Bill in order to the same, yet a firm League
was made with France, the Interest and Religion of the French, King and the
King, your Brother, and your self, being all one.

In the first place be pleased, Sir, to remember, that the Parliament that was
adjourned to the Third of December, 1677. and then put off till the Fifteenth
of January 1677/78; but that day being come, both Houses met, but by a Message
to the House of Commons they are ordered to adjourn till the Twenty eighth, and
the pretended reason the then King gave (or rather you, and your Conspirators)
that his Majesty had matters of great Importance in order to the satisfaction
of their Addresses for the Preservation of Flanders; but it so fell out, that
things were not then so ripe, as in a few days they would be; therefore it was
his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure that the House do immediately Adjourn
till the Twenty eighth of the same Month.

The Message was very Grateful to the House of Commons, and to many others, who
understood not the Conspiracy, for the design was clear another thing than what
they had conceived. The day of their meeting comes, and they are entertained
with a Speech full of good Words, yet he Reprimands them for their distrust;
and to show them how they were mistaken, they are told what a great care the
King had taken of the Protestant Religion: And in order thereunto, he had
concluded a Match with the Lady Mary, to the Prince of Orange; (but you know,
Sir, tha^ it was full sore against his and your Wills) a Prince Professing the
same Religion w^^^ us (which by King Charles's good leave) was a great mistake;
for I dare say that the Prince of Orange, now our King, never Received the
Sacrament from the Church of Rome in all his days, which to my certain
knowledge King Charles did, and afterward Received it from the hands of a
Bishop of the Church of England the self-same day. But to go on with his
Speech, he told them that the Prince of Orange was a Prince engaged in Arms to
Defend the Common Cause of Chridendom; and so he goes on and talks of
Alliances, and forgets not to call for a fresh supply, that he might carry on
his Alliances made, and to be made. Well, Sir, What was the effect of this Most
Gracious Speech? I remember that the House in return made an humble but a sharp
Address, and the Speech was not answered with Thanks in General, but only in
Particular, relating to the King's care he had of the Protestant Religion;
which Address was Concluded on January 31st. following.

In that Address they promise the King Supplies, provided he would enter into
an actual War with France, and join in with the Confederates, and Exclaim
against the growing Greatness of the French King; and that if it must be Peace,
that they would have the French King left in no better condition than he was
upon the Conclusion of the Pyrenean Treaty.

I remember when this Address was made, I was at St. Omers, but we had news
from Coleman how you resented it; nay, Sir, it is well known that the Address
stuck terribly in your stomach, as well as the Match between the Prince of
Orange, and the Lady Mary (our Late Gracious Queen) by which, Sir, you could
not but easily perceive that the House of Commons had got some scent of the
Damnable Plot that was carrying on against our Religion, Laws, and Liberty; and
your underhand-dealing with France and the Popish Interest. But that men might
not understand you too well, your Agents were busy both in City and Country to
n^^^ish a Report of Alliances with the Confederates, and a War with France; and
so big they pretended to be of the War with France, that they avowed the
certainty of it both in words and in Print; all this I say was to keep the
Nation in horrid Ignorance: To this end, Sir, you hired a Tool that had pawned
his Soul for Bread, to write against the French King; but all was not gold that
glistered, there was no Money like to come, because that the House was resolved
to be satisfied that the Alliances were made, and the War proclaimed: This,
Sir, you, and your Party, looked upon as a great hardship put upon the King,
and that the House of Commons took too much upon them; but your Rogues made use
of this Address to be a poor Cripple to beg Money even from France it self; you
know who undertook in that Affair to get Money from France upon the strength of
that Address, and was in a fair way of succeeding, had not something happened
between the Cup and the Lip: In a word; Nothing but War with France is talked
of; the French is content it should be a Bill passed for a War, and Money was
given; the French King concurred with you in it; a Law passes against the
Importation of French Goods, he wills that too; for you had so ordered the
matter, that notwithstanding that Act, by the diligent care of the Officers of
the Custom-House, there was more French Goods brought into the Custom-House
than before.

But, Sir, you were not idle all this time; for while the People of England
were talking of War and Alliances, you, and your Conspirators, were busy both
at home and abroad; oh, the multitude of Messages that were sent to Rome and
France! and you know what Advice was given you; that upon the account of the
pretended War, you should raise Forces; for the Priests doubted not, through
the assistance of the Saints, the work would be done; you raised Forces, and
got Money, tho for other ends than the Parliament gave it; Was this, Sir, to
carry on the War, or to go on in making of Alliances? you know it was that
Popery, and the French Government might be advanced both at one and the same
time; so that, Sir, I have justified that head, the unwillingness of King
Charles's entering into, and keeping League with those who would uphold and
maintain the Protestant Religion; but chose rather to make Alliances with
France, yea and keep them too, with a King that had a mighty mind to destroy it.

11. I come to the last Passage that I proposed in the beginning of this
Memento to treat about, and that is this; That as long as King Charles lived,
what a dismal and difficult task had this Nation to suppress you, and your
wicked Popish, and Popishly affected Accomplices? and that when he died, you
were like to be his Successor; and therefore the Commons took this into serious
consideration; and upon the whole, that the state of Religion was desperate;
and that the Popish Conspirators would certainly be advanced, and that there
would be nothing less than the Nation to all intents and purposes ruined;
therefore, I pray, Sir, remember the Vote passed, Ap. 27.1679.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the
hopes of his coming to the Crown such, has given the greatest encouragement to
the present Conspiracy and designs of the Papists against the King, and the
Protestant Religion.

Sir, This Vote would have ground and beaten an ordinary Subject to Powder, but
it had not that effect upon you, and your Party; your Party was so prevalent at
that time, your Popish Party I mean, that you, and your Conspirators threw off
all these Difficulties with scorn and impudence enough; for it is plain enough,
that the Popish Party had such an influence upon King Charles, as to favor
them, notwithstanding the notoriety of those Crimes both they and you stood
charged withal: For,

1. The Popish Party had a great interest at Court upon the pretense of their
pretended Loyalty in the time of the Civil War between Charles the First and
his Subjects: And again, some few of them were instrumental in the escape of
his Son Charles the Second from Worcester, and the seeming readiness that was
in that Party for the Restoration of the said Charles the Second in the Year
1660. this gave them not only a share of peace and Quiet under Charles's
Government, but procured from him a farther degree of respect unto them; by
this means they had a very great advantage of carrying on their Designs against
the Interest of the Nation, and Peace of the Government; and this was the
Argument, Sir, that you used for that part of your Banditti, in order to join
your Forces and strengthen your Party. Give me leave, Sir, to observe to you,
how wicked a thing it was in you to embolden such a party of Rogues to ruin the
Nation; you used to say they were always loyal, and therefore how many times
did you procure great Indulgences from the Government, against the express
Letter of the Law, for them, while the rigor of the Law was let loose upon
other Dissenters, who yet continued more quiet and loyal under their Pressures
and Provocations, than those under Favors and Caresses; and did not the King,
your Brother, hazard the Hearts and Affections of his best Subjects, and much
of Royal Honor (if ever he had any) in appearing for his Indulgence of March
15. 1671/2 with frustration, to engage, if possible, these everlasting holy
Cutthroats; but where was the Loyalty of these your Popish Conspirators? For,

1. Was it not at their instigation (when they were in a Conspiracy against the
Peace of this Nation with that Arch-Traytor Laud, that was sometime Archbishop
of Canterbury) that the Uniformity of Service that was in England, was against
all Law, Justice and Conscience, pressed upon the Kingdom of Scotland, which
occasioned that breach with that Nation, that was not without great difficulty,
and vast expense, made up to the dishonor of King Charles the First, and the
English Nation. You cannot but remember, you have been informed who were the
Prime Sticklers upon the occasion of that Service Book, and other strange
Impositions laid upon that people to foment the War between the two Kingdoms.
For in your Letter to Ashby, the Rector of the English College at St. Omers,
dated March 17, 1676/7. to supply you with a dozen of such men as were used in
Scotland in 1637, 1638, 1639. that would not stick at any thing to carry on the
Catholic Cause; in which you said, that his Majesty of France, your Brother,
and your self, were engaged, for you then did want them; and upon the receipt
of your Letter the Scotch College at Doway was consulted, and 12 men were
dispatched over for England, for what Ends and Purposes you know well enough.

But to return to the Point in hand; The Priests that were sent into Scotland
in the time of your Father, Charles the First, you have been informed that they
were sent by Cardinal Richlieu into that ancient Kingdom to inflame the
Differences between the two Nations; and the Motives upon which that great
Incendiary was so earnest to kindle a War in the Dominions of your Father, were
sufficiently understood by those that lived, and were actually engaged in
public Negotiations, who have been so just as to leave them upon record to
future Generations; and they were the very same Motives that you, and your
Party, made the grounds for the subversion of the Protestant Religion, and our
English Government; these were your loyal Men that would have brought in a
Religion upon us by a conversion of us with Blood, and a Baptism with fire; but
the Good Lord, I hope, will keep the Land from the one, and this great City
from the other.

2. Your Conspirators were men of undoubted Loyalty; and this Englishmen will
believe, if you can make them; because of their great zeal in commencing and
carrying that never to be forgotten bloody Massacre in Ireland, wherein so many
thousand Protestants lost their Lives, and were by your Hell-born Cutthroats
basely and barbarously murdered: Nay, as a testimony of their Loyalty, they
renounced your Father's Authority, and the Authority of his Lord Lieutenant of
that Kingdom, and assumed the Royal Authority to themselves, owing only a
dependence upon the Pope, and his Nuncio; yet these men for that piece of
barbarity, were by you, and your Brother, recommended to several Princes, as
men that had ventured their Lives, and lost their Estates, for promoting the
Catholic Apostolic Religion in Ireland by the direction and express Command
of your Royal Father of blessed Memory; and many of them in their old age were,
at your Brother's request, and yours, made Priests to get Bread for that piece
of Service.

3. The Loyalty of your Conspirators did highly appear in that accession they
had to the Death of Charles the First, they did contrive it; and this has been
made appear to their shame and disgrace (if ever they were capable of any);
that King was himself informed a little before he was executed, that the
Jesuits, at a general Meeting at Paris, in revenge for his condescending in the
Treaty at the Isle of Wight to pass some Bills in prejudice of them, and the
Romish Religion, had unanimously resolved by the Power, and Interest, and
Influence, that they had in, and upon the Army, to bring him to Justice, and
get him executed; and accordingly, when the stroke was given, both one that was
a Romish Priest and Confessor, brandished his Sword, and proclaimed that now
their greatest Enemy was cut off, and destroyed. I suppose, Sir, you, and your
Party, will be convinced, if you observe a Passage from one that knew those
Transanctions, and see what he says in his Letter to a Reverend Divine of the
Church of England; it bears date, Aug. 9.1673. This I may safely say, and will
do it confidently, That many Arguments did create a violent suspicion, very
near convincing Evidences, that the Irreligion of the Papists was chiefly the
occasion of the murder of that Prince; the odium whereof they would file to
the Account of the Protestant Religion. However, Sir, your Popish Conspirators
having not only escaped the legal Arraignments upon this account, but having
since the Restoration of K. Charles the IId, been esteemed by your self, and
some other pretended Friends of that King, they have thereupon arrived at more
respect; and to carry on your damnable Designs, they have enjoyed more peace in
their Persons and Estates, than they were in possession of at any time since
the Reformation.

4. But how little they deserved this Honor and Peace both in their Persons
and Estates, you may see in a fourth Particular; and that was in the Escape of
the King, your Brother, from Worcester, 1651. how did they above all men,
endeavor to betray and sacrifice that King unto the hands of his Enemies; And
who was to pay the 1000 l. promised for his being discovered, and taken, but
Father Joseph Symmonds, and Father Carleton Compton, both Jesuits; and whence
that Money came, Sir, you well know, as did the Queen, your Mother; for you
know, that your Mother, and your self, was in a plot against his Life, that you
might wear the Name and Title of a King, as being the more likely to perform
what your Brother had so lustily promised to the Popish Party. It is true, Sir,
that one or two of the Romish Persuasion, amongst many loyal and faithful
Protestants, both Male and Fem^le, might then have contributed to that King's
Deliverance; but such, Sir, have been by your self, and Party, well chidden,
reproached, and discountenanced, and called Fools, for this grain of Loyalty,
more owing to their English Blood, than Romish Principles.

5. Since my hand is in, give me leave to add a fifth Instance of their Loyalty
to your Family. That Popish Lord is not unknown, nor yet forgotten, who brought
a Petition to the late Protector, signed by about 500 Principal Papists in
England, wherein they promised upon condition of a Toleration of the Popish
Religion here by a Law, their joint Resolution to abjure and exclude the Family
of the Stewarts for ever from enjoying the Crown. This, Sir, you know startled
you when you heard of that Attempt; a man that has but an Irish Understanding,
may easily judge from hence of the Loyalty of that Party of men; I would
willingly, Sir, appear to any one of your dear Joys, and stand by his Judgment
in that Case.

6. One Point more, and then, Sir, I shall have done upon this Head; and that
is the Loyalty of your Popish Conspirators, who to ingratiate themselves with
the Government of the said Protector, procured Manning to be a Spy upon your
Brother; and he was not only allowed well by that Party by your direction, but
also had a very Bountiful Pension too, by the said Protector; but he was in due
time found out, and executed by your Brother; he was of the same Red Letter
with your self; and therefore, when dead, he had Masses sung for him as the
usual Reward and Plaster.

There were other Specimens of their Loyalty, but I forbear to mention them
now, because there are some other things to be discoursed with you; but this I
say, That we should have forgotten and forgiven all these soul Proceedings of
your dearly beloved Popish Party; and we should not have envied the Security
they enjoyed, or the Favors through your procurement they had attained to;
provided they had not abused them in joining with you to subvert the Protestant
Religion and Government, in turning the one into downright Popery, and the
other into French Slavery; but alas, good men and true, such an opportunity of
promoting the Catholic Religion was not to be lost; they having a Prince
converted to such a degree of Zeal and Piety, as not to regard any thing in the
World in comparison of the Conversion of England, that has a long time been
oppressed, and miserably harassed with Herery and Schism; to accomplish which,
you would assassinate the King's Person, destroy our City, murder his
Majesty's Subjects, subvert our Religion, and disturb the Peace of Mankind; and
your present Design that is discovered, does prove beyond all manner of
objection and doubt, That that, Sir, throw your Brother's, and your grace and
favor, they did then carry on their Designs for advancing the Power of the
Pope and French King, to advance the Religion of the one, and the Interest and
Government of the other; none daring to suggest the least thing to bring them
under jealousy, who would not be aspersed for being Maligners of the King's
best Friends, and your Fellow-Conspirators; till one appeared, and took the
Popish and French Interest by the Collar, and gave it such a deadly wound, that
it could not recover it self to this day, but you were even with him for it,
when you usurped the Government; and so I conclude this Head.

2. A second thing that gave you, and your Popish Conspirators, such an
advantage for the carrying on you wicked Designs and Purposes, was the unhappy
Divisions amongst us poor Protestants; for as the Conspirators improved that
little Stock of Credit they had by being for Charles the First in the Civil
War, against himself and Parliament; and the Priests, Jesuits and Friars made
use of that Credit to reduce us to the Obedience of the Sea of Rome; so you,
and the rest of the Popish Crew, made use of our Divisions amongst our selves,
to carry on the same Design. Now, Sir, there were two main things which did
greatly administer to this unhappy Division.

1. The Parties divided were come to a more equal Balance, as to numbers, on
each side respectively, than at any Season heretofore: For, Sir, consider this,
That during the Reigns of Q. Elizabeth, K. James I. and K. Charles I. the
Dissenters, from the Established way of the Church of England, were but few, in
comparison of those who were for Prelacy, and the Rites and Ceremonies required
by Law in their Worship and Service of God; so that there being little or no
jealousy of any danger to the Church of England from the Protestant Dissenters,
how zealous soever they might be in their way; yet the watchfulness of the
Prelates, and their Curates, were chiefly exercised upon those of the Romish
Communion: But the Protestant Dissenters since are like to the People of
Israel, in the Land of Egypt, very much multiplied, to that degree, that they
are come nearer to the other Party, than heretofore they did; the main care
therefore of the Prelates, and their inferior Clergy, together with old Roger
their Guide, did much abate toward their old Friends of the Church of Rome,
and exerted the same to the Protestant Dissenters.

2. But another great Cause of the dividing the Protestant Interest, was the
very severe, but just Entertainment, the Prelates, with the Scandalous and
Ignorant Clergy met with from the Protestant Dissenters in the late Times of
Reformation; when they were restored by the return of your Brother from Exile,
they measured the same again to the Protestant Dissenters, when they had the
Law on their side, and your Grace and Favor into the bargain; they remembered
all the old Scores, by which great Animosities and Heats have been between
Party and Party; the Prelates aiming then at the ruin of the Dissenters for
aiming at the reformation of Prelacy and Superstition. By this, I say, a
difference is risen, that in all humane probability can never be made up.

We cannot but from hence very easily, not only by Reason, but by Experience,
gather the great use you, and the rest of the Popish Party, made of them to
carry on their Designs for the subverting the Religion and Government of this
Nation: For, as the pretense of these Divisions has been made use of as an
Argument to pervert such as knew not that the Divisions of your Synagogue of
Rome are more numerous, and their Fewds more irreconcilable than ours; so
subtle have your Conspirators been, by winding themselves into all Companies;
nay, mustering themselves in all Parties; endeavored both to heighten the
Differences, to make their Annimosities not only hotter, but more immortal; and
while the one Party of Protestants have been crying out against the other for
their Schism, and the other crying out against them for their Superstition and
Persecution; you, and your Party, to the reproach of both, were undermining
that holy Faith which they equally center in; and carrying a Design of
destroying the one as well as the other, they being, in you esteem, both
equally Heretics.

3. A third thing that contributed much to your bringing of Popery and Slavery
into these Kingdoms, was the general Profaneness and Debauchery which had
overspread these Nations beyond what in any former Reign had been observed.
Sir, You in this, by, and with the Consent, Advice, and Example of the King,
your Brother; and your Conspirators followed the Counsel of Cardinal Mazarine,
in the Year 1654. at Paris, when the Popish Party were but at a low ebb in
England; That the only way to accomplish the Work in England, was to debauch
them first, and make them Atheists; and when that was done, they would soon
make good Papists; for this you well knew, and so did your Popish Party, That a
profane, debauched Person is truly of no Religion, and therefore indifferent
to seem to be of any, as Interest and Temptation sways him; so it is plain,
that no man cares to be of that Religion, which condemns all those Ways and
Practices which he is resolved to pursue with his utmost vigor.

Do but take notice that the Popish Religion was such as would allow them in
all those wicked ways to which their vicious Inclinations led them, and does
secure them from the horror and dread of Eternal Wrath and Vengeance; for your
Religion makes those to be no Sins, tho committed by some against the express
Command of Christ himself: If they are such things as the Word of God has set
a mark upon as enormous, then they are made Venial Offenses only; and if they
are Sins which your Synagogue calls Mortal, which are indeed the most daring
and prodigious Enormities, through their Doctrines of Penance and Absolutions,
and Papal Indulgences, you are secure from the Pains of the damned in the other
World.

By this means, Sir, you, and your Conspirators, increased the number of your
Converts, and strengthened your hands so far, that you boasted to Beddingfield,
your Confessor, That you did not doubt: but in a very few years to have such a
number of Catholic Gentlemen, and others, tha you feared not but to have a
Catholic Army sufficient to suppress the Factious Protestant Party, in case
they should rebel; this saying of yours Beddingfield the Jesuit communicated
to the Jesuits at Wild-House upon the 24th of April, 1678.

Nay, Your Zeal was such for the Popish Religion, that poor Mr. Jones, your
Chaplain-Naval, and Domestic, for opposing Popery, was by you turned out of
his Employ, and left as a Sacrifice to that wicked Prelate of Winchester, Dr.
Morlay, for saying, That it was his fault that your Duchess turnest Papist;
and that the said Morlay might have prevented the Duchess of York 's being
seduced to Popery, if he pleased; and that her turning Papist was to be laid at
his door. You therefore would not for a long time pay him his Wages, tho that
most Christian Prelate had sued him upon the Statute de Scandulis Magnatum, to
the poor man's utter ruin; for his Living was extended, and he left to perish
for want of Bread: And he had never received his Arrears due to him in your
Service, had I not shamed old Sir Allen Apsley publicly in Westminster Hall
for it, you pretending it was referred to him. Moreover, I told him, If he did
not pay Jones, I would fetch it out of his old Bones; it was a time Sir, when
Men began to observe your steps, and perceive your Designs, so Jones, much
against your Will, got his Money, and after that Jones had suffered several
years Famine from that Villanons Old Priest of our Church, and he could not
hold his Living from him any longer, he most Graciously delivered Jones from
the extent; but Jones being so ill used by Morley, he died within a year or two
after he had his Living restored; but by the way, Sir, by the Duchess of York,
I mean her that was the Daughter of the Earl of Clarendon, sometimes Lord
Chancellor, but the two Ladies your Daughters, were by God's Providence saved
from being corrupted by you, and your Conspirators.

Now Sir it remains that I tell you, or rather put you in mind what Steps your
Conspirators took to ruin these Nations; they were, Sir, your Favorites, and!
of the same Religion, and of the same Interest with your self, for you having
made such Advantages from the three Heads beforementioned, and by these means
strengthened you Hands to dispose you to do the Three Kingdoms what mischief
you pleased: Therefore it follows, that you now be put in mind what Steps you
took for the ruin of the Protestant Religion and the Established Government of
these three Nations. I shall only name these few that follow.

1. The first great Step that your Conspirators took to the ruin of these
Nations, and subjugate them to Hell and Rome, was that wicked Fire of London;
which was begun, and carried on by your Popish Conspirators, to ruin this great
and populous City, that had been for many years the Bulwark of the Protestant
Religion; which they completed without the least remorse or pity: You your
self beheld its Flames with Joy, and viewed its Ruins with much rejoicing, as
old Gray the Jesuit was pleased to say in a Letter of his in November, 1666.
to the Jesuits at St. Omers. Sir, I will not charge you with the actual burning
of London, because it was below you to be engaged in the very Act; and you had
Rogues mean enough to serve you in so base a piece of Villainy; but of this I am
certain, That when any were taken in the Fact, you your self discharged them;
and not only so, but you, and your Guards actually hindered many of the poor
Citizens from saving their Goods from the Flames, and protected those that did
aid and abet the Fire; and some of them you preferred; and since you usurped
the Throne, you gave them marks of your Favor: As for instance, the Chyrurgeon
that lived in the Savoy, a Frenchman, that went by the name of Ch^queaux, and
others, whose Names occur not to my memory; and several Irish-men in gaged in
that Hellish Villainy, you caused to be preferred. Upon the whole, Whether you
had not a hand in that Fire, I leave all the World, and your own Conscience, to
judge.

It will not be unnecessary Sir, to put you in mind of the account I have had
of it from some of those who were Conspiratos, and were engaged in the Fact,
Richard Strange, a great Favorite of yours, and sometimes your Father.
Confessor in Ordinary, used it as a great Argument to me to go on to assist the
Design of the Society, who told me that they got 14000 l. in the Fire of London
in the Year 1666. and not only so, but you your self was in their Counsels when
it was determined, yea, and your Brother too, which I durst not for my life
discover, because of the Promise I had made to Prince Ruport, not to mention
any thing to the Parliament that might touch the King, but he afterward
heartily repented of his giving, and I did also of taking that Counsel, and so
you escaped; for I could not Charge you but must Charge him too: But the Prince
knew of it, and so did King Charles himself; but this let me tell you, That in
a Letter of yours Signed Lieutenant, to Father Courtney, of Aug. 12. 1667. you
did declare your Resentment of the Dutch siring our Ships at Chatham, and what
a dishonor it was to the King and his Friends, but this you said was your
Comfort, that London's Pride was sufficiently pulled down; and as the burning
the Ships at Chatham had been the cause of much trouble at Court, but it was
much allayed by the hopes that Factious City would scarce be built again,
unless to the ruin of the Undertakers; the Fanatics (said you) may now studdy
again the number of the Beast. Langhorne that had a hand in the Fire by being
Privy to it, who solicited King Charles more in his behalf, than your self and
employed Portsmouth that French Spy and Whore to use her Interest to procure
his Pardon.

I shall add the Promise that I had of your Favor by Sir Allen your Trusty
Tool, if I would spare that part of my Evidence concerning John Grove, about
his Firing of Southwark, and how you solicited for his Life in conjunction
with Portsmouth, you cannot forget I am sure; and the King asked you whether
you had a desire to bring the whole Nation about his Ears, for after the Firing
of Southwark was Sworn against him, the King told You and Portsmouth too, he
durst not Pardon Grove. You cannot forget Conyers the Benedictine Monk, who
whilst you were a Votary of that Order, was one of your Father Confessors; him
you brought into White Hall though Evidence was given in against him of being
to be one of the Murderers of King Charles the Second; and the King himself
told the then Lord Chancellor, That if there was no other Evidence against him
but that of his being to have a hand in his Murder, the said Conyers would
surrender himself; but the Lord Chancellor told the King, That there was other
Evidence against him, of Matters of high Concern; and the Lord Chancellor told
you in your Ear, That he would be Charged with the Fire of London, at which you
were much appaled, and went to Conyers who you had planted in the Dark Lobby
before the Council Chamber, that opened into the Privy Gallery, and you came
out to Conyers, and bad him shift for himself; and when the Council sat down I
was called in, and asked if I could make out any thing against Conyers as to
the Fire of London, I told the King I could, and so Sir you must stand Charged
in some respects to have had a hand in Firing of London.

2. A second Step which you and the unwearied Enemies of the Protestant
Religion in these Realms took toward the Extirpation of it, and the Subverting
the Government was, to interest the French King in your Councels; and you
having in a great measure engaged him to assist you with Money, and with what
else might be convenient for the Executing your Wicked Enterprises, I must
justify this Point from your Letter to Lechaise the French King's Confessor,
wherein you say thus: H^ Most Christian Majesty offered me most Generously his
Friendship, and the use of his Purse to my Assistance against the D^signs of my
Enemies and His: And professed unto me, That His Interest and Mine were so
clearly linkt together, that those who opposed the one, should be lo^kt upon as
the Enemies of the other.

Arlington, tho a Papist in his heart, yet he was not of your Interest,
therefore the French King told you his Opinion of that noble Lord; therefore
you say thus to the French King's Confessor, and told me moreover his Opinion
of my Lord Arlington and the Parliament, which is, That neither the one, nor
the other, is in his Interest or mine, and thereupon he desired me to make such
Proposals as I should think fit in this Conjuncture.

Sir, give me leave to observe this to you, the Jesuits in the Reigns of Q.
Elizabeth, and of K. James l. till the Match of his Son with France, labored
nothing more diligently than the advancing the King of Spain to the Universal
Monarchy of Europe; but that Crown being by various ways and means much
weakened and rendered wholly incapable of aspiring any farther in that matter,
the false and treacherous Jesuits have of late years applied themselves with
mighty diligence to serve the Interest, and to promote the Grandeur of the
French Monarch. In which your own Engagements do sufficiently appear, for how
have you with those firstborn of Pride and Treachery kindled those Flames of
War which have not only laid the most flourishing Provinces in Europe waste,
and rendered the Kingdoms of Europe Fields of Blood, and with them do still
nourish them to the Ruin and the Destruction of so many millions of men.

For, Sir, did not you and your Party, by the Interests you had in almost all
the Courts of the Princes of Christendom, influence some Princes to a
Neutrality, and others to an open Confederacy with France, so that now the
French Monarchy is in truth become very troublesome to all his Neighbors.

But, Sir, give me leave to make this Observation to you, that the French King
being arrived at this formidable Greatness, which he has for several Years
last past stood in; you that plotted and contrived the ruin of these three
Nations, drew him into your Councels, and obtained his promise of Assistance to
the rooting out of Heresy, and nourishing a misunderstanding between the King
your Brother, and his People; and this you and your Conspirators conceived to
be a main advance toward the attaining your wicked Ends and Purposes; for
otherwise you would not have so much labored the compassing that point by your
self, and your Servant, Coleman, who was taken in the midst of his pious
Labor, and rewarded with the Triple-tree to your great satisfaction; for if he
had lived, he might have told all, and some body else might have tasted Death
in his place.

But, Sir, I must come closer to the Point in hand, that is, your interesting
the French King in your Councils; and in your Letter to the said Father
Confessor to the French King, you say, I was much satisfied to see his most
Christian Majesty altogether of my Opinion, so I made him answer by the same
means he used to write to me, that is, by Coleman, who addressed himself to
Father Ferier, and entirely agreed to his most Christian Majesty, as well to
what respect he had to the Union of our Interests, as the unusefulness of my
Lord Arlington, and the Parliament, in order to the Service of the King my
Brother, and his most Christian Majesty, and that it was necessary to make use
of our joint and utmost use of our Credits to prevent the success of those evil
Designs resolved on by the Lord Arlington and the Parliament, against his most
Christian Majesty and my self, which on my side I promise really to perform; of
which, since that time I have given reasonable good proof.

I pray, Sir, what was your Opinion? It was the French King's Opinion, which
was that your Interests were so clearly linkt together, that those that opposed
the one, should be looked upon as Enemies to the other. Did you agree with the
French King in any thing else? Yes, That the Lord Arlington and the Parliament,
were not in your Interest, nor in the Interest of the French King. And I agree
with you, Sir, in omnibus; but what of this? Then the Designs of Arlington, and
of the Parliament must be prevented: What, I pray, were those? They were to
engage the King; if possible, to enter into a League offensive and defensive
with the States General of the United Provinces, and to join with the
Confederate Princes, and to enter into an actual War with France, and to
advance the Prince of Orange by marrying your eldest Daughter to him: This last
was done full sore against yours, and your Brother's Will, but the other were
not done; so zealoufly you had engaged your Brother in the French Interest.

That these were the Lord Arlington's designs, and the designs of that Part of
the Parliament that gave themselves Leisure to design, is apparent from what
you say in the same Letter, thus, Moreover, I made some Proposals which I
thought necessary to bring to pass what we were obliged to undertake; assuring
him, that nothing could be so firmly established, our Interest with the King my
Brother, as that very same Offer of the help of his Purse, by which means I had
much Reason to hope to persuade him to the Dissolving of the Parliament, and to
make void the Designs of my Lord Arlington, who works incessantly to advance
the Interest of the Prince of Orange and the Hollanders, and to lessen that of
the King your Master.

And did my Lord Arlington do so? It seems he did; and I think it was the only
good thing that ever he did; for which he was to be destroyed, and the
Parliament dissolved, and every thing that stood in the way of France and your
self; nay, a Parliament that is not in your Interest must not stand. We have
seen into my Lord Arlington's Designs, I pray, what were yours and the French
King's, for which you had made some Proposals, and compare them together: Yours
and the French King's Designs were to ruin the Protestant Religion, as Coleman
in his Letter to the Pope's Internuncio at Bruxels, Aug. 21. 74. But
Arlington's was to lessen, and if possible, he was to destroy the Interest of
the French King. You had a mighty Work upon your hands, no less than the
Conversion of three Kingdoms, and the utter Subduing of a pestilent Heresy,
which had for some time domineered over this Northern part of the World: and
you had never so great hopes of it, since your Queen Mary 's Days. The Lord
Arlington he had a mighty Work in hand too, and that was to advance the
Interest of the Prince of Orange and the Dutch, who were much in danger of
being subdued by the French King. You for your Designs, next to God Almighty,
you relied upon the mighty Mind of his Most Christian Majesty, for his Aid and
Assistance: But Arlington did rely upon the mighty Mind of an English
Parliament, for their Aid and Assistance. Your Design was to get the Parliament
dissolved and never to have another; His design was to have this dissolved, and
speedily to call another: Yours was for advancing the French Interest; and his,
tho he was a Papist, was for advancing the Interest of the Confederates, and to
lessen the Interest of the French King: You were for Three hundred thousand
Pounds, advanced by the French King, to give the Protestant Religion such a
Blow as it could not subsist; but he, for nothing, was to give the French King
and his Interest such a Blow as that should not subsist. The French King, by La
Chaise, gives you and your Secretary thanks for your Zeal and Service in order
to the promoting the Popish Religion: and I do not question but the Prince of
Orange and the Dutch were as thankful, by their Ministers at our Court, to the
Lord Arlington and his Party, for promoting their Cause and Interest with the
Parliament: Your design was to establish a good Understanding between the King
your Brother and his Most Christian Majesty and your self, which you say
Arlington and his Party endeavored, by a thousand Deceits, to break, to the
end they might supplant all three of you; but Arlington's Design was to
establish a good Understanding and Intelligence between the Parliament, the
Prince of Orange, and the States General: You say that Arlington and his Party
had used a thousand Deceits to carry on his Rogueries to betray the Councils of
France and England; and you and your Party used Ten thousand Rogueries to
betray England, Holland, and the Prince of Orange to the French King: You said,
through the Deceits of the Lord Arlington, your Designs succeeded not, but
through your Violence and Folly, his Designs succeeded to the Honor of God and
the Happiness of the three Kingdoms and you are living upon the Charity of that
Monster of Mankind whose Interest you advanced whilst you were here.

But you will say, what is all this to the Purpose? Yes, it is much to the
Purpose. You may see that the Nation knows well how you interested the French
King in all your Councils, to change the Protestant Religion into downright
Popery, and the well established Government into French Arbitrary Power; and
were not your Party grown to such a height of Insolence, that they boasted
openly of the Aid and Assistance the French was to give for the setting up the
Romish Religion.

3. A Third Step you took to ruin the Protestant Religion and the well
established Government of England, was your unhappy Match with the Daughter of
Modena. I must put you in mind what the Opinion of the then Parliament
entertained of that Match, and that you may see in these following Particulars.

1. That it would disquiet the Minds of the Protestants at home, and fill them
with endless Jealousies and Discontents, and would bring the King your Brother
into such Alliances abroad as might prove highly prejudicial, if not
destructive, to the Protestant Religion it self. Now Sir, it was your main
Design to inflame the hearts of the People, and put them upon a Ferment. And
you engaged the King in the said Marriage, as might put him upon those
Alliances as might weaken his Esteem with his People, and strengthen you and
your Popish Cut-^hroats in your Conspiracy against the Peace and Tranquillity of
the Nation: For, Sir, in a Letter of Coleman's to Ashby, the Rector of S.
Omers, he says, you commanded him to let the Fathers know, that that Match was
to strengthen the Catholic Cause and Interest, and that now the King your
Brother, who had engaged in it, would be engaged to unite himself in a more
near Alliance to his Majesty of France, and the Princes of Italy, Apr. 2. 1674.

2. That they had found by sad experience, that such Matches had encouraged
Popery within this Kingdom, and had given Opportunity to Prieists and Jesuits
to propagate their wicked and devilish Doctrines, and to seduce great numbers
of the King's Protestant Subjects. You that had such a mighty Work upon your
hands, as the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and the Subduing of a pestilent
Heresy which had so long domineered in these Kingdoms; and it being a great
Work, and the Laborers in your great Harvest being but few, and you being like
to meet with mighty Opposition, as indeed you did, and an effectual one too, so
that it did import you to have all the Assistance you could, that your
Laborers might not be out of breath; and though, next to Gods (or rather the
Devil's) Providence, you did rely on the mighty Mind of his Most Christian
Majesty, whose Generous Soul had inclined him to many Barbarous and Traitorous
Undertakings; and though his Temper was, in that, very much like your own; yet
three or four Strings to your Bow, were more than one for the more Alliances
abroad with Catholic Princes, would increase the Number of your Laborers in
the Devil's Harvest: Therefore in order to this, what Alliances you were
engaging your Brother in, you well know, and you cannot forget how all that
Design was dashed, and by whom.

But, Sir, you must be stone-blind, and so must your whole Party, if you did
not see that Experience had taught my Lord Arlington and the Parliament how
such Matches had been fatal to this Kingdom and to their Designs: The Match of
the King, your Father, with the Daughter of France, was the first Step that was
taken to advance Popery and the French Interest in England; and when she came
over, what a Swarm of Priests and Friars followed her; and what Numbers of
Priests and Jesuits she protected, and what Numbers were seduced in hopes of
Employment under her, or of Preferment by her Grace and Favor; and how that
unhappy Prince was influenced by her Councils till she had promoted a War in
Scotland by the Influence of that old Incendiary, Cardinal Richlieu, and the
Rebellion in Ireland, and the bloody Civil Wars here, which terminated in the
Ruin, and, by the Just Judgment of God, in the untimely end of your Father.

2. The Match of the King your Brother with the Daughter of Portugal, by whom
he could, through the Blessing of God, have no Issue: This Lady, what she
wanted in Understanding to be a Counselor, she had made up to her, in the
blessed Gifts of Malice, and Treason, and Revenge, which she exercised to the
utmost: And what Swarms of Priests, Jesuits, Monks, and Friars were by her
protected, and with what Zeal she promoted the Romish Religion, and protected
Men that were in a Conspiracy against our Religion, Laws and Liberties; and how
great Numbers were by her Priests perverted to the Romish Faith, to the great
disquiet of the Government, the Parliament well knew: And therefore, Sir, you
must know that the Experience they had of these two considerable Matches, how
fatal they had been to these Kingdoms, was a sufficient Motive for to interpose
in yours.

3. The Parliament observed how your Devilish Popish Party were animated by the
hopes of this Match before it was consummate, which were discouraged by the
King's Concessions at the last meeting of that Parliament; you know what they
were, the Breaking the Indulgence, and the Passing the Test Bill. My Lord
Arlington and the Parliament were very prosperous in their Rogueries (as you
called them) those Sons of Zerviah were then too many for you and your damnable
Crew.

It is remembered, upon the hopes of this Match, that a Protestant could scarce
come within your Court at S. James's, but he was affronted by your Popish Crew,
and scarce a better Word than Damn you for a Heretic Dog; and when Complaints
were made to you of these Insolences, the Complainer found no other Redress
than, What Business had you there? insomuch that this sort of Carriage was
observed by the Parliament, and upon this Consideration they interposed with
all their Might, to hinder, if possible, the Consummation of the intended
Marriage to that Italian Princess.

4. They did greatly fear it would occasion the lessening the Affections of the
People to your Person, and for that you were so nearly related to the Crown,
they desired that your Honor and Esteem should be preserved: But had they
known of your Traiterous Confederacy with the French King, and with him
designing to subvert our Religion, Laws and Liberties, they would sooner have
addressed for your being Banished from the King's Presence and his Councils for
ever, if not to have sent you out of the World as you justly deserved.

But, Sir, you may remember, that you once were the Darling of the Nation, and
had the Esteem and Affections of the People, upon the Account of your being the
Son and Brother of a King, and stood in a very near Relation to the Crown of
England in the time of your Brothers Reign; but when your Traitorous Designs
were laid open, the Parliament, Apr. 27. 1679. Resolved, That your being a
Papist, and the Hopes of your coming such to the Crown had given the greatest
Encouragement to the then discovered Conspiracy and Designs of the Papists
against his Majesty your Brother, and the Protestant Religion: Notwithstanding
this Vote of the House of Commons, you had an impudent Crew that did endeavor
to persuade the Nation, and not without some Effect, through the Power of their
bold Asseverations that you were no Papist, but of the established Religion;
only that you were a Prince of more Generosity and Greatness of Mind, than to
comply with the Capricio's of a Parliament, in Renouncing this, or Swearing to
that, as they should in humor enact; which Roguery in Conversation passed with
a great many Rascally Profligate Protestants, who would not believe your being
a Papist, till the day you opened your Chapel or Oratory, the next, or next
Sunday but one, after you took the Crown.

5. The Parliament was of an Opinion, that for an Age after the Consummation of
the said Marriage, at the least the People of England would be under continued
Apprehensions of the Growth of Popery, and the Danger of the Protestant
Religion; and so they were an Age before: For when they saw so many Piracies
made on the Dutch Factories in the Years 1663, 1664. and a wicked War commenced
in the Year 1665. and the City fired by Papists in the Year 1666. and the
Papists encouraged, not only in the Years aforesaid, but in the Year 1667. and
1668. and Persons that had a hand in firing the City of London, not only
protected, but preferred; and the Trpiple League broken, and another ungodly
War proclaimed, Priests and Jesuits increasing in their Numbers, and their
Insolences and Impudence: This increased the Fears and Jealousies of the
Nation, and your first L^dy turning Papist and dying such; but when you married
an Italian Papist, you had more Eyes upon you, and the People by degrees began
to see into your Designs against the Protestant Religion and Government.

That the Protestant Religion was by this means in danger, is beyond
Disputation; for it had three great Enemies conspiring against it, that had
made a League together, to destroy it and all those Princes and States that did
intend to maintain and uphold it, viz. your Brother Charles, the French King,
and your self; and this Confederacy was set up to destroy the Prince of Orange,
the Government of the States General, and the Parliament of England; and this
the Parliament feared, and therefore they interposed in this marriage.

Object. But here an Objection will arise: Why should the Parliament object
against this Match, and be so zealous in their Interposition to prevent this
Match with the Daughter of Modena, since it is plain, you, in view of the
World, had been for several Months engaged in a Treaty of Marriage with another
Catholic Princess; yet a Parliament, nay that very Parliament held during the
time of the Treaty, and not the least Exception taken at it? To this I Answer,

1. That the Archduchess of Inspruck, though she was of the Romish Religion,
yet she was an avowed Enemy of the French Cause and Interest: For observe this,
there were many Papists, which, Sir, you hated, and by your Conspirators were
looked upon with an evil Eye; for the Lord Castlehaven, that was one that
served the King of Spain, was one that was used very hardly by you; Sir Kenelm
Digby was also very obnoxious to you, and so was my Master, the Duke of
Norfolk, being one of the Spanish Faction, and Anderson the Priest, and several
others that I can, when called to it, name, who were Enemies of the French
Faction: And this Lady being not of the French Faction and Interest, the Match,
through the Influence of the French King, was broken, and this Piece of Flesh
you have was, sent from Modena in her Room.

2. The Match between you and that Duchess was never so near a Consummation, as
this between the Daughter of Modena and you was de non Appaparentibus, and non
existentibus eadem est Ratio; the Match did not appear to them; therefore they
touched not upon it: But to make sure, they addressed the King that you might
not match with Modena, or any other Popish Princess, for several weighty
Considerations.

6. The House of Commons considered, that your Princess of Modena being so near
a Relation and Kindred to the many Eminent Persons of the Court of Rome, might
give great Opportunities to promote their Designs and carry on their Practices
amongst us, and by the same means penetrate into the most secret Councils of
the King your Brother, and more easily discover the State of the whole Kingdom.

It is observed, that it is a standing Rule amongst the Venetians, that if one
of their Senators have a Relation that is made a Pope or Cardinal, or is
preferred to any great Dignity in the Court of Rome, that the said Senator
withdraws from, or is dismissed his serving in the said Senate. And the Reason
is plain: First, Because they will not be imposed upon by any of that Vermin;
and Secondly, Because they will not have their Councils looked into by any that
belong to the Court of Rome; nor, Thirdly, Will they have the Secrets of their
Government discovered to them; and lastly, they will not have the State of
their Commonwealth exposed to the Censure of the Ecclesiastical State.

Sir, You were no sooner married, but how Letters pass betwixt the Court of
Rome and you self, and your servant Coleman. Jan. 4. 1676. Cardinal Howard,
writing to Coleman, intimates, That Sir Henry Tichburn was appointed by you to
be your Minister at Rome, and rejoiced at the Prorogation of the Parliament;
and further said, That if the King would do well, then all would do well: Now,
you know what was meant by the King's doing well, that is, if he were removed.
In that Letter, he says, he hoped to do you good Service. It is plain, that
now not only France but Rome was also to be interested in your Councils, to
destroy the King your Brother, and expose the Councils and Secrets of the
Government to the View of the Court of Rome.

Cardinal Howard in his Letter to Coleman, Feb. 8. 1676. says, He does all he
can to serve you: He has writ to Mr. Haies at his Brothers, moves, that your
Brother's Ministers, may join with the Pope's Ministers about P. Furstenburg,
and about the Peace, and that the Pope will send a Minister on purpose.

In a Letter, on March 1676. signed Cardinal Norfolk, which was sent by an
Express that was to return with what his Master and Mistress had to
communicate. This was a Letter of Credence, and your Servant Coleman was to be
he asked, who this Messenger was; and was accordingly asked, and would not
tell, but, Sir, I will; and it was Signior Con, that went under the notion of
an Italian, but was an old Scotch Priest, that was in the Conspiracy against
Charles the First, and discovered by Habernfield to Sir William Bozwell, the
English Ambassador at Holland, who discovered the same to the Archprelate of
Canterbury, who was in a most Reverend Manner pleased to conceal the same by
that King's Advice and Direction. This Con, that was near 80 years of age, was
entrusted with some Secrets from Rome to your self and Duchess; and what you
had to communicate, you were to communicate it to him: And what was that? The
King your Brother had promised to dissolve the Parliament. Coleman, with your
Brother's Approbation and yours, drew up the Declaration, and a Copy was sent
to Cardinal Howard; and the Resolutions you had taken to establish the Popish
Religion, and what Measures were taken for the Destroying the Interest of the
Lord Arlington and the Prince of Orange, and the Dutch at our Court: and this
Con was to take an Account of the State and Condition of our Fleet, and of the
Exchequer; and these were the things that you and your Spouse were to
communicate to the Messenger that brought the Letter dated March 1676.

March 14. 1676. The Cardinal, in his Letter, says, That he ordered Mr.
Leybourn, his Auditor to write -- He understood that you had received his --
That he used to direct his Letters for the Portugal Ambassador. For Mr. Coleman
takes notice that Plunket had received Letters from Archbishop Talbot, at Rome,
who offers his Service to you and the Catholics whether they will or no -- He
tells Coleman, that Talbot is enough to spoil all -- His constant Custom is
forging Letters -- Says, if you make use of him, you would disgrace your self,
and put the Catholics in Derision, which is the way to destroy them -- which
if then, the Cardinal and his Confriars must shut up their Shops -- if he had
not taken care, the Match between you and the Daughter of Modena had been
broken off -- that a Friend of his at Paris first set the Match on foot -- he
says, he promoted the Match to serve you and the Catholic Religion in
England; and says, that he and his are in great Power at Rome and Spain -- And
says, that it would prejudice you if you were partial -- Complains of want of
Countenance from the King your Brother -- Proposes a Barony to be got of the
King for him to get Money for -- Says, that it would be no Scandalum Magnatum,
though, for a Catholic, than when Sir Francis Radcliff was in motion -- Takes
notice, that the Pope is not satisfied with the Education of your Daughters --
Despairs not of getting a Pension from Rome for your Duchess's Secretary.

In Cardinal Howard 's Letter of March 24. 1676. he takes notice of the Receipt
of Letters on the 17th and the 20th of March, and also of your advancing the
Catholic Religion, to the Joy of the Pope, by his of the 27th. fully
completed their Joy -- Hopes your Duchess would bring forth a happy
Roman Catholic. Thus, Sir, you see what Destruction you were then bringing
upon the Nation, by exposing the King's Secret Councils and the State and
Condition of the Nation, to the grand Enemy of the Protestant Religion and
Interest.

Now I have done with the Steps you took for the Destruction of these three
Nations and the Protestant Interest in general, I come now to every particular
Country and Nation, in which you may behold your Attempts there in particular;
by which it will appear to what Ruin and Misery you had brought the Protestant
Interest to: First I will begin with Holland.

I. HOLLAND.
YOU may remember, Sir, with what Respects that Protestant State received and
protected your Brother and your self as long as they durst, and what particular
Friends your Family found there, who contributed in some measure to your
Support, and made what Friends they could for your self and Brothers, when you
were by the French King Banished France: But how you have since treated the
States General, by engaging the King your Brother, in two most unjust Wars, to
their great Impoverishing, and the Weakening the Protestant Interest: But you
dealt with them as you did by all your other Friends and Allies. You no sooner
received the Testimony of their Affections, but you forget it; and therefore it
was well observed of Kirton your old Friend and Friar, that the only way for a
Man to ruin his Family, was to engage in your Cause and Quarrel. You will do
well to call to mind the Heats that you and your Incendiaries created in
Holland, and the Animosities you caused, which cost the De Wits their Lives.
Several Letters of Coleman's to the Jesuits of S. Omers, do highly magnify
your prudent Conduct in that Affair; and what was the End of all those Heats
and Flames you kindled, but to exasperate a considerable Party of Men against
your Nephew the Prince of Orange; nay, your Malice against that Prince did not
cease here, but most unnaturally you engaged the King your Brother to abandon
him, and to comply with his and the mortal Enemies of this Nation; which was so
unnatural, that an Infidel would not have been guilty of such Ingratitude as
your self, if you do but remember how the Prince's Father served yours. Your
Malice yet went further; for the Lord Arlington using some Arguments with the
King to have a more Regard to his Nephew the Prince of Orange, and the
States General of the United Provinces: What Care on the contrary did you use
to prevent any good Intention of the said Lord Arlington toward the said
Prince of Orange; and in order to this, you dispatched Letters to Ashby the
Rector of the English College of S. Omers, and require him to write to the
Confessor of the Emperor, to satisfy him that the King your Brother intended
no less than the Ruin of the Confederates, especially of the Empire, and of his
Catholic Princes under him, and that underhand he furnished the Hungarian
Rebels against his Imperial Majesty, and found them Money to go on with their
Rebellion, and that his Design was, not to have any Alliances with his Imperial
Majesty but only in Show, that he might advance his Nephew the Prince of
Orange; and in order to that, he had brought him over to the French Interest,
which Letter, Sir, I saw, and the Instructions were followed to a Tittle by the
Fathers at S. Omers.

In those Letters the States General were to be acquainted with this. Now, Sir,
it is well known, that the King your Brother's being engaged in the French
Interest, was no Secret at the Court at Vienna, nor with the States General;
but that the Prince of Orange was drawn into that Interest, this must be
surprising: Therefore, Sir, we might easily see the secret Hatred you conceived
against the Prince and his Cause, and Interest. You and your Conspirators could
have been heartily glad of being blessed with such an Ally; but because he was
true to his Cause and Interest, you by your lying Jesuits did what you could to
create a Jealousy in the then Confederate Princes, of the Sincerity of the
Prince, to the Confederacy, and to the Interest of the United Provinces, in
order to his Ruin. These Letters that were sent to the Emperor's Confessor,
bore Date, Jan. 4. 1678. Stilo Novo.

Sir, You may not forget the 12 Jesuits that Whitebread the Provincial of the
Jesuits sent into Holland to create a Belief in the Dutch, that the Prince of
Orange designed no less than the Subversion of the Government of the United
Provinces, by procuring his Party to receive and own him as their King, and
that it was the Design of the said Prince to assume the Title and Crown of a
King, and change their Government, and make a Seizure of their Freedoms. These
Jesuits were sent by Virtue of Letters sent from Coleman in your Name, and
Money was sent over to be received at Dunkirk, the Sum was 4000 Crowns, to bear
the Charge of the Mission into Holland, and the Bills were signed by one Busby
a Merchant here in London, the Money being paid in by Sir Allen Apsley;
therefore, Sir, it may well be concluded who was at the Head of this Piece of
Villainy.

In a word, Sir, you see what means you and the rest of your Popish
Incendiaries used to beget in the Dutch an ill Esteem of the Prince of Orange,
and to widen the Difference between the Lovistein Party and his Friends; and,
if possible, to seduce his Friends, and destroy his Interest, and the Interest
of the Protestant Religion: and the best Title the Jesuits of St. Omer's used
to give him, was Apple Tree Will; at which you were pleased; in the multitude
of your witty Thoughts, to laugh, as Coleman used to tell us, when ever any
Discourse happened concerning the Prince of Orange.

But, Sir, you may say, That he was your Sister's Son, and that at that time
you had married your Daughter to him, so that he was not only your Nephew, but
your Son-in-Law, What then? How you and your Party used him, when he was your
Nephew, the Princes of Europe saw, and the Honest Party of England resented his
Usage, and had Thoughts of you accordingly, yea, and of your Brother to; but
you pretend that you had married your Daughter to him. No, Sir, it was neither
you nor your Brother married the Lady Mary to the Prince of Orange; it was
something else, I had almost said the Siege of Charleroy, and the Advice of a
worthy Minister of State upon the same: But suppose you had married your
Daughter to the Prince of Orange, and that it was your own Inclination, to
which I cannot yet be reconciled in my thoughts, but that after the Marriage
you pursued his Ruin with as much vigor as you did before, give me leave to
sum up the whole in a few words: You and your Accomplices resolved, That the
Prince of Orange should not become Great, therefore he must be destroyed; and
in order to effect so mighty and so great a Work, all means are used to stir up
the Dutch to mutiny against him, upon that Diabolical Suggestion of your
Conspirators, That he had designed, and was resolved to subvert their
Government, and usurp a Crown and Title of a King: the Emperor is also
instigated to create a Belief in the States General, That the Prince designed
the making himself Absolute; and oh how did you and your Party hug your selves
with the Expectation of a Breach between him and the States General, so that
his and the whole Protestant Interest might fail in Holland.

In truth, when a Man reflects upon this Affair, he would wonder at your
Barbarity, and naturally ask this Question, Why should this Prince aim at the
Destruction of the Prince of Orange? Was he not his Sister's Son, his
Son-in-law? What profit would it be to you to destroy him? An honest-thinking
Man would hesitate at these things; but when he considers who it is attempts
this, and for what cause, then it naturally follows there was a pretended Cause
for such Diabolical Suggestions, and such Barbarous Designs.

You that was his Uncle was converted to such a degree of Zeal, as not to
regard any thing in the World in comparison of the Conversion of Heretical
Kingdoms, and so your Interests we know were inseparately united to the French
King, that it was impossible to divide them: You know that you used all means
to secure His Most Christian Majesty's Interest in England, and that for many
weighty Reasons; one among the rest was, That his and yours prevailing, would
give the greatest Blow to the Protestant Religion that ever it received from
its birth; then undoubtedly the Prince of Orange (through God's mercy now our
Gracious King) at that time stood within a step or two of the Throne, and being
a Protestant, ought in all Policy to be removed, notwithstanding his being your
Nephew, and Son-in-law: For what do Men talk of natural Affection amongst
Popish Princes? Was you not in a Conspiracy against Charles the Second, when he
was at Bruxels, though he was your own Brother, (or else he is basely belied?)
And was not the Queen, his Mother, zealous in the same Conspiracy,
notwithstanding he was her Son? Why then should any Man talk of natural
Affection?

Sir, you cannot forget that you had a mighty Work upon your Hands, that was,
The Conversion of these Kingdoms, and subduing the Northern Heresy, and that
your hopes of it were very great, and that you were zealous, to a miracle, of
being the Author of so Glorious a Work: Your mighty Mind, and the Mighty Mind
of the French King, were relied upon by the Conspirators; for that also that
the Interest of the French King was highly attracted to that of yours. Why then
should any wonder at your Passing a Bill of Exclusion upon the Prince of
Orange, who the World knew (notwithstanding all your Hellish Suggestions both
to the Emperor and States General) stood ready with all his might to Baffle
You, and the French King, and all your mighty Undertakings.

Consider further, That the Interest of the French King was highly attracted to
your Interest; and this pleased you and your Party, and so you thought your
selves secure: But here was your Nephew and Son-in-law; his Interest was as
highly attracted to that of England, Holland, and the Reformed Churches of
Europe, to the Support of the Protestant Religion, which You and the French
King were to destroy by the Name and Title of the Northern Heresy. I pray then
what signifies a Nephew and a Son-in-law in such a Case as this? Can any Man
that ever knew you, believe that natural Affection should interpose and prevent
your destroying him, since your natural Affection and Bigotry were, and are
still no Strangers in England or Holland.

Consider once more, and then I have done with this Point: You may remember,
that the French King did most generously offer you the use of his Purse, to
assist against the Designs of those that were Enemies to you, and that Monarch:
Nay, you know he protested, That those that opposed you he should look on them
his Enemies; and you did as well protest, That those who opposed him you would
look upon them as your Enemies; and it was the Opinion of the French King, that
the Parliament of England was neither in his Interest nor yours, and you
entirely agreed with him in that Thought of his; so that it was your Opinion,
that it was necessary for you both to make use of your joint and utmost
Credits, to prevent the Success of the Parliaments Evil Designs against you
both. What, Designs against you and the French King? Yes, Designs against you,
and the French King; nay, that which is more, a dangerous Plot. Who are the
Plotters? And what was the Plot? my Lord Arlington was at work, without
ceasing, to advance the Interest of the Prince of Orange, and the Hollanders,
and to lessen that of the French King: And that he and several others were
endeavoring to break the good Intelligence between Charles the Second, the
French King, and your self, wherefore you earnestly solicited the French King
to assist with the Help of his Purse, to prevent such Rogueries.

Thus, Sir, you make a Tripple League, and set it up in Opposition to another:
In the one, King Charles, the French King, and your sweet Self are engaged; in
the other, the Parliament of England, the States of Holland, and the Prince of
Orange, are engaged: The French is to furnish you with Money, which is the
Sinews of War, the Parliament are declared Enemies, King Charles stands as a
Cipher only; and therefore the French King, and your self, put your selves
under the solemn Engagements to perform what was stipulated, and strenuously to
assist each other against the Designs of your and the French King's Enemies;
for that there was a dangerous and desperate Design on foot, to advance the
Prince of Orange, and to lessen the French King: And therefore, can any think
that it was unreasonable in you, to endeavor to destroy him, since his
Advancement was of such a desperate and dangerous Consequence to the French
King, your Self, and Romish Religion? These things duly considered, no Man that
has his Thoughts and Judgment keeping pace with each other, but must from the
Premises rationally conclude, That you and your Incendiaries must have a
design of destroying the Prince and his Party, and Protestant Interest in
Holland, notwithstanding any Excuses you may make to the contrary, or your
Party for you.

II. IRELAND.
Since, Sir, you have not left so good a Name in Holland, as you might have
pretended to, it is much to be feared that, upon enquiry, your Name and Memory
will not be very precious here in Ireland. If you please to give me your
Company thither, I Will assure you, if you deserve it, you shall have my good
Word from thence, for all the old Favors I received from you in the Day of
your Power here amongst us; but I suppose I shall find sad havoc there made by
you, and your Plotters, of the Protestant Religion, and of the Civil Rights,
Liberties, and Customs of the English and Protestant Interest.

Sir, it pleased King Charles the Second to send the Lord Roberts as his
Vicegerent into Ireland, who was a warm Man, and not at all Popishly affected,
and therefore not for your Turn, or one that would gratify the Conspirators in
any one Point of countenancing Popery, and therefore you procured him to be
removed; so that Ireland was put into such Hands as your Heart and Soul could
wish for: For whoever was Deputy, or Lieutenant, your Conspirator, Boil, an
Archbishop, was the Governor; a Fellow, 'tho' of the Communion of the Church of
England, yet was a well-wisher to the Romish Mathematics. So Ireland was in a
fair way to be Overrun and Ruined to all Intents and Purposes by yours; and
the Procurement of the Jesuits.

Upon the Removal of the Lord Robarts, afterward Earl of Radnor, you remember
who succeeded him, and what Promises was made by this Successor, and what Terms
you required from him, and how he complied, and who it was that recommended
this new Lieutenant as a Person fit, to all Intents and Purposes, to execute
your Designs: These things are worthy of consideration I assure you, for we
have considered them; and what could be done in so little time as our King has
had, many of those Abuses have been corrected and amended. This Tool brought
the Kingdom of Ireland into a sad condition, by encouraging the Popish
Recusants, who are the professed Enemies to the Protestant Religion, and
English Interest; by his, or rather your Encouragement, they grew more Insolent
and Presumptuous than before that Tool of a Lieutenant came there, which was of
a dangerous Consequence to that Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion, and
English Interest: And it was like to have proved Fatal to that Kingdom, had it
not been in some measure prevented, by the sending in his room that Great and
never-to-be-forgotten Earl of Essex, whom you and your Party procured to be
Murdered in the Tower, to make the Murder of the Good Lord Russel less
difficult.

1. For in the First Place, in the Month of January 1672/3. you procured a
Commission of Enquiry into Irish Affairs, containing many Powers that were new
and extraordinary, not only Prejudicial to the English, whose Estates and
Titles were liable to be questioned, but in a manner to Overthrow the King's
Acts of Settlement, which Commission you caused to be pursued, to the great
Charge and Attendance of many of the Protestants there: And by this means you
shook the Peace and Security of the whole Kingdom of Ireland. It is well known,
Sir, that you gave the Jesuits great Hopes of making a fair Step to establish
the Romish Religion; and old Gray, the Jesuit, in a Letter of February, 1672.
exhorts the Fathers at St. Omers to be very thankful to God that he had put it
into the Hearts of the King and Duke, to remember the sad Estate of the
Catholic Religion in Ireland; and that now there was some Hopes of
Establishing it there, since the Lord Lieutenant was so well disposed toward
it, by the especial Care of His Royal Highness.

II. You were pleased to cause the Popish Party to be armed in that Kingdom,
and some of them were Commanders to others; Instructions were given from
Richard Talbot, then your Agent there, by your Order, for those of the Roman
Catholic Party to furnish themselves with quantities of Arms; and this, your
Conspirators said, were to keep the English in order. This, Sir, can be proved
whenever there is occasion. No Man can think, that Sir Ellis Leyton, a Papist,
that was Secretary to the Government, by your especial Grace and Favor, should
not pursue the same Instructions that your Agent Talbot had received: Nay, give
me leave to tell you, That your dear Brother was highly engaged to reduce that
Kingdom to a Popish Establishment, according to the Agreement he had made with
Madam, your Sister, to whom he had promised to begin the Establishing the Roman
Catholic Religion in Ireland; and that High-Mass should, in a short time, be
sung at St. Patrick's, in the City of Dublin, the Metropolis of that Kingdom.

It is true, Sir Ellis Layton was a lewd Fellow; but there was none that did
your Business, in jest, so well as he did, for the time of his residence in
Ireland: For under the Notion of Ridiculing the Irish, he promoted every Man
that was a Papist, if he had but common Sense, and a Place open. And it is well
remembered what vast Quantities of Arms and Ammunition were daily sent from
England to that Place, and considerable Quantities both from France and Spain,
which your Party used to say, would do more good toward the Establishing the
Catholic Religion than so many Bibles: And great care, Sir, was taken by you,
to secure the poor Irish Catholics in the North, that the Planters of Ulster,
and the Scotch, should give them no disturbance; that is, in plain English,
they should themselves stand still, and be peaceably murdered by your Irish
Cutthroats.

3. How many Popish Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Coroners, Mayors,
Sovereigns, and Portriffs, were made, by your Princely Care, in that Kingdom!
And was this for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the English
Interest there? No certainly; it is well known, by several Letters of yours to
Richard Talbot, and Sir Ellis Layton, that the Reason why you gave such
Instructions, was to crush and ruin the Protestant Religion and the English
Interest in that Kingdom; for you having Popish Judges, and Popish Sheriffs*
you would quickly find Popish Juries, and Irish Witnesses to swear any thing
against the Protestant Nobility and Gentry that stood in opposition to your
Proceedings in that Kingdom: Then, Sir, what Security had a Gentleman of his
Estate, when Judges, Sheriffs, and Witnesses were against him? The many
Instances of the Wrongs and Oppressions done to the Protestant English
Gentlemen, the Records of your Villainous Court of Claims can tell how they
were sworn out of their Estates and Fortunes by your Rogues and Banditti. I am
certain that this Point being gained by You, and your Conspirators, it proved
very Fatal to Ireland.

4. You took great care of the Church too; not of the Protestant Church, but of
your Popish Titular Archbishops, Bishops, Vicar-Generals, Abbots, and others,
that had Power from Rome to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that they
should be established in particular. Sir, your old Friend Peter Talbot, the
pretended Archbishop of Dublin, and your old Friend James Lynce, Archbishop of
Tuam, both of them had been notoriously disloyal to the King your Brother, in
that they had long lived in Disobedience to him, and in Contempt of his Laws:
But, to cure that, you procured a Pardon for them both, which Boil the
Chancellor passed under the Great Seal, by your special Command and Direction;
nay, you hectored your Brother when he was unwilling to pass Talbot's Pardon,
and challenged his Promise and Agreement made at Dover, at the Interview, with
Madam his Sister and yours: And, Sir, that all things might appear with some
Face of Grandeur, a Meeting of all the Popish Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicar-Generals, Abbots, Priors, and Priests, for the settling and establishing
their Clergy, both secular and regular, which was connived at by your Tool of a
Lieutenant; upon which the Popish Party grew so insolent, that a Protestant
went in danger of his Life amongst them: nay, to preserve their Stock, in many
Places they were forced to pay Tithes to the Popish Priest, as well as to the
Protestant Minister.

But when the Earl of Essex was sent over, with much difficulty some small
Check was put to these insolent Carriages of the Irish Papists; Tuam fled, and
Talbot withdrew for a while, or rather absconded themselves, and the Public
Popish Schools were put down, and many secular and regular Priests did depart
the Land: For which, Sir, you hated the Earl of Essex, and Plunket you also
despised, because he said, It was not Prudence for Catholics to live in
Contempt of Law; and therefore you may remember how and by whom his end was
promoted, and with what zeal you and your Party sent him out of the World; he
was of the same Opinion with Cardinal Howard, that in whatsoever Business
Talbot was engaged, he ever spoiled it, and he was impudent and false to his
Party, for which the Jesuits turned him out of the Society; but that he might
not in discontent leave the Church of Rome, the General of the Jesuits
procured of the Pope that he might be made a Bishop. But this, Sir, I will
assure you, That if Talbot when he was taken in Ireland, had been taken in
England, he would have done You and your Party a signal Piece of Service; for
Coleman had certainly given Evidence with him against you: So that your
traitorous Correspondency with France, and Intentions to destroy the Prince of
Orange, and the Protestant Religion within these Realms, and all over Europe,
would have been so fully detected, that it had been almost impossible for you
to have escaped the hand of Justice. Of this, Sir, I can give a particular
Account, if ever there should be occasion: And Plunket himself gave you such an
Item of Talbot's Intentions in that Point, that Coleman's Death was hastened,
and Talbot died strangely in Prison, and so you escaped to do more Mischief:
And how well you rewarded Plunket for his Good will toward you, is well known;
and all to oblige your Cutthroat Jesuits, to whom they were mortal Enemies.

5. On the 26th. of Febr. 1671. It is remembered, that for the better
Encouragement of the Irish Papists, and that they might many of them live in
greater Bodies together, you procured Letters from King Charles, your Brother,
and a Proclamation, to give Liberty in General to all Irish Papists to live in
Corporations, against the Act of Settlement; and to be excused from all those
Oaths that were required from those who were duly licensed according to the
true intent and meaning of that Act: And your Agents, Si^ Else Leyton, and
Richard Talbot, were very vigorous to see those Letters and Proclamations put
in Execution: Then the Irish flocked into Towns Corporate, and other Market
Port Towns of that Kingdom, to the great Terror of the English Protestants,
and the Disturbance of their Trade. To redress which, how many Petitions were
presented, setting forth the Calamity the Protestant Interest was exposed to,
and what Danger they were in of losing their Trade both at home and abroad; and
how they returned without any manner of Redress, but were ridiculed by Leyton,
and abused by your Tool the Lord Lieutenant.

It is well known that the Irish Papists (some few only excepted) did not
understand Trade, and therefore the End for which they were let in to live in
Towns Corporate, and into other Market Towns within that Kingdom was, that they
might overpower the Protestant Party and seize their Effects as they did in
the Rebellion: They began in the Year 1641, and that they might get into
Offices in those Towns Corporate, to keep the Protestants so much under as
would incapacitate them to stand upon their defense, the Irish being well
armed, and the English being disarmed by a private Order from your self to the
then Lord Lieutenant, which was discovered in the Papers found at Jolliff's
house in Weldstreet, in Feb. or Jan. 1678/9, amongst Papers belonging to Sir
Else Leyton.

And for two or three Years together, great Inquiry was made by some of your
Conspirators, for News out of Ireland; so big they were with the Expectation of
a Rebellion there; which certainly had been if it had not been for fear of the
Scotch, who were well planted in the North of Ireland, who with all the Bravery
and Resolution that became honest Men and good Protestants to stand by the
English, in opposition to the Irish; for which Cause you did use your utmost
Efforts to have those Scotch that were so planted in the North of Ireland to be
disarmed; but whether at that time your Design took effect I cannot well
remember.

6. Furthermore, you to carry on your wicked designs and purposes in that
Kingdom for the better establishing of Popery and Arbitrary Power, and
discouraging of the Protestant Religion and English Interest. You procured
Letters of the King your Brother, bearing date, September. 28th. 1672. and upon
that Letter so procured, there was an Order of Council of that Kingdom, in
which Letter, and by which Order, the English Protestants were strictly charged
and commanded, upon pain of his high Displeasure, not to prosecute the Irish
Papists, in any Actions whatsoever, for any Wrongs or Injuries committed by
them, during the late Rebellion. Nay, Sir, you would not have it called a
Rebellion, but you desired it might be called rather the late Troubles, which
you could not obtain; and rather than your Teagues should lose the Benefit of
the said Letter, you were content to have it called a Rebellion; and the Reason
was, you and your Brother too were well satisfied who had a hand in it, and
first stirred it up; witness, the Parchments that were found in the Red Trunk
in Jolliff's House in Weld-street, and the Letter written in the behalf of the
Marquis of Antrim, to your Devilish Court of Claims, in which the principal
Author of that Rebellion was made manifest, but that by the Way only.

In that Rebellion, what Murders, Rapines, Thefts, and barbarous Outrages were
for some time daily committed by the Irish Papists, upon the poor Protestants,
some yet alive in both Kingdoms to testify: And yet, of your tender Care of
those Barbarous Cutthroats, you would not have them answer at Law, for any of
the aforesaid Villainies, and why? Because what they did, was in Zeal for the
Catholic Cause, to which, you by a Miracle was converted, insomuch, that for
the promoting of it, you had regard neither to Law, or Justice, Sense, or
Reason: Nay, some that did sue those Murderers before that damnable Court was
set up, were much discountenanced by your Party there, and by your self here in
England, if they had occasion to make any Application to your self for any
Favor or Kindness.

7. You constituted Richard Talbot Agent from your self to the
Roman Catholics, and they constituted him their Agent to you from them, for
which Talbot had a sufficient Pension to whore and game withal; and, give the
Devil his due, he answered his Trust with all the Care, Fidelity, and Diligence
both to you and the Popish Party. Not only so, but you procured for him the
said Talbot, a Command in Ireland, as a Reward for his great Services done. Of
this Agency of the said Talbot, Dr. Tongue, and Mr. Thomas Jones, your quondam
Chaplain, having some clear Proof, they made Application to the King your
Brother, and he ridiculed the Business, and said, That Talbot was not only a
Blockhead, but was in no manner fit for an Agent for any party, he being also a
Man too much addicted to his pleasures; and you met with Jones, and asked him
whether he was turned from a Preacher to an Informer, and told him he had
pitched upon a very unlikely man for an Agent. Thus was any Truth, that was
against Poperty or Papists, brought by any honest Man, hissed of the Stage by
your Brother and your self. Sir, I confess you would have used me so when I
charged him with a Commission from some body, to be General Governor, and Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland; and the King then told me how Tongue and Jones had been
to inform him that Talbot was an Agent from the Popish Party in Ireland to the
Duke, and an Agent from the Duke to the Popish Party, which he rejected as an
improbable thing; but the Story I told him was more improbable: I discovered
his Agency, and made out that by Letters under the hand of the said Talbot; so
that Tongue and Jones were justified, and you did, in a few Years, so justify
that part and so many particulars of my Testimony in that Affair, that your
very Passive Obedience Rogues began, when it was almost too late, to look about
them: For in time he was General of the Army in Ireland, in the time of the
Earl of Clarendon's Regency, and after him, to the sorrow of many Unbelievers,
he was by you made Lord Lieutenant.

8. Your Conspirators received a Letter from Talbot, the pretended-Archbishop
of Dublin, wherein it was expressly said, That your Jesuits in Ireland, and
others were preparing the Irish Papists to Rise in defense of their Liberties
and Religion, and to recover their Estates, and that if the Parliament that was
to sit in England, did engage heartily with the King, and the King with them in
a War against the French King, that a place or places should be opened to
receive the French King's Army in Ireland, whenever his most Christian Majesty
should think fit to send one. And by Order from Coleman and the Jesuits in
London, the Fathers at the English College at S. Omers, were to advertise the
Father Confessor to the French King of the same; and other Jesuits that had an
Interest in the French King, and the Fathers of S. Omers were assured that the
King your Brother was brought to that state of Security, that if any
Malcontent among them should not prove true to them and their Design, his
Majesty would not give ear to their Information, and therefore prayed them to
be diligent, for now was the time or never; and accordingly Messengers were
sent to Father La Chaise, viz. Edward Nevil your Confessor, and William Busby,
to carry the aforesaid Letters to La Chaise, and these did bring home La
Chaise's Answer, and withal several Letters that Coleman had written to him
upon that Affair in your Name, and by your Command, that bore date in the month
of January, as these also did in the month of January 1677/8. some little time
before the Parliament sat down: And then, Sir, there was a Pension obtained for
Coleman, your diligent Secretary, of 2000 Crowns a Year, and another from Rome,
but what that was I do not so well remember: But this is not to be forgotten,
that the Fathers of S. Omers had great Assurance of considerable Sums from the
Pope, and from the General of the Jesuits, if any Progress were made in that
Glorious Attempt.

Here, Sir, you and your Party signalize your selves in several particulars
worthy of your being put in mind of, 1. The great Preparations that were made
for the Rising of the Irish Papists. 2. That the great Design of Rising, was
for the Defense of their Liberties and Religion. 3. You were not certain but
that your Brother might engage in earnest with the Parliament for entering into
an actual War with France. 4. That in case he should, your Conspirators would
let in French Forces into Ireland. 5. That your Brother was brought to such a
state of Security, that if any Malecontent amongst you should not prove true to
you or your Design, he would not give ear to their Information.

1. The great Preparations that were made for the Rising of the Irish Papists,
and this your Agent Talbot was engaged in, and your Secretary Coleman was privy
to it, and you too, by the Letters that Coleman wrote by your Order to the said
La Chaise, with whom you your self left this Jesuit to correspond, Coleman
being a Servant to you, and a trusty one too. But there were many Protestants
that had their Eyes opened, and made their Observations of the Carriage of your
Teagues, how imprudently insolent they had been, and how they were Armed and
Countenanced by some in the Government, and therefore they can attest the Truth
of this Proposition of mine, and they are Men of unexceptionable Credit. So
that if you will try the Merits of the Cause, you may come forth and be heard.

2. That the great Design of Rising was for the Defense of their Liberties and
Religion, and the Recovery of their Estates. You know, Sir, that you were
converted to the Religion of the Church of Rome; and you were so zealous for
it, even to a Miracle, that you regarded nothing in the World in Comparison of
your Religion: And so it was with your Friends here in Ireland; and whilst the
English Protestants were uppermost, you had instilled this Principle in them,
by your Jesuits, and other Conspirators, that they were but Slaves: And as for
those that could not recover their Estates, forfeited by Rebellion, by the dint
of Perjury, they must try by the dint of the Sword to destroy the English
Protestant Interest; or else they were not only Slaves, but Beggars too into
the bargain.

3. They were not certain but that the King your Brother might engage in
earnest with the Parliament, in an actual War against France; you know, Sir, he
had been but uncertain in his Proceedings with you in this damnable Conspiracy,
for he had broke the Engagements that he had made with Madam your Sister, in
the Establishing the Popish Religion in Ireland, and that he had passed the
Test Bill in England; and that he refused to sign Coleman's Declaration, for
the dissolving the Parliament, notwithstanding his solemn Engagements to you
and your Party to do it; and that he received the Sacrament in his Chapel
according to the Usage of the Church of England, though he had received the
same but that morning, from Ireland the Jesuit, according to the Rites of the
Church of Rome; and therefore neither Teague nor your self were sure of him.

4. In Case he should heartily engage with the Parliament, in an actual War
against France, your Conspirators would let in French Forces into Ireland, and
so they did when you Traitorously Invaded that Kingdom, and what they did for
you then, they would have done as much for you eight or ten Years before. They
were zealous for the Popish Religion, and so were you, and your Interests were
both one, and they are to this day; I think I need not go further to prove that
Point.

5. The King your Brother was brought to such a state of Security, that if any
Malecontent amongst you should not be true to you or your Design, he would not
give ear to their Information: you know who it was that so governed the King,
and led him by the Nose, but you supposed your selves safe: But this remember,
that when Information was made of this Hellish Conspiracy, the King your
Brother heard it, and the Evidence was so strong, and the Plot made so plain,
that he could not gainsay it, he being in every part of it himself, excepting
that of his own Life; and was convinced that the Parliament ought to have the
Examination of the same put into their hands, which was accordingly done. And
what the Parliament, that was within some few days after the Discovery thereof
to sit, did do, and what Credit they gave to it, and three other Parliaments,
you and your Followers cannot forget.

9. Your Conspirators, the Jesuits from St. Omer's, were made acquainted, by
Letters, from those of London, in conjunction with your Servant Coleman, That
William Morgan, and one Lovel, Jesuits, were dispatched as Messengers into
Ireland, to see how Affairs stood there; and this Morgan's, and his Companion's
Charges were paid by the said Coleman, who gave them Instructions, in your
Name, to encourage the Irish Papists, to defend their Religion and Liberties:
And Coleman, and the Jesuits transmitted 2000 Pound for the Supply of their
present Wants; and a Promise of 4000 Pound was, in your Name, made by Coleman,
and the Jesuits, in case there should be any Action.

But, Sir, these Messengers, Morgan and Lovel, they went away on the last of
January, 1677/8. and returned the latter part of March following, and gave such
a melancholy Account of Peter Talbot's lavishing the Money that you had in a
special manner entrusted him withal, and not applying the same for the use of
the Irish, as you had directed, that it struck a great Damp upon the Minds of
your Conspirators here in London: and, That the said Talbot had forged Receipts
of several Sums of Money by him paid to several of their Officers, though the
same were neither paid by him, nor yet received by them; and not only so, but
that the Protestants in the North of Ireland were much alarmed at those
Quantities of Arms and Ammunition that were put into the Hands of the Irish
Catholics.

10. Your Conspirators, Coleman, and the Jesuits in London, received Letters
from St. Omers, written from Father Ireland, (not he that was hanged, for his
own Name was Ironmonger; but this Man's own Name was Saltmarsh) That Care was
taken for the Destruction of the Duke of Ormond in Ireland, he being then
Lord Lieutenant there: And for what Reason? Because he had refused, Sir, to
join with you in Breaking the English Interest in that Kingdom; though, Sir,
you may remember, that the said Duke was a Person very Obsequious to your
Brother, and your Self; and the Reason why you could not get him to engage with
you in Omnibus, was his own Safety and Ease. Yet when you acted, by the King's
Command, the said Duke never failed you; nor did his Son, the Earl of Ossory,
which cost that good Gentleman many a Sigh when he came to dye; for the
Business of the Smyrna Fleet, and the Wicked War against the Dutch, stuck upon
his Soul to the last Minute of his Life. But I say, Because the Duke of Ormond
would not push on every thing you put upon him, he was not for your turn;
though, give him his due, he had gone farther than his Inclinations lead him,
to please your Mind.

11. In the last place, when you took the Crown, you in a short time put the
whole Government into the Hands of the Irish Papists, by which means the
English Protestant Interest was in great danger to be lost; and the Protestant
Inhabitants were under the daily Fears, through your Grace and Favor, of
having their Throats cut; nay many, daily, by your Cutthroat Teagues, were, by
your especial Direction, basely, inhumanely, and barbarously murdered. So that
some tasted of that Cruelty which others justly apprehended from the Arbitrary
Power you set up there: Some of them left the Kingdom, and abandoned their
Estates, calling to mind that Cruel and Bloody Massacre which fell upon their
Fathers in that Kingdom, in the year 1641. And to crown your Work, you
traitorously invaded that Kingdom, and called a Number of your Villains
together, and christened them by the Title and Name of a Parliament; and what
you did by their countenance, many yet alive can tell. But Doctor King, an old
Passive Obedience Friend of yours, has painted you out at large in those
particular Carriages of yours, when you, with your French Mirmidons, invaded
that Kingdom.

But, Sir, let me tell you, That Great William our King has endeavored, and
does still study to bring Ireland into such a State, that the Settlement of the
Protestant Religion may there be religiously observed, and the Protestant
English Interest may be secured against any Effort of yours, or your Irish
Teagues to the contrary notwithstanding.

III. SCOTLAND.
You having played your Game so well in Ireland, it will not be amiss to cast
our Eye upon that Quondam Ancient Kingdom, and see how you managed there; for
as you managed Ireland by a Tool that succeeded the Lord Roberts, so in
Scotland You and your Brother acted by Lauderdale, for he brought all the Laws
and Liberties of Scotland to the Council Chamger, bringing all Persons and
Causes of any moment to your Arbitrary Council, who acted as Lords Paramount
without control; and so zealous were you, by him, to promote and support the
French Interest there, that continually new Levies were making in Scotland for
the Service of the French King, though at that very time we were pretending a
French War in England. You remember, Sir, that by your Influence upon the King
your Brother, and on the Council of Scotland, you make them use all the
diligence that was possible to get an Army there, to be a standing Army in the
room of the Militia of that Kingdom, the Militia being not thought fit for your
Popish Designs: And the means to effect the same, you pitched upon those you
judged to be the most effectual; which was, first to Oppress and Enrage the
Dissenters: and this could not be better accomplished, than by disturbing and
prosecuting their Meetings, and Religious Assemblies for the Worship of God;
which You and your Conspirators did with all imaginable diligence. And you
having found out a new way by caution, your Conspirators devised a Bond should
be imposed upon every Man they marked out for Ruin, as being Enemies to their
Arbitrary Proceedings; which Bond was, That the Landlord should be bound for
his Tenant, the Master for his Servant, and the Husband for the Wife, and
Father for the Children, not to go to Conventicles: Which you knew many would
not do; for that the People of Scotland generally hated Praelatical Government.
But this way they thought would so enrage the People, whom they fore-knew would
not part with their Meetings, that they doubted not but to force a Rebellion;
and thereupon have a fair Pretense to raise Forces for the Security of the
Kingdom against restless Meeters and Meetings. Which Design, Sir, You and your
Party in that Kingdom did at last effect.

Another Device you and your Conspirators had of seizing the Field-Meetings by
the armed Forces, and destroying them both in Bodies and Estates, and dragging
them to Gaols, and then by whole Ship-loads selling them to the Plantations as
Condemned Men; and Ship-loads coming here for London, they, by one way or
another, got their Liberty. Was this of the Bond all? And was the Selling of
them all? No: For You and your Conspirators found out another way, by the
Tyranny of Duke Lauderdale; and that was this:

There was a Warrant procured from the Council of Scotland to disarm diverse
Shires and Low-lands of that Kingdom; and when that would not exasperate them,
then another Order was procured to order the High-landers, a sort of barbarous
Papists, to be armed, and by whole Regiments to come down upon the Inhabitants,
spoiling and destroying the whole Country, living amongst them at discretion;
and these very High-landers, thus armed, under the pretense of keeping the
Peace, had, in their Commission from your Brother's and your Council in
Scotland, Authority to live at Free Quarter upon those Inhabitants, which they
did diverse Months together, to the destruction of the poor People. And all this
was to procure a Rebellion at any rate.

But least this should be too general, I will descend to some Particulars, that
the thing may be plain, to your Ragged Regiment at St. Germans, and your
Hell-born Cutthroat Crew here in England.

I. I will show you, in several Particulars, how your Brother and You invaded
the Rights of the Good People of Scotland in general. II. I will give you to
remember some Instances of your Brother's, and your Barbarity to particular
Persons. III. Your Brother's and your way of using your Prisoners.
I. Give me leave to put you and your Conspirators in mind of several
Particulars, in which your Brother and you invaded the Rights of the good
People of Scotland: And that this Point may be more plain, I will illustrate it
in these following Particulars.

1. Your Conspirators in Scotland did most grossly, falsely, and impudently
misrepresent to the King your Brother, and your Self, the Condition of the
Western Counties of the Kingdom of Scotland, as if they had been in a State of
Rebellion; though it is well known that they had never made any Opposition to the
King's Authority; nor did they resist any of the King's Forces, but patiently
submitted to the Execution of the Laws: But You and your Conspirators purposing
to have the King's Authority to carry on your sinister Designs, You, with your
Conspirator Lauderdale, and the rest of your Popish Crew, advised the King (who
was not difficult in that Point to consent) to raise an Army against the
Protestants in Scotland; and a Letter was signed by your Brother, and sent to
the Council of Scotland. Upon the Receipt of this Letter, your Conspirators,
the Council of Scotland made out Orders for the Raising an Army of about Eight
or Nine thousand, the most or which were Popish Highlanders: Which, Sir, was so
wicked a Contrivance, that the Nobility and Gentry of the Western Counties did
send to Edinburgh, and for the Security of the Peace did offer to engage, That
whosoever should be sent, the Laws should be put in execution, and should meet
with no Affront; and that they would become Hostages for their Safety. Yet this
Army so raised by You, and your Conspirators, with the Color of the King your
Brother's Authority, was marched into a Peaceable Country, and did, according
to their Commissions, take Free Quarter; and in most Places levied great Sums
of Money, under the Notion of Dry Quarters; and did Plunder and Rob the
Protestants, of which no Redress could be obtained, though Complaints were
daily made of these Barbarities: For your Brother and You were resolved, that
nothing should satisfy your Cruelty, but the extirpation of those who did not
comply, without reserve, with your Arbitrary Proceedings.

2. That it was apparent, that your Design was not only to destroy those that
went to Field-Meetings, but also the whole Protestant Interest; for those that
were Field-Meeters, were but tenderly used, in comparison of those who went to
Church, who were most quarrered upon, and destroyed; those of the
Field-Meeters, parting with their Moneys to be excused as long as they were
able; and when those poor Wretches had no more Money to satisfy your
dragooning Apostles, they were miserably used by them: By which means several
Families were Ruined, and brought to starve for want of Bread.

3. The Protestants also were required to subscribe exorbitant and illegal
Bonds, which was impossible to be performed by them, which was against the Law
of Nature, which is, no Man is bound to impossibilities, viz. That they, their
Wives and Children, Servants and Tenants, should live orderly, according to
Law, and not go to Conventicles, or entertain Vagrant Preachers, with several
other Particulars; by which Bond, those that signed it were liable to answer
for all Men's Transgressions that lived upon their Lands: Which was so hard a
Case, that Coleman himself thought, that if that did not make them Rebel,
nothing would.

4. That many of the Protestants of that Kingdom, within those Counties, were
proclaimed Rebels, and Writs issued forth for the seizing of their Persons,
upon their refusing the aforesaid Wicked and Illegal Bond; and the Nobility and
Gentry within those Counties, who had been ever faithful to the Crown, and had
appeared in Arms for the King, were Discharged upon Oath, and a Proclamation
was by your procurement Issued out, forbidding the Nobility and Gentry, upon
great Penalties, to keep any Horses above Four pounds Ten groats a Piece.

5. That the Protestant Nobility and Gentry of the Shire of Air, at your
Instance and Suggestion, were, by the King's Order to the Advocate-General,
indicted of High Treason, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors. These
Indictments were delivered to them in the Evening to be answered by them the
next Morning upon Oath, and when they did demand two or three days time to
consider of their Indictments, and craved the Benefit of having Counsel to
advise withal in Matters of so high Concernment, and also excepted against
their being put to swear against themseves in Matters that were Capital; those
desires were rejected, and were told they must swear instantly, or be reputed
guilty.

6. Notwithstanding the Imposition of the Oath was illegal; and the denying of
Time to consider of their Indictments; and to have Lawyers allowed them to
advise withal, had never been denied to the greatest of Malefactors; nor,
indeed, could be by the Laws of that Kingdom, yet for all this, these Noblemen
and Gentlemen knowing their Innocence of all that had been charged upon them,
did purge themselves by Oath, of all the Particulars that were objected to
them, and were thereupon acquitted, and though the Conspirators in the
Committee of Council used the severest manner of Inquiry to discover any
seditious or treasonable Designs, which were pretended as Grounds for marching
that Army into those Western Counties, yet nothing ever could be proved. So
false was that Suggestion concerning a Rebellion then designed by them, though
heartily desired by you and your Conspirators.

7. The Oppressions, notwithstanding the Acquittal of those Noblemen and
Gentlemen of the said Counties, continuing upon them, they went to Edenburg, to
represent to the Council the heavy Pressure they and their People lay under,
and were ready to offer to them, all, that in Law, or Reason, could be required
of them, for securing the Peace: The Council being Conspirators with your
Vice-Tyrant Lauderdale, I did immediately upon their appearing there, set forth
a Proclamation, requiring them to depart the Town within three days, upon very
great Penalties. And when the Duke of Hamilton did petition for leave to stay
for two or three days longer upon some very urgent Affairs of his own, that was
refused him.

8. That when some Person of very great Quality, had declared to the Villain
Lauderdale that they would go and represent their Condition to the King, since
they could not have Justice from his Ministers. But to prevent that, a
Proclamation was set forth, forbidding all the Subjects to depart the Kingdom
of Scotland without License, so that the King might not be acquainted with the
Condition of the poor Protestants, and that they might not apply to him for
Redress though it would have been to little purpose, he, and you, and this
Lauderdale being in the Conspiracy to have them destroyed.

2. Give me leave in the Second Place, to remember you of some particular
Persons that were Oppressed by you and your Wicked Instrument, the said Duke
Lauderdale; they were Persons of great Note, for their Quality and Worth, and
their Oppression so great, that the Protestants in Scotland were apprehensive
that all Protestants might be, upon the slightest Occasions, brought under the
like Oppression; for you, and your Conspirators there managed your wicked
Designs and Purposes with all the Dexterity and Diligence that Men that had a
Mighty Work upon their Hands, and Mighty Minds to go through with it, could do
for you and your Party; there being of the Council upon many occasions
proceeded to a new kind of Punishment; for those who would not comply with your
Villainous Designs of bringing in of Slavery, so that Popery might the more
easily be introduced into that Kingdom, viz. Of declaring Men of Public Trust,
whereby the greatest Persons were Robbed of their Honor, and a Stain laid not
only upon them but upon their Posterity also; nay, the Parliament it self was
Branded with Infamy, by such a Severe and Illegal Sentence by Lauderdale
himself in the time of the Lord Middleton's Government, yet he by your
Procurement, and the express Command of your Brother King Charles, caused it to
be done in the lower Courts.

I will Sir, for the satisfaction of your Bloody Cutthroats, both here at
home, and your ragged Crew at St. Germains, put you in mind of several
Instances in which that Ban-Dog Lauderdale, served your Brothers and your
wicked Designs and Purposes.

You may remember the Twelve Worthy Protestant Citizens of Edinburgh that were
declared incapable of Public Trust, against whom no Complaint was made as can
be made out, against you; but you will say, What was the Cause? Then I Answer,
These Men being Magistrates of that City, refusing to part with the public
Money of the City to Lauderdale for what Uses you know well enough, they, I
say, were turned out, and Conspirators of your own Stamp put in their Places,
and then the Public Money was drawn out of the City's Bank at the desire of
the Conspirators.

The Provosts of Aberdeen, Glascow, and Gadburgh, were put under the same
Sentence for Signing a Letter to the King your Brother, in a Convention of
Boroughs, Stating a true Account of their great Oppressions by the
Conspirators; which Letter was Signed by the whole Body, and the Letter was
advised by your Brother's Advocate, as a Letter that had nothing in it which
could bring them under any Guilt; yet those were there singled out of the whole
Number, and Incapacitated, besides, a high Fine and a long Imprisonment.

Sir Patrick Hume, since a Peer of that Kingdom, not of your Creation, but of
the Creation of our Gracious King that now is: This worthy Person being sent by
the Shire of Berwick, to complain of some illegal Proceedings, in Order to
obtain a legal Remedy and Redress, which he did only in the Common Form of Law,
was also declared incapable of Public Trust, besides many Months imprisonment;
and since then, he was another time imprisoned for almost one whole Year, and
nothing ever was charged upon him.

The Provost of Linlithgoe being complained of, for not furnishing some of your
Brother's Forces with Baggage-Horses, was called before the Council, and
because he said they were not bound in Law to furnish Horses in such a manner,
he was immediately declared Incapable of Public Trust, and was both fined and
imprisoned.

Your Conspirators, as they were diligent, doing yours and the Devils Drudgery,
they sometimes out-did themselves to please you; for at one time they
incapacitated 50 of the Town of S. Johnstons, upon a very slight Pretense;
insomuch that they could not find a sufficient number of Citizens for the
Magistracy of that Town.

It is well known, Sir, that for your Brother's Service and yours, and for the
carrying on of your cursed Designs in that Kingdom of Scotland, several
Protestants, upon slight, and, oftentimes, upon no Ground, were imprisoned, and
sometimes kept Prisoners for many Months, nay Years, though nothing has been
objected to them. Some have been required to enter themselves Prisoners,
contrary to the Laws of that Kingdom; a particular Instance you made of
Lieutenant General Drummond, whose great Loyalty could never be forgotten, he
was required to enter himself a Prisoner in the Castle of Dunbarton, where he
was kept for eighteen Months time, nine of which he was made a close Prisoner;
yet nothing was objected to him to give the least Color for that usage.

The Lord Cardross, a Man of great Virtue and Integrity, was for his Lady's
keeping two meetings in her House, though he was present at neither of them,
fined Eleven Thousand Pound Sterling; and was kept several Years a Prisoner in
Edinburgh Castle, and was a frequent and a long Petitioner for his Liberty, and
could not find for a long time the least Inclination in any of the
Conspirators; nay, Application was made to the King, but from your incensing
the King against him, his Petition was rejected.

Besides all these illegal Imprisonments, the King your Brother, and your self,
had Rogues of a deeper Dye; they were Officers in your Cutthroat Army in
Scotland; these carried with them General Warrants for the apprehending of any
Person that the Conspirators had a spite to, though under no legal Censure, nor
have been so much as cited to appear, which put many of the poor Protestants to
very great Fears as also to great Expense (Just, Sir, as your Atterburies and
the rest of your cursed Messengers did here in England in the time of your
Tyranny.)

Captain Castaires, a notable Villain, and fit for a Dragooning Apostle for the
Devil's Service and yours, did entrap one Kirkton an outed Minister of Jesus
Christ, into his Chamber at Edenbourgh, and did violently abuse him and
designed to extorted some Money from him; the Noise of this coming to the Ears
of one Baily, Brother in Law to the said Kirkton, he came to the House, and
hearing him cry Murder, Murder, forced open his Chamber Door, where he found
his Brother in Law and the Captain grapling; the Captain pretended he had a
Warrant against Kirkton, and Baily desired him to show it, and promised that
all Obedience should be given to it; but the Captain refusing to do it, Kirkton
was rescued. This was only delivering a Man from one of your Robbers according
to the Law of Nature. The Captain complained of this to your Conspirators, and
the Lord Hatton, with others of the same Kidney, were appointed to examine the
Witnesses; and when it was brought before the Council, the Duke of Hamilton,
the Earls of Morton and Dumfrize, and Kincardin, the Lord Cocheren, and Sir
Archibald Primrose, then Lord Register, desired, that the Report of the
Examination might be read; but that not serving the Designs of your
Conspirators, was denied: Thereupon those Lords delivered their Opinions, That
since Castaires did not show any Warrant, nor was clothed with any public
Character, it was no Opposition to the King's Authority, in Baily to rescue the
said Kirkton: But for this Opinion, the King your Brother, and your self, and
Lauderdale, put these Lords out of the Council, and out of all Command in the
Militia, and though it could have been made appear that he had no Warrant at
all against Kirkton, but procured it after the Violence committed, and it was
antedated on design to serve a turn at that time; yet the said Baily was fined
6000 Marks and kept in Prison for a long time; which sort of Proceedings put
the poor Protestants under sad Apprehensions.

3. Now, Sir, I pray remember how your Conspirators used the poor Protestants
when they had them in Prison. There was fourteen Men taken at a Field Meeting,
who, without being legally convict of that or any other Crime, were secretly
and in the Night taken out of a Prison upon a Warrant signed by the Earl of
Linlithgo, and the Lords Hatton and Collington, and were delivered to Captain
Maitland, who had been Page to Duke Lauderdale, but after, a French Officer,
and was making his Levies in Scotland, and were carried over to the Service of
the French King, in the Year 1676.

Your Conspirators in Scotland did, for your Brother's Service and yours, upon
many Occasions proceed to the most unreasonable and arbitrary Fines either for
slight Offenses, or for Offenses where the Fine is regulated by Law, which they
have never considered when the Persons were obnoxious to them. So the Lord
Cardross was fined 11000 l. for his Ladies keeping two Meetings in his House,
and Baptizing a Child by an outed Minister, without his Knowledge; the Provost
formerly mentioned, and Baily, and many others were also fined without any
Regard had to the Law.

4. Give me leave, Sir, to put you in mind of a fourth Piece of Villainy acted
by you and your Brother upon the Protestants of Scotland. Your Conspirators, by
your Brother's Authority, and your Procurement, did several times proceed to
take away Gentlemen's Dwelling houses from them, and to put Garrisons into them,
even in the time of Peace, contrary to all Law, Justice, and Reason. In the
Year 1675, it was designed against twelve Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen,
and executed upon the Houses of the Earl of Callendar, the Lord Cardross, the
Lady Lumsden, etc. and it was again attempted in the Year 1678, upon the Houses
belonging to the Lairds of Chesnock, Blaghan and Rowallane, and they were
possessed by Soldiers and declared Garrisons: Nor did it rest here, but your
Conspirators sent Orders, and required the Countries about those Houses, to
furnish them for the use of your Soldiers, and to supply them with
Necessaries, contrary to the Laws of that Kingdom: It was against this, that
Sir Patrick Hume, now a Peer of Scotland, applied himself to the Conspirators
to have Redress; and common Justice being denied him, he used a legal
Protestation in the ordinary Form of the Law of that Kingdom, and was thereupon
kept many Months in Prison, and declared incapable of all Public Trusts.

5. I must put you in mind how you by your Conspirators endeavored to kindle a
Flame amongst the Scotch; for since you had disobliged so many of them, and had
begot such a Disaffection in them against you and your Brother; your great
Design was to keep that Disaffection alive, and not only so, but so to increase
it, as to make them rise and take up Arms in their own defense; therefore in
order to this in the Year 1677, April 19. the Letters of your Conspiring
Jesuits, to the Procurator-General at Madrid, gave him notice, that your
Conspirators at London, the Fathers of the Society, had sent for Scotland,
three Jesuits in Masquerade to give the poor provoked Scots to understand these
three things: 1. That all the Miseries, under which they groaned, was from the
Bishops and their Clergy, which Doctrine they were inclined enough to believe,
they naturally hating the Government of the Church by that sort of Men, as
being against the express Word of God, and tending to Tyranny. 2. That there
was no other way to recover their Liberty and Religion, but by the Sword; and
this was certainly true, for they had made all the humble Applications that
could be made by Men, both to the King your Brother and the Council in
Scotland, and could find no Redress of their Grievances; for as these Villains
were sent to exasperate them on the one hand, so you and your Traitor
Lauderdale augmented their Miseries on the other hand, and all in Order to make
them take up Arms in their own Defense. 3. That the King your Brother was so
addicted to his Pleasure, that he neither would nor could take care in that
Concern, but left them to be redressed by those that cruelly oppressed them;
which was as notoriously true: and you wanted not your wicked Instruments to
accomplish the great Design you had in hand, of enslaving the Protestants of
that Kingdom, so that the Method you took, by your Jesuits, by their
Insinuations, and by your Taskmasters to oppress them, you did very much
incline them, to take up Arms against your Conspirators in their own Defense.

Sir, Your Jesuits in Scotland laid not aside their Attempts there, to make the
distressed Protestants rise; for the whole Popish Party was at Work to stir up
the Commotion, by them designed, in that Kingdom, as appears by Letters from
thence, from your Incendiaries, of the 11th. of August, 1678. Nay, that the
Work might take effect, Eight thousand Scots that were of the Romish Religion
should be ready, For what? to join with the disaffected Scots: Such Sots you
employed, as if the disaffected Scots would join with them. But the Truth of it
was, to Pillage and Destroy the Habitations of those that should rise in the
Defense of their Lives, Liberties, and Religion; for that was the Intent,
whatever Imaginations your Cutthroat Jesuits had in their empty Noddles, that
appears in their Packet of August the 10th. 1678. directed to John Grove: For
you must remember that was your Design, and Lauderdale's, though your Jesuits
thought, that the poor Protestants might be brought to join with the Popish
Party, to make a Commotion there: for when your Secretary perused the Contents,
he laughed at the Folly of the Scotch Jesuits, but said, If the Scotch would
rise, he cared not with whom they joined; for their Rising was the thing that
was desired.

Your Design had its effect; for their Provocations were so many, and their
Oppression so great from Lauderdale, and his wicked Party, who were serving
your Brother's, and your Popish Designs, to bring that People under a despotick
Power, and the Insolences of your impudent Clergy was such, that they could no
longer bear; and therefore in the Year 1679. they did raise Forces, and armed
them; and by their Declaration they were far from carrying on a Popish Design;
for their Design was the Extirpation of Popery, and Popish Prelacy, out of
Scotland, which had been a great Grievance to that Kingdom. And because, Sir,
you may have forgotten their Declaration, I will give it Word for Word, and is
as follows:

AS it is not unknown to a great Part of the World, how Happy the Church of
Scotland was whilst they enjoyed the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in Purity and
Power, of which we have been deplorably deprived, by the Reestablishment of
Prelacy; so it is evident, not only to impartial Persons, but to professed
Enemies, with what unparalleled Patience and Constancy the People of God have
endured all the Cruelty, Injustice, and Oppression, that the Will and Malice of
Prelacy and Malignants could invent, and exercise. And being most unwilling to
act any thing which might import Opposition to lawful Authority, or engage the
Kingdoms in War, although we have been all along groaning under the
Over-turning the Work of Reformation, Corruptions of Doctrine, Slighting of
Worship, Despising of Ordinances, the Changing the Ancient Church Discipline
and Government, Thrusting out so many of our Faithful Ministers from their
Charges, Confining straightly, Imprisoning, Exileing, yea, and putting to Death
many of them, and Intruding upon their Flocks a Company of Insufficient
Scandalous Persons, Confining, Imprisoning, Torturing, Tormenting, Scourging,
and Stigmatizing Poor People, Plundering their Goods, Quartering upon them Rude
Soldiers, Selling their Persons to Foreign Plantations, Horning and
Intercommuning many of both Sexes, whereby great Numbers, in every corner of
the Land, were forced to leave their Dwellings, Wives, Children, and Relations,
and made to wander as Pilgrims, still in Hazard of their Lives, none daring to
Recet, Harbor, or Supply, (though Starving;) or so much as to speak to them,
though upon Deathbed, without making themselves obnoxious to the same
Punishments. And these things acted under color of Law, in effect tending to
banish not only all Sense of Religion, but also to extinguish all natural
Affection, even amongst Persons of nearest Relations, and likewise groaning
under the intolerable Yoke of Oppression in our Civil Interest, our Bodies,
Liberties, and Estates; so that all manner of Outrages have been most
arbitrarily exercised upon us, for a Tract of several Years past, particularly
in the Year 1678. by sending us an armed Host of Barbarous Savages, contrary to
all Law, and Humanity; and by laying on us several Impositions, and Taxes, as
formerly, so of late, by a Meeting of Prelimited and Overawed Members in the
Convention of Estates in July, 1678. for keeping up of an armed Force,
entrusted (as to a great part of it) into the Hands of avowed Papists, or
Favorers of them, by whom sundry Invasions have been made upon us, and most
exorbitant Abuses, and incredible Insolences committed against us; and we
being continually sought after, while meeting in Houses for Divine Worship,
Ministers and People frequently apprehended, and most rigorously used; and so
being necessitated to attend the Lord's Ordinances in the Fields, in the most
desert Places; and there also often hunted out, and assaulted, to the effusion
of our Blood, and killing of some, whereby we were inveitably constrained
either to defend our selves by Arms at those Meetings, or be altogether
deprived of the Gospel preached by Faithful Ministers, and made absolute
Slaves: At one of which Meetings, upon the First Day of June instant, being the
Lord's Day, Captain Graham, of Claverhouse, being warranted by a late
Proclamation to kill whomsoever he found in Arms at Field-Conventicles making
Resistance, did furiously assault the People assembled; and further, to
provoke, did cruelly bind, like Beasts, a Minister, with some others whom he
had found that same Morning in Houses; and several being killed on both sides,
they knowing certainly that by Law they behoved (if apprehended) to dye, they
did stand to their own defense, and continue together; and there, after many of
our Friends and Countrymen being under the same Oppression, expecting the same
measure, did freely offer their Assistance. We therefore thus inevitably, and
of absolute Necessity, forced to take this last Remedy, (tho Magistrates having
shut the Door by a Law against Application, that whatever our Grievances be,
either in things Civil or Sacred, we have not the Privilege of a Supplicant) do
judge our selves bound to dcelare, That these, with many other horrid
Grievances, in Church and State, (which we purpose to manifest more fully
hereafter) are the true Causes of this our Lawful and Innocent Self-defence:
And we most solemnly, and in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all
Hearts, declare, that the true Reasons of our continuing in Arms, heartily and
sincerely, are these:

First, The defending and securing of the true Protestant Religion, and
Presbyterian Government founded upon the Word of God, and summarily
comprehended in our Confessions of Faith and Catechism, and established by the
Laws of this Land, to which King, Nobles, and People are solemnly sworn and
engaged in our National Solemn League and Covenant; and more particularly the
Defending and Maintaining the Kingly Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ over
his Church, against all sinful Supremacy derogatory thereto, and incroaching
thereupon.

Second, The preserving and defending the King's Majesty, his Person and
Authority in the Preservation and Defense of that true Religion and Liberties
of the Kingdom, that the World may bear Witness with our Consciences, of our
Loyalty; and that we have no Thoughts nor Intention to diminish his just Power
and Greatness.

Third, The Obtaining of a Free and United Parliament, and a Free and General
Assembly in Order to the Redressing of our foresaid Grievances for the
preventing the eminent Danger of Popery, and extirpating Prelacy from amongst
us.

This therefore being the Cause we appear for, and resolve, in God's Name, to
own, hereby homologating all the Testimonies of faithful Sufferers for the
Truth in Scotland these eighteen Years by gone. We humbly request the King's
Majesty to restore all things as he found them when God brought him home to his
Crown and Kingdoms; and if that cannot be obtained, then we heartily and humbly
invite and entreat, beseech and obtest, by the Bowels of Jesus Christ, all who
are under the same Bonds with us, to occur in this Common Cause and Interest;
and that they will not stand still and see not only us oppressed but this
foresaid Cause ruined, Adversaries proudly and highly insult against God and
all good Men, Friends of the Truth discouraged, yea, the Protestant Cause in
Britain and Ireland, and even your selves within a little time made a Prey of,
or else forced, when we are broken, (which the good Lord prevent) dreadfully to
wrong your Consciences. Finally, because we desire no Man's hurt or blood, we
request our Countrymen, now the standing Forces of this Kingdom, some of them
being our Friends and Kinsmen, not to fight against us, least in so doing they
be found fighting against the Lord, whose Cause and Quarrel we are sure he will
own and signally countenance, seeing we fight under his Banner who is the Lord
of Hosts.

This, Sir, you know, was the Declaration of these Blessed Servants of God, but
you had not filled up the measure of your Sins, and therefore God was pleased
to deliver these miserably enslaved wretches into your hands, and they were
made a prey to your never to be forgotten Cutthroats; and some of them sealed
their Testimony of Jesus with their Blood: You may remember what Havoc your
Popish Crew made of them both in their Estates and Families, that Scotland was
a Field of Blood, through many Barbarous Murders that you by the Hands of your
Party Committed there.

Some of your bloody Crew here, especially the Tyrant Lauderdale, were
exceeding glad of the News of these poor Protestants Rising, and your Popish
Conspirators and their Motly Protestant Admirers and Abettors did prick up
their Ears at the News, and concluded the Day was their own. Our English Popish
Army was to cut their Throats first, and then the Throats of all English Men
that stood in their Way afterward. And Lauderdale highly valued himself upon
this Rising (for Posts came every day to White Hall to bring the News of their
Increasing) boasting that now the Fanatics had showed themselves in their
Colors; and that it was by that strict hand that he had kept over them in
Scotland that had been the Cause of their being quiet so long, hoping by this
to get Honor for his prudent Management, when all Mankind knows that his
Management was with a Design to make them take up Arms: And it was you and he
that raised that Devil; but, Sir, you know whom you had appointed to betray
them. Sir, you were in Flanders, thither the News was sent to you, not because
you were ignorant of the Contrivance; but it was a Watchword for your Return:
But that you might lay this Devil, which you and your Conspirators had raised,
and kill two Birds with one Stone; therefore you pitched upon the Duke of
Monmouth, that he might destroy the Protestants there, and that his Person
might either fall in Scotland, or his Reputation be ruined here at home;
therefore by your Advice or rather Direction, he is ordered for Scotland in all
have, for it was the Grief of your Soul to see him the Darling of the
Protestants of both Kingdoms. Besides, Sir, you knew, that if he went Armed
into Scotland, without Assent of Parliament in both Kingdoms, by an Act made in
the Reign of Charles the F^st, was High Treason and therefore the Consequences
might be fatal to him every way.

However he went by the general Consent of the Council, and was well received
in Scotland, by Virtue of his Commission given him, and draws the Army in
Scotland together and faces these poor Wretches; and indeed, as Matters had
been managed in Scotland, it was a great Question if the Forces in Scotland
would have been prevailed with, with so little Difficulty to be commanded to go
out against these innocent and oppressed Countrymen of theirs, had it not been
to go under the Command of the Duke of Monmouth, who marches up to the Enemy,
they by their Petition desire Liberty of Religion, and offer to lay down their
Arms; it being given out by your Party, that the Duke of Monmouth had a Power
of giving them Terms, but that could not be done by him, for your Bloodhounds
never intended they should have any Quarter given them, therefore he had not
that Power in his Commission, of granting any Terms as was promised him: Nay,
if I am not mistaken, after that he had left London, the Instructions that he
had to grant Terms were recalled before ever he arrived in Scotland; so that
some of our Counselors intended well, and though all things were promised not
long before to be acted before their Faces above-board, yet they were mistaken;
for all the chief of their Consults were privately acted amongst your Popish
Crew, the French Ambassador, and your Priests, at the Duchess of Portsmouth's
Lodgings; and to give them a Reputation, the honest Part of the Council sitting
as Ciphers, all was done as by an Order of the King and Council.

Well, what then? The Duke of Monmouth engaged with these poor Creatures, but
your Rogues, and Trickers, and Officers amongst these poor Souls, soon left
them, before the Battle was begun; so that the Pains of Reducing them was not
very great nor hazardous, and diverse of these poor Protestants were murdered
upon the place by one Oglethorpe, an eminent Cutthroat, yet alive,
notwithstanding they cried for Quarter, which was promised them; but how well
that Promise was kept, was seen; many hundreds of them having been murdered in
cool Blood, under a Color of Law as if they had been Traitors: So that the
Duke comes home a Victor in the sense of some, and a vanquished Person in the
minds and affections of others, who would not, out of Love to him, have had him
engaged with such an ill Company of Cutthroats in such a thing in Scotland,
they knowing it hazardous in many Respects; however, for his own Security, he
procured his Pardon for that Action. But that Pardon though it was an Act of
great foresight in the Duke, yet the Judgment of Heaven pursued him; for as he
contributed to the Murder of so many poor Protestants by the Help of Popish
Cutthroats, so he himself was murdered, and his Friends, by you and your
Popish Cutthroats

It will not be amiss, Sir, to put you in mind of your Cutthroat Lauderdale,
of whom you made such use and who complied against his Understanding, Judgment
and Conscience (if he had any) with you and your Brother in all those
Villainous Acts and Barbarous Inhumanities in Scotland. I will now show the
Opinion that our English Parliament had of that Monster of Mankind.

1. Remember, Sir, the Address of the House of Commons to the King your
Brother, on April 23. 1675. for then they found that some persons in great
Employment under that King had fomented Designs against the Interest of the
Subject, intending to deprive Great Britain of its ancient Rights and
Liberties, that thereby they might the more easily introduce the Popish
Religion and Arbitrary Government, to the ruin and destruction of the Subjects
thereof, amongst whom they had just cause to accuse, for a promoter of such
Designs, the Duke of Lauderdale, because it had been testified in their House
by several Members of Parliament, That in a Hearing before the Council, in the
Case of Mr. Pennystone Whalley, who had committed Mr. John James contrary to
the King's Declaration of the 15th of March 1671, the said Duke of Lauderdale
did publicly affirm, in the presence of the King your Brother, and before
several then attending the Board, that the King's Edicts were to be obeyed, for
that they were equal with the Laws, and ought to be observed; in the first
place thereby justifying the said Declaration, and the Proceedings thereupon,
and declaring his Inclination to Arbitrary Councels, in terror of all good
Protestants. This, Sir, was not all, but they had a farther confirmation of
this Opinion by two Acts of Parliament, of a very strange and dangerous nature,
which they had found in the printed Statutes of Scotland, the first whereof was
in the third Session of the first Parliament held under the King your Brother,
Cap. 25. and the other in a second Parliament, Cap. 2. the like had never
passed since the union of the two Crowns, and were contrary to an Act passed in
the fourth year of the Reign of James the First, your Grandfather, which
intended the better abolition of all memory of Hostility, and the dependencies
thereof between England and Scotland, and the better repressing the Occasions
of Discord and Disorders for time to come; and of a like Act passed about the
same time in Scotland; by the force of which said late Acts there was a Militia
settled in that Kingdom of Twenty thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse, who were
obliged to be in a readiness to march into any part of the Kingdom of England,
for any service wherein your Brother's Honor and Greatness might be concerned;
and they were to obey such Orders and Directions as they should from time to
time receive from the Privy Council of that Kingdom: By color of which general
words the then Parliament did conceive that the Kingdom of England was liable
to be invaded upon any pretense whatsoever. And this was done by the
procurement of that Lauderdale, he having been all the time of those
Transactions Principal Secretary of that Kingdom, and chiefly entrusted with
the administration of the Affairs of State there, and he being Commissioner for
holding the Parliament at the time of passing the latter of the said Acts,
whereby the providing the said Horse and Foot was effectually imposed upon that
Kingdom, and that extraordinary Power vested in the Privy Council there; so
that the Commons of England conceived they had just reason to apprehend the ill
Consequences of so great and an unusal Power, especially since at that time the
Affairs of the Kingdom of Scotland were managed by the said Duke, who published
himself to be a Person of such pernicious Principles; thereupon they prayed the
King your Brother to dismiss him from all his Employments, and forbid him his
Presence and Counsels for ever, as a person obnoxious and dangerous to the
Government.

This, Sir, is the Character, and these are the Qualifications of a person that
your Conspirators judged meet for a man to serve your Cause and Interest; and
how near he brought the People of Scotland to the French Government and
Interest, I must leave an impartial Reader to judge; he wanted nothing but a
King to make an Example of him and all such profligate Monsters of Mankind. But
I will give you a second Instance of the good Opinion that the Commons of
England assembled in Parliament had of this Varlet; and that is as follows.

2. Upon the 10th of May, 1678, the Commons of England assembled in that
Parliament represented to the King your Brother, the deplorable condition the
state of the Kingdom, through evil Counselors, which, Sir, you know were your
Conspirators, and were designing to overthrow the Protestant Interest in both
Kingdoms, and were the Cause why the King your Brother followed not the Advice
of his Parliament for the redressing of Grievances, amongst whom they reckoned
John Duke of Lauderdale, and prayed that the King would remove him from his
Council and Presence for ever.

3. I hasten to a third Instance of the Opinion that the Commons of England had
of the said Duke of Lauderdale; and that was in a Parliament held in May 10th,
1679. They tell the King in their Address, That they found the Kingdoms
involved in imminent dangers and great difficulties by the evil designs and
pernicious Counsels of some who had been, and were then, actually in high
Places of Trust and Authority about the Person of the then King, who, contrary
to the Duty of their Places, by their arbitrary and destructive Counsels,
tending to the subversion of the Rights, Liberties, and Properties of the
People of Great Britain, and the alteration of the Protestant Religion, did
endeavor to alienate the Hearts of the People from the then King and his
Government, amongst whom they had just reason to accuse the Duke of Lauderdale
for a chief promoter of such Counsels, and more particularly for contriving and
endeavoring to raise Jealousies and Misunderstandings between the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, whereby Hostilities might have ensued, and might have
risen between the two Nations. They took notice of the many repeated Addresses
of the immediate preceding Parliament; and were much concerned that
notwithstanding those Addresses they found that Duke Lauderdale, with all his
Qualifications, continued in the Councils of the then King, for that the
Affairs of the Kingdom required that none should be put into such Employments
but such as were not only of known Abilities, Interest and Esteem in the
Nation, but also were without all suspicion of mistaking or betraying the true
Interest of the Nation. Upon these Considerations a new Parliament prayed the
then King to remove him the said Duke Lauderdale from his Employments, and
Person, and Councels for ever.

You well know, that in the Month of February 1678, you were banished into
Flanders, before the meeting of the new Parliament, (for the good King your
Brother parted with his old Pensioners, who lowed very loud for want of Fodder,
and to save Charges, that stale Parliament was dissolved and a new one called)
whom your Conspirators, by the insight they had in the Elections, knew it would
be such a Parliament as was not for their turns; therefore a deep Consult was
held, how to make the Nation to believe that they were in earnest; they
resolved to discover the Plot, and discourage Popery, though in truth it was the
two things you and your Conspirators aimed at to be still supported. However,
to blind the Eyes of Mankind, it was resolved that all imaginable symptoms
should be publicly professed, both for the discovery of the Popish Plot, and
leaving you and your Conspirators, for you were to absent your self from your
Brother, and go beyond Sea for some time, upon these Considerations; the one
was, That you being out of the way, might stop the further examination of the
Popish Plot, then newly discovered to the King, who was in every bit of it but
that of his own Life; and it had a near relation to your self: And by this
means your Conspirators thought to preserve the Chief Conspirator alive and
safe. The other was for a gloss, to make Mankind to think that the King your
Brother and the Court were such mortal Enemies to Popery, that he would not
endure you his Popish Brother near him, for fear of being influenced by Popish
Councels. But, Sir, you may remember, that your self and Conspirators at St.
James's were of a different Opinion, some of your Partisans with all their
might and skill opposed your leaving the Kingdom, for that it would weaken your
Party extremely, and make persons more bold to come in and give Evidence
against you when you were absent than if you were present, and that if you were
absent, though by the Royal Command of your Brother the King, yet the People
would be ready enough to say you fl^d for fear, and that it was in effect to
own your self guilty. Such Arguments as these were used by your Conspirators,
but the Whore Portsmouth carried it for your going; therefore a Command was
sent to you all of a sudden, That it was your Brother's pleasure you should be
gone.

This, Sir, filled many with amazement, who knew not for what ends such
Counsels had been taken; and it filled others with great Joy, they now
believing that the King your Brother, and his Court, would have been purged
from Popery and his Popish Councels, and the Popish Fabric, which had been so
long a building, would again tumble down, when they saw you that were the chief
supporter of it had left your station.

Well, Sir, away you go for Flanders, as if you had been going into another
World; but your Conspirators were not a whit daunted, but resolved to stick as
faithfully to you as you had done before to them. And though by this departure of
yours many of your Conspirators, for whom the Kingdoms were too hot, and who
ought to have danced a Gambrel at Tyburn, under the pretense of being your
Servants, yet notwithstanding, the hardiest and boldest of your impudent Crew
staid behind, and watched Affairs at home, letting nothing be done that was
material but what was done by your Advice and Direction and theirs; and by your
being abroad, they had the opportunity of studying and advising what was fit to
be done at home.

This, Sir, I must observe to you by the way, that before you could be
prevailed upon to go, you were faithfully promised, that nothing of value or
moment should be done or acted without you; nay, the Speech that was to be made
at the Opening of the Parliament was concluded on before you went: Yet for all
this, at the Meeting of the New Parliament, which was now become almost a
Wonder in this Nation, a great panick Fear was struck in all or most of your
Crew, and they certainly had so much Fear upon them, from the least to the
greatest, that they were even ready to cry Quarter, or at least to offer terms
of accommodation, the Nation being in a very great ferment; and your Party,
that had relied so much upon the mighty Mind of the French King for Money, began
to curse him for driving them upon these Extremities; nay, you your self did
not spare to revile him for the same.

The King your Brother happening to be indisposed at Windsor, which being
posted over to you, you return with all speed, and unexpectedly; and being
here, you had but a little inclination to return to Flanders again; but the
King pleasing you with some private Resolutions of his, you did submit to
return again to Flanders, where you was as coldly received as at first; but
your stay was not long there, for the Coast being then clear, you resolved upon
returning home, and did accordingly return; and the design, you know, was then
to fix the Sham Protestant Plot you and your Conspirators had contrived: But
that would not keep you in England, for it was resolved that you should go to
Scotland, to settle the Protestant Religion there, where you received the sad
News of the baffling the Sham-Plot that you and yours had thought to charge
upon some Protestants, which made you take new Measures, and you resolved to
part with a small spell of Money to get the Parliament prorogued for some longer
time, and a greater Sum was pressed from France, but without success; for the
Duke of Bucks spoiled that Design, for which piece of service you owed him a
Cake, and was resolved, if it had not been timely prevented, you would have
bestowed upon him a whole Loaf. But that by the way.

Well, you arrive in Scotland, I pray how were you received? with great Joy to
your Banditti there: Nay, the most excellent Protestant Bishops received you
with tokens of Welcome, and highly resented the Affront that the Parliament of
England had put upon you, when they went about to exclude you, and very
honestly declared against it; and though the Commons of England were so dim
sighted, as not to see that the only way to settle the Protestant Religion was
by a Popish King, yet they could see it, and declare it as an undoubted Truth.
Now, Sir, it was expected that you should admire the Fabric that your old
Friend Lauderdale had so delicately contrived, and in reward of his good
Service advance his Interest: No, no, you no sooner got into Scotland, but you
were designing against Lauderdale, he being the great Instrument of sending you
thither, for you never forgave him that Affront; so that after your arrival in
Scotland his Interest much dwindl'd away. Thus you rewarded one of your old
Friends, who had sold Body and Soul and all to the Devil to serve you and your
Cause; he is gone to his place, I fear, in sure and certain expectation of
Wrath and Vengeance, for the many Villainies he had committed against the
Religion, Laws and Liberties of his Country.

Whilst, Sir, you were in Scotland, you and your Conspirators made your Designs
to go on to your full content, though much diligence was used and pains were
taken in the point: and to give you and your Accomplices that which is your
due, you never did spare your Pains for the bringing on your wicked Devices to
perfection; and you thought it good Policy and your best way to make sure of
something, that if England should be too hard for you, yet you resolved to make
sure of Scotland: And, to repeal those Laws that were in force, which did debar
a Popish Prince from inheriting that Crown, therefore you got a Parliament
called, and your self made High Commissioner. Upon this you labor the Point,
for the choice of the Commoners that should be fit for the purpose; and to
cajole some of the Lords, you entice Hamilton to come into your Interest. You
mounted the Throne as High Commissioner, without regarding the Law, or due
Qualifications necessary in taking the Oaths, for that was below you: And the
King having furnished you with Letters, you are admitted into the Council
without taking the Oaths: But being got into the House, you carried all before
you, and got your Succession to the Crown of Scotland secured by an Act; and
you got a Test passed, by which all were to swear not to endeavor to alter
that Government either in Church or State; and all such as refused were to lose
their Employments. In a word, you made every thing to pass that you and your
Crew had a mind to.

As you were a Privy Councillor in that Kingdom, you wheedled in the Duke of
Hamilton, and admitted him one of the Council, who was very zealous for the
Protestant Religion formerly, but then began to be very cool: And so were the
rest of the cajoled Lords, they all put on the Temper that Scotchmen usually
are attended withal, that is, to be false to the Cause that is persecuted; for,
upon the rising of the Parliament, they suffered the poor Dissenters to be
squeezed to death, and suffered all imaginable Severities to be used toward
them. You succeeding so well in Parliament, you used great Endeavors for a
standing Army, under the notion of securing the Peace against those Dissenters
and Field Meeters; but though you had labored hard in that point, yet the
Success did not answer your expectation so fully as to give you content.

Well, Sir, what becomes of old Lauderdale, your faithful Servant and dearly
beloved Favorite, for I do not find him in this Parliament? No, he is forced to
stay in England, not daring to appear in Scotland, for his Hell hounds were not
able to weather the Point, because the Stream run so strong against him (not
that you had made any change of his Measures in the Conspiracy against the
Protestant Interest and Religion, unless it were for the worse); and very
desirous you were of getting him into Scotland, and no doubt you would have
served him a Scotch Maiden Trick: Why so? Because that Old Dog had been heard
to say, that all you had done in Scotland was nothing, in regard the Oaths were
omitted; and, that the Parliament was but a Convention and what you had done
was in it self void, and of no effect. These were bloody words, and highly
resented by you; and afterward you had an Eye upon Argyle, who began to snort
at the Test; and though he had been a Dog in a String to your Brother and your
self, some Qualm came cross his Conscience: He therefore began to make his
Interpretations upon it, which were such as cut the Throat of the thing it
self: And although the Interpretation he gave could be no other than the genuine
sense of the thing, and plain to be understood, that it could mean no other
than what he intended to take it in, yet it was so much disliked, that he was
then to have been made a Sacrifice, under the notion of being guilty of High
Treason, only for explaining the Test; he was accordingly seized and libelled
against, and found guilty of the Fact, and he was then in a fair way to have
lost his Life for his Ingenuity, but he, with a great deal of dexterity, made
his escape, and so saved himself for that time from being murdered by you and
your Cutthroats there.

Scotland, Sir, you bridled and saddled, and brought the Government there to be
something like the French Mode, differing nothing but that you had made the
Scots the greater Vassals of the two: And the People of that Kingdom caressed
you highly for the grace and favor of their Vassalage, notwithstanding which,
you were not willing to stay any longer there, your Friends advising you by all
means to return to England, to secure your Interest in England, you having
settled Scotland to your content. And this remember, Sweet Sir, that the Whore
Portsmouth, with her Bastard Son, was by your Royal Brother sent to France, to
renew the Dover Treaty, in which she was more successful than your Sister of
blessed memory, for she was caressed by the French King, and her Bastard
honored as a Prince of the Blood, and she settled a firm Correspondency between
Lewis of France and Charles of Great Britain, pursuant to the Treaty at Dover.
This you heard of, and you judged the Strumpet was undermining you, and
obtaining the Succession for her son, which made you after your arrival at
Whitehall more unwilling to return again for Scotland than before; and you
pressed the then King your Brother for your stay here; but you were told, that
you must return to Scotland, where your stay should be but short; you obeyed,
and went by Sea, with your chief Favorite Mumper, who with you was like to
have been lost, but you saved your self and the Curr, and lost some Treasure,
with a great part of your Retinue, who drank your Health, and went to the
bottom. But you arrive in Scotland, and the Money being lost, your Intentions of
having a standing Army there were sunk also.

Your stay was to be short in Scotland, and so shall mine; therefore since I
have put you in mind of your bridling and saddling that poor Kingdom, as a
Subject and a High Commissioner for King Charles, give me leave to remember you
of your Carriage when you pretended to and usurped that Crown as King of
S^otland, for by the Laws of that Kingdom all Popish Princes were incapable of
that Crown: And because of your Omission of the Oaths that were to be by you
taken, all that you did in repealing them was null and void, and to no effect;
so that those Laws were still in force against you, notwithstanding the
aforesaid pretended Repeal; for without those Oaths the meeting together of
Lords and Commons was no Parliament, but a Convention, which cannot repeal any
Statute there. Upon your taking that Crown, the Earl of Argyle, upon the 20th
of May 1685, well knowing how the Protestant Religion must suffer in Scotland,
lands in Scotland near a place called Kentire, and on the 21st sent forth his
Declaration, wherein he tells the Scots, That the End of his coming was the
defense of the Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Protestants
of Scotland against Popery and Arbitrary Government, and therefore he required
all persons from sixteen to sixty to come and join with him, with Arms and
Provisions necessary. One of his sons sent Letters to several Gentlemen upon
the same account, so that in few days his Army was increased to 2500 Men. But,
Sir, your Trappan that betrayed the poor Protestants at Bothw^ll bridge, 1679,
escaping the Gallows, lived to betray this poor Gentleman, in the year 1685.
for, instead of showing him the true way wherein he should have marched,
provided Rogues who led him into a bogg, from whence he returning toward
Glyde, was fallen upon by some Scots, and taken; and, Sir, by your Arbitrary
Order he was basely murdered at Edinburgh on the 30th of June following.

This man had all along fought in your Brother's Cause and Quarrel, and was an
Instrument to betray his Father to your Brother, and was murdered in the
beginning of his Reign after his Return. This man had served your Cause and
Interest in Scotland many years, and had run in the same excess of Riot with
your Conspirators, but God opened his Eyes to see your base Designs against the
Religion and Liberties of his Country, and therefore nothing would satisfy you
but his Blood, and the ruin of his whole Family. Well, he is dead, but I must
say of him, he deserved better Fortune in the World, and more Favor from your
Hands and his that is gone to his place.

Scotland did another time become a Field of Blood; and till it was, you were
not contented. But the Scots being weary of these perpetual disappointments,
they submitted to your Government, and you then declared, by the Advice of your
Villainous Conspirators, especially the damned Bishops, that you were clothed
with an Absolute Power, and that all your Subjects of that Kingdom were bound
to obey you without reserve; upon which you did assume an Arbitrary Power both
over the Religion and Laws of that Kingdom: From all which it is apparent, what
you did when you were Duke of York was in order to complete the Work when you
came to be King James.

These great and insufferable Oppressions of the poor Protestants of that
Kingdom, and the open contempt of all Law, Justice, Sense, and Reason, together
with the sad Consequences that most certainly followed upon it, did put those
poor People under great and just Fears, and did thrice make them offer at such
lawful Remedies as were Allowed by the very Law of Nature, though it was not with
that effect that was desired, Lauderdale and your other Conspirators did
endeavor to make all men to apprehend the loss of their Lives, Liberties
Honors, and Estates, if they should go about to preserve themselves from your
great Oppressions by Petitions, Remonstrances, or other means the Law did allow
of: So you did by several Scotch Noblemen and Gentlemen, to their utter ruin;
therefore what Obligation you have laid upon the Kingdom in general, or any one
Protestant in particular, both before and since your pretended Reign there, I
leave it to your self and Conspirators to judge: And therefore blessed be God
for delivering that Nation from your Tyranny and Oppression.

IV. ENGLAND.
NOW we have seen your particular Projects that you and your Conspirators
pursued to ruin Holland, Ireland, and Scotland, I think it will not be
unnecessary to put you in mind of the Pranks you and your Party played both
before and since you usurped the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, and then you
will see whether you can expect that any honest Englishman should ever engage
for your return again in Peace to this Nation. Therefore I shall use this
method: 1. I shall show you how far you were engaged in the Conspiracy of
turning the Civil Government into downright French Slavery, and our Protestant
Religion into Popery, before you took the Crown. And, 2. I shall show you what
you contributed to it after. 3. I will show you the unreasonableness of the
attempting your return hither: On which Particulars, I hope, you have leisure
enough to reflect, and advise about with your worthy Ministry you have
attending your person at St. Germains.

I. I will show you how far you were engaged in the Conspiracy of turning the
Civil Government into downright French Slavery, and our Protestant Religion
into Popery, before you took the Crown. When God was pleased to restore you and
your Brothers, you may remember that you came into a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey, for its Plenty, and a well-governed Country, for Religion and Virtue. But
this agreed not with the Complexion of your Souls, you had another Game to
play, and this I found in a Letter of yours from Breda to old Courtney the
Jesuit, That you would follow the Directions that Mazarine had given you, and
then you questioned not but to bring the People to receive the Roman Catholic
Religion. This, Sir, was your Project, and how you pursued it, let all the
World judge. Therefore,

1. Your Conspirators were resolved to remove all those who had been eminent in
Virtue and Sobriety from any Command or Place of Trust in the Government. I
must not forget the Usage of those who had been great Instruments in that Work,
viz. Two thousand Ministers in one day laid aside, that room might be made for
those whose Doctrine should enslave the People, and whose profligate Lives
should render Men Atheists enough to be of any Religion but of that which was
according to Godliness; Make them Atheists, said Mazarine, aad you will soon
make them Papists. Nay, the love of Debauchery created such a Prejudice in your
Brother the King, against the Marquess of Argyle, that it was the chief
Obstacle to his being pardoned, for he had reproved Charles for offering
Violence to a sober Lady in Scotland, in the year 1650, for which Reproof he
never forgave Argyle to his dying day. Nay, give me leave to remember you, that
when that unfortunate Lord was in Custody, and humbly requested but to speak
one word with the King before he was carried for Scotland, to be murdered, you
took upon you to reprove any that should move the King, with this Jeer. That
Argyle was one of the Godly Party, it was not for such fellows to see the King:
Or to that purpose; and the King your Brother was pleased to say, Let my Lord
Argyle be content, he shall see the Maiden e're long, his own dearly beloved
Invention. And nothing was a greater Argument for his Destruction than his
Piety.

Sir, I can prove, that those men who were concerned in Judging and Condemning
your Father to death, though that was the Pretense or handle you took to have
them cut off, yet the great reason why they were not spared was, that if they
lived, and as long as they lived they would have been great Obstacles in your
way of debauching the People, and that was the reason of their being cut off;
for old Courtney being at London, and admiring their demeanor and deportment
in their Confinement, gave you an account of their Piety and Devotion. And so
did old Hitchcock the Monk; but what Answer you made them was remarkable; your
Brother and your self would never have had them excepted, had you not been
fully satisfied, that as long as they lived you could have no manner of
prospect of settling the Government, and advancing the Catholic Religion; both
which have told me of their stedfastness and resolution to the last degree, and
could not forbear shedding of Tears when they discoursed that matter to me; and
if you remember, it was the weaker part of those men that had their Lives given
them; not but that some of them were worthy persons, but they had not arrived
to those Experiences of God and true Religion as the others had done, that laid
down their Lives in that Cause. But the truth is, I never found many of them
had so little Grace as to repent of what they had done.

Nay, your Rage did not cease here; for you, by all the Wrong imaginable,
packed a Parliament together of greenheaded young Gentlemen, the Sons of some
Cavaliers, whose Parents suffered in the late War, and so were haters of
Dissenters, from whom an Act was obtained to empower Commissioners to displace
all Officers that they should judge not to be firm to the King's Interest and
Proceedings: By this Knack you had all Justices of the Peace, and Corporation
Magistrates, that had been forward in punishing Profaneness and Ungodliness in
their respective Places, and had been great Promoters of Religion and Holiness
of Life, turned out, and in their rooms were put all profane and ungodly
Wretches, Swearers by, and Blasphemers of the Name of Almighty God, these being
Men for your Turn, that you might the more easily enslave, and so pervert the
People. And it was come to that pass, that none could have any Employment
unless he could swear and damn for the Church, though they never came within the
inside of one all their days. Of these, Sir, you made most excellent Papists in
process of time, or at least Favorers of the Popish Party.

Your Conspirators had an Eye upon the City of London, and therefore, that none
might stand in your way of debauching that City, all the sober old Officers of
the Army was not to come within 20 miles of it. This was done by the Advice of
your old Friends the Priests, who visited all your soured Cavaliers, and your
Conspiring Villains, and never left urging to them the danger the Government
was in, till they were disarmed and banished London. It Is true, the great
Argument was, the Safety of the Government; but the true one was, your making
your progress in perverting the People to the Popish Religion; for all Virtue
being discouraged, both in Church and State, they had the fairer opportunity of
proselyting the prophaner part of Mankind to the Religion of the Church of Rome.

I must confess, that some few that were sober men had the fortune to be
preferred both in Church and State; but what Joy you and your Conspirators
conceived when they were removed either by Death or Age, is not forgotten.
Those Statesmen that opposed Popery or Arbitrary Power were soon removed, and
if they had the hap to dye in their Offices, they could do no more against
Popery and Arbitrary Power than tell their Friends what Care you took to bring
it in. But this I say, if any were but zealous, he was commonly laid aside as
useless and dangerous to the Government, for as long as they lived or continued
in Power, you and your Party could not go on so smoothly in your Practices
against our Religion, Laws and Liberties.

2. It is well remembered how your Conspirators carried a Villainous Design of
putting on Sham Plots upon Men, in order to take away their Lives and Estates,
to the utter ruin of their Families and Posterity for ever. These were so
many, that to enter into the Particulars of them would be enough to fill a
Volume; but I will therefore reckon these that follow as the Chief of them.

1. If you please, I pray you, Sir, to call to mind the rising of the
Fifth-Monarchy-men on the 6th of Jan. 1660/1. Who drew in those men to that
foolish and wicked Attempt but your old Acquaintance Dr. Goff, and Strange the
Jesuit, and Gray, and another Jesuit that went by the name of St. George, and
Ashby, that was afterward Rector at St. Omer's, who counterfeited themselves
Fifth Monarchy-men? For an Uncle of mine, one Mr. Thomas Buttivant, was engaged
with them, and had been in the Rising, if the Three hundred Horse had come they
promised should join Fifteen hundred Foot; and this Buttivant was to have been
Commander in chief of the Horse: He was so intimately acquainted with this
Gray, that they called Brothers; this Gray I having seen so often with that
Uncle of mine, that when I came to be acquainted with the Jesuits,
notwithstanding it was so many years after, I found this Gray to be a Jesuit,
who had pretended to Fifth Monarchy Principles; and renewing my acquaintance
with him, he told me, That he, and Strange, and others of the Society with this
Goff, used to preach to them in Swan-Alley in Coleman-street, and at Mr.
Buttivant's House in Cobb's Yard in Petticoat-lane, and that they had drawn in
several of those poor Dogs, as they termed them, to be hanged, but they
themselves were protected by you at St. James's, and in Whitehall; and it is
true, that Gray had the Fifth-Monarchy Notions to a Hairs-breadth. In this
Affair the Society were at some Hundreds of pounds charge, for they were
liberal of their Money, and possessed these poor Creatures of your Brother's and
your being Papists, and that your design was to destroy the Interest of Christ
in the three Nations, and to set up Popery and Slavery, and so drew them into
that Folly of Rising, and all with this intent, that they might obtain some
severe Laws against the Protestant Dissenters, in order to weaken the
Protestant Interest within these three Nations, and boasted very much of your
being privy to the whole Design: And, by your Carriage in other Affairs, you
will be by all sober Protestants judged guilty of This.

Against such strange Practices the poor Dissenters did at that time, in their
Addresses and Declarations to the Government, positively, without any
Equivocation or Mental Reservation, declare and protest their abhorrence, and
disavowed all such Principles as might tend to such irregular and disorderly
Practices, as tending highly to the dishonor of GOD and the Protestant
Religion; yet you and your Jesuits and Priests made great use of this, to
beget a disesteem of them in the future Parliament.

2. Another Conspiracy was formed and contrived by you and your Banditti,
against Protestants, and this was in November 1661. A doubty Knight of your
Friendship forged several Letters from several Ministers of the Gospel about
Worcestershire, and several other Counties; and in conjunction with this
Villain several Jesuits acted, amongst whom was Father Fitz Patrick and Father
Peter Talbot, afterward the pretended Archbishop of Dublin, and old Courtney;
all of these were employed by your self, as I have seen in several Letters,
wherein they complained of your delaying their being satisfied for that
Service: But the Intrigue did not hold Water, though several honest men suffered
Imprisonment for the same. But the Forgers and Framers of this Hellish
Conspiracy in this pretended Plot had an aim at the rewarding Mr. Baxter for
the great Service he did in your Brother's Restoration and yours.

3. Another of the same nature was invented by your Conspirators in Oxford,
wherein the Names of several men of note and value, to the number of above a
Hundred, whose Lives were designed to have been made Sacrifices to Hell and
Rome; but neither did that Cheat take any other effect than to continue the
then Parliament exasperated against poor Protestant Dissenters, as men of
restless Spirits, that were always disturbing the Government. So that by these
Artifices you did not only find a way to throw them out of their Livings, but
endangered their Lives also.

4. Your Priests and Jesuits not making their Sham-Plots to hold upon the
Dissenters, your Conspirators try what they could do with two Pillars of the
Church of England, one Hill and Riggs, both highly carress'd by three special
Guardians of the Church of England's Interest, that is, old Cosens, old
Hinchman, and Sheldon, three of the Devil's Brokers. These two Villains Hill
and Riggs, both Parsons, they pretend to discover a Fanatic Plot, as they
called it, against the King's, Yours, and old Monk's and Turncoat Brown's
Lives, and this Plot was sworn against several Honest Men, for which some lost
their Lives; the one got a preferment to a Living, and the other was preferred
to eat Salt Beef and Pork and Pease at Sea, and sometimes he acted as a
Chaplain in a Ship, with great Promises of being preferred, but God cut him
off, whilst Hill slept in a Pocky Skin. Now, Sir, to lay open to you and the
whole World the truth of this matter, I pray observe, that this Hill and this
Riggs were in your Pay, to be Spies upon the Conversations of several Honest
men, as Butler and Seely was afterward in your Brothers for the same purpose;
Riggs and Hill gets into the Company of several Dissenters, and in their
hearing did talk at a strange rate against the Government, and what a secret
Cabal there was meeting in London for the change of the same; and how that the
King your Brother and your self were for introducing Popery and Slavery. But to
prevent your Attempts of that sort, the said Riggs and Hill told them, That
Arms and Ammunition were provided, and that a number of honest men were left to
rise, and defend the true Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom; and
that Deal Castle and Windsor Castle were to be surprised. This sort of Talk
they had with some few honest men, who in the Integrity of their Hearts
confessed, that they heard Hill and Riggs talk at this rate. Nay, these Devils
could not deny, but that they did use this sort of talk, and intimated that
they had a License so to do. Notwithstanding these poor Creatures denied that
ever they had any hand in any such Conspiracy, nor indeed was any thing proved,
but what Hill and Riggs swore they had talked to them, yet they were condemned
and basely murdered, and their Families ruined by your procurement, and Hill
and Riggs escaped with Impunity, though not without Infamy. Your Jesuits would
have courted them both to the Church of Rome; but they appearing to be such
Rogues, they were afraid they would be a Disgrace to them, who from their
rising up in the World had themselves been a Scandal and Disgrace to the
Creation of God.

5. You having some Success in this, your Conspirators would not be idle, but
drew in some warm Men into another Conspiracy in the North. The then Sheriff of
the County of York, and a great man whose Name I will omit, because he did in
part afterward make England some amends for that piece of Villainy, you know,
at that time, to please the Court, he was reconciled to the Church of Rome, and
no doubt, whilst so, he was a fit Tool to carry on so wicked a Design, which
was to discourse of the Oppression the Nation lay under through the Duties of
Excise, etc. and the disturbance that the Lawyers had made in the Kingdom; That
your Brother and you were bringing in of Popery and Slavery, at which these
poor Creatures were enflamed; and being promised the supply of Money, and by the
High Sheriff the Assistance of Posse Comitatus, they were drawn in to engage:
But alas, it was but a Trappan, they were taken and executed upon the Evidence
of some of them that were engaged with them; but how you rewarded that Person
of Quality afterward it is well-enough known. This was another of your
Projects, as the Person of Quality you employed has told to several Friends
with great Grief, some of whom are alive to this day.

But not to forget one passage, let me tell you, that you and your Conspirators
made at the Trial of Mr. Alured two Witnesses of one Man; first he appeared in
a strange disguise, with one Eye, and gave his Testimony under one Name, and
then withdrew, and appeared in his common Dress, and gave his testimony by his
own Name, and so Alured was murdered by the Conspirators. This can be proved by
good testimony.

6. I will give you a short Truth of the Fire of London, how that Eight Men
were executed for having a design to fire the City of London on the third of
September 1666. And great care was taken to lay it upon the Fifth-Monarchy-Men,
and the old Officers of the Army that served under the Parliament, but in truth
it was contrived by your self and your wicked Popish Party, and by you and them
carried on to destroy that great Protestant City, that with more ease you and
your Accomplices might introduce Popery and Slavery among us; for London was
the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion and English Liberties, and therefore she
must be made a Burnt-Offering to your self and Hellish Popish Crew.

7. Another Instance of your Conspirators shamming their Plots upon poor
innocent Protestants, and that is the Case of the Lord Claypool, and by this
cast an Odium upon the whole body of Protestant Dissenters: For in the Month of
August, just about the time that your Conspirators were to execute their wicked
Design to destroy the King, then you deal with Secretary Coventry, to clap up
that poor innocent Gentleman, for designing to seize the King as he went to
Newmarket; and you had two Witnesses ready at hand to have sworn that Design
against him the said Claypool, who was by the Secretary's Warrant arrested for
High Treason: But he the said Claypool knowing nothing of the matter, demanded
to know his Accusers; that was (according to that Villain's usual way) denied
him, and he frowned upon as if he had been the greatest Knave in England next
to Coventry himself. Claypool was as stout as that Knave of a Secretary was
proud and insolent; and as for Claypool, he would scarce answer any Question,
so away he was sent to the Tower a close Prisoner. This startled every one
except the Conspirators and my self, who was privy to the whole business, by
the repeated Orders Coleman received from, Sir, your self, for his Prosecution,
that when the Blow was given upon the King, it might be charged upon the
Fanatics: And to that end Sing and Throgmorton, two virulent Papists, and
Butler and Seely, two Popish Spies of your Brother's and yours, both pretended
Fanatics, the last, I think, is a Cornish man, and was a Major in the late
Protector's Army; so that you and all your Popish Conspirators intended as one
Man to revenge the Death of the King on the Dissenting Party, concluding that
the Vermin of the Church of England would strike in with the Popish Party,
since they hated a Dissenter worse than a Papist, though differing from them only
in a few scoundrel Ceremonies not worthy to wipe a Porter's Tail withal:
Therefore, as a Prologue to that cursed Design, you could not think of a man
fitter than this Lord Claypool, he being Son-in-Law to that Lord Protector
Cromwell; but you and your Villains were disappointed for a time from
destroying the King, for when the true Plot was discovered, your devilish
Witnesses against the Protestant Party disappeared. And so much for Claypool.

8. Another Instance of your implacable Hatred to the Protestants, and of your
designing to sham a Plot upon them, was your old and very good Friend Mr.
Thomas Blood, whom you and your Brother set upon my self, to bring me into a
Conspiracy with Richard late Lord Protector, and him the said Blood, to
dethrone your Brother and your self; which, Sir, was a great mistake, for your
Crimes were so plain and notorious, that an honest man would have thought the
Laws of the Land and public Justice would have reached you both without such
irregular Methods as these were; but I discovered the Letter, and the Trappan
escaped for a while, and then God cut him off with Infamy and Disgrace.

9. I must entreat your patience to remember another Instance, and that is the
particular Case of Mr. Thomas Dangerfield, who was maintained by you and your
Conspirators with Twelve pounds per week, to invent a Plot against the
Protestants, the better to color or hide your own. What Papers you and the
rest of your Conspirators contrived to be put upon the Duke of Buckingham! The
Gentleman of his Horse was Mansfield, and he was prepared to be a second
Witness against the said Duke, as Dangerfield was suborned to be the first, so
that you might have the Blood of that great man, as being one in a Conspiracy
to destroy the King your Brother. But Dangerfield had not been so mindful of
his Lesson as he ought, and fixes himself upon one Mansel, who had been a
Retainer to the Earl of Essex, who at that time was carried away with the
dissimulation of the Popishly-affected Party, but instead of leaving them in
Mansfield's Chamber, left them in Mansel's Chamber. In these Papers there was a
List of Noblemen and Gentlemen that were to be sworn against, as being in a
Conspiracy against the Life of the King your Brother, and your self, and Church
of England: And, to make the World believe that these Papers were not forged,
this Dangerfield repairs to Secretary Coventry, your old League-breaker, and
informs the Secretary (who was privy to the whole Concern) of a dangerous Plot
against the Government, and that there were dangerous Papers in the Chamber of
Coll. Mansel, that would make the same out: but the fellow, though he had been a
Rogue all his days, as God would have it, scrupled the Oath; though if he had
said in Mansfield's Chamber, he should have had a Warrant without an Oath; but
mentioning the Name of Mansel, the Secretary was startled, because that Mansel
was a Favorite of the Earl of Essex, against whom this Conspiracy was not at
first to appear, therefore Coventry would do nothing without an Oath in
relation to Mansel, because of the Earl of Essex, who was then actually a Privy
Councillor; therefore Dangerfield was resolved to have the papers brought to
light, and therefore gets an Officer or Officers of the Customhouse, to search
Mansel's Chamber for prohibited Goods, and then these papers were seized: And
Mansel hearing of what was done when he came to his Lodging, and that papers of
dangerous consequence was found in his Chamber, behind his Beds-head, where he
had never laid any, he immediately repairs to the Council, and complains of his
usage before Dangerfield had told his Story.

Well then, what becomes of this Affair, so foolishly miscarrying in its first
birth? I must observe to you, that Dangerfield is called in question; and though
he had many Friends in the Council, and many that knew the Design well enough,
yet the Blunder that Dangerfield made was so great, and his Story hung so ill
together, that the Conspirators that were at the Board began to be confounded,
and were much dejected that their Tool had succeeded no better; for, besides
all his self-contradictions, shrewd proofs were brought against him: Yet
notwithstanding the aforesaid blunder, and his being so confronted with Major
Richardson and others, Dangerfield was as bold as his Folly was great, and
stood in it, that the Papers taken in Mansel's Lodgings were not put there by
him, till at last the proof of the Customhouse Officer that searched, and
Dangerfield's own words, the Cheat and the Roguery was most manifest; so that
the Council, though many of them your Conspirators and his intimate Friends, were
of necessity obliged to commit him to Newgate, who being there, was still
upheld by that Whore Cellier, and the rest of your Conspirators, who had
redeemed him out of Newgate for this very end and purpose, and had forbad him
to discover; but some Letters being discovered, and he being out of all hopes,
made his application to the then Lord Mayor to take his discovery; which was
done, and upon that Discovery it plainly appeared who set him on work to frame
such a piece of Villainy. You were so nettl'd at the Discovery, that instead of
the Lord Mayor's having Thanks returned him for his Service to the King and the
Nation, that he met with a Check at Court for meddling in that which concerned
him not. But by this Trick the Earl of Essex's Eyes were opened, and he fairly
left you and the Council, abhorring such Villainies as never was to be
paralleled in future, nor heard of in past Ages.

Your Sham-Plot thus miscarrying, and the Book found in the Meal-Tub, showing
who they were that was to be sworn out of their Lives falsely, appearing, you
know, Sir, that you were, with your Accomplices, at a stand; for, Sir, you know
that this Villainy, if it had been placed with Mansfield, the Duke of
Buckingham's Servant, who was to have been a second Witness with Dangerfield,
and both these to have been corroborated by Blood, Butler, and Seely, you would
have cut off, by a Form of Justice, all such persons as had stood in opposition
to your wicked Designs and Practices; so that a new Parliament should have been
opened with the noise of a Presbyterian Plot, therefore you know the Parliament
was prorogued for a longer time, and your self forced to part with a small
Spell to get this thing done, and the French King pressed for a bigger Seame,
which was happily prevented by the Duke of Buckingham.

10. I must beg your Pardon if I put you in mind of another piece of Roguery
your restless Conspirators undertook; For a new Parliament being to meet at
Oxford, in the year 1680/1, they were resolved to welcome that Parliament with a
Protestant Plot in good earnest, to the end with more ease you might bring your
cursed Designs to pass. In order to this, it was agreed by your Crew, that
Papers containing Treasonable Matters should be got to be written, and lodged
in the Houses of private men, and shuffled into Gentlemen's Pockets at Oxford,
and before the meeting of the Parliament they should be seized with such Papers
about them; and one Fitz-Harris, who was to be their Tool, was well acquainted
with one Everard, that was a Villain much of the said Fitz-Harris's stature or
standard; for it was a hard matter to know which was the greatest of the two.
This Everard had been countenanced by the Earl of Shaftsbury, and therefore the
said Everard was judged the most fit to join with him in the Roguery: And
Everard had agreed with this Fitz-Harris to be seized with these Papers about
him, when they had dispersed as many of them as would do the business; but
those that employed these Rascals in this affair were such, that it would ^ill
an Englishman with Confusion to name them. Fitz-Harris had his Instructions
from your Brother and Portsmouth, and when Access could not be had to them,
then they received them from Nell Wall, a notorious Whore, that from a poor
Wench that washed down the Stairs, was made her Mistresses Woman, and privy to
the whole Intrigue.

The Writing was drawn up, and much approved by the King your Brother and the
Duchess, and their Approbation signified to this Fitz-Harris by this Whore
Nell Wall, and the same told to this Everard by Fitz-Harris; but no Money
considerable appearing, unless it were one Thirty pound, Everard discovers this
Intrigue to one Smith, commonly called Narrative Smith, and Sir William Waller.
They are planted in a secret Room, where they might not only hear, but see the
Transactions between Everard and this Fitz-Harris; so that Fitz-Harris was
apprehended and committed upon Everard's Testimony, and Tried and Condemned
upon the Testmony of Smith, and Waller, and Everard, and fairly Hanged, that he
might not tell Tales. So Shaftsbury and several others escaped that one time
from being made a Sacrifice to your Will and Pleasure. The Story, Sir, is too
long to be fully repeated, but when any of your Cursed Crew shall Answer this,
I shall tell the whole Story at length; but this shall suffice for this
Particular.

11. Be pleased to remember how many Irish men were suborned to swear against
the Life of the said Earl of Shaftsbury, and how diligent your Conspirators
were to suborn others that were of the same stamp for Roguery and Villainy; but
God, by the Industry and Care of his Friends, delivered him; and what these
Villains swore against him was so inconsistent with either the Principles or
declared Judgment of that Noble Lord, and the Particulars of their Testimony so
contradictory one to the other, that the Grand Jury would not return a billa
ver a upon the Testimony of these Rogues, though the Court used all the indirect
methods with that Jury to have the Bill found.

12. Sir, I must deal plainly with you and your Tribe, that my Heart is ready
to bleed when I must name to you the Murder of the Earl of Essex, whose Throat
you procured to be cut that very Morning, that a Way might be made for the
Horrible Murder of the Lord Russel, who was by your means basely murdered by a
Form of Law; and the great Colonel Sidney, what Juries of Common Rogues and
Villains were packed upon them by the contrivance of murdering Rich and North,
your two pretended Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, Fellows that valued not
the Blood of a Protestant, but rejoiced that they had made you and your
Conspirators drunk with their Blood!

I must not forget poor Stephen College, who was basely murdered at Oxford by
a Set of wicked Judges, and a Packed Jury, at Oxford, whose Blood cries to
Heaven for Vengeance against you and your Cutthroat Party.

We have a Cloud of Instances against you and your Party of your suborning
Witnesses against Mr. Colt, Mr. Arnold, Sir Samuel Barnadiston, Mr. Covet, Mr.
Culliford, Mr. Braddon, Mr. Johnson, Sir Thomas Pilkington, and Mr. Hampden, my
self and others; what a long and tedious Imprisonment we all suffered through
the Testimony of your suborned and perjured Witnesses. But this may suffice for
this second Particular, how you and your Conspirators, from the very time of
your being restored to your Native Country, which was in the year 1660, to the
year 1685, that you took the Crown.

III. A third Project that you and your Popish Crew had on foot was, to ruin
our Trade. It was not enough that you fired our Cities, and abused the
Professors of the Protestant Religion, by the many Murders that were by you and
your Party committed, by the help of your Mercenary Judges and Hackney
Jurymen, but you also labored heartily to disturb the Trade of the Nation,
that you might with more ease enslave it, and bring in Popery upon us. I will
but give you only one or two Instances; Many might be given, to your Shame, and
the Shame of your Party, if there was any such thing remaining with you.

1. The first Instance I shall give you is the countenancing the French King to
take so many of our Merchants Ships by his Pirates and Rovers in our Seas; and
several Letters were written by your Secretary Mr. Coleman, to Sir Else
Leyton, wherein several Merchantmen, whose Owners and Merchants had been
obnoxious to you or your Party, by opposing Popery and Slavery; he was by your
especial Order to see their Ships and Goods condemned, to the utter undoing of
several Families. And your Servant Coleman, when any thing of a Tradesman was
mentioned, he used to say, Damn them, they are a sort of Fanatics that have no
Kindness for my Master, or our Religion, and it will be never well till we make
them poor, then they will be brought to obey. Nay, Sir, this was your Language
too, or else you would never have been so much of the Opinion of the French
King, your most Christian Brother.

2. A second Instance is taken from the Letters that were written to the Rector
of St. Omers, Richard Ashby, from Thomas White and John Keines, and others of
the Society in London, in which Letters from them and others were enclosed
Letters to Thomas Stapletoa, then Procurator at Bruxels, to persuade the Father
Confessor of Duke de Villa Hermosa, then Governor of the Spanish Netherlands,
to inform him the said Duke, That the King your Brother did not intend to
assist the King of Spain, but would stand a looker on till he was ruined by the
French King. Which Letter being not sealed, I saw it; and that in case the
Father Confessor to the said Governor should not be ready to comply with the
said Stapleton, that Messengers should be forthwith sent to Father Swiman at
Madrid, to inform the King of Spain of the said Concern, and to make the same
relation of the business to the Popish Archbishop of Tuam, of the Kingdom of
Ireland, who was then at the Court at Madrid, that he the said Swiman and the
said Titular Archbishop, might jointly give an account of the Motion made or to
be made to the said Father Confessor of Duke de Villa Hermosa, and also to
advise the Spanish King to seize the Estates of the English Merchants in their
several Factories in his Dominions, for that they had endeavored to transport
their Estates, and did transport them to England, and all, or most part, in the
Coin of Spain, to the great Prejudice of the Kingdom of Spain. And for the
confirmation thereof, they procured Letters from one Fonseca, sometimes an
Agent in London, to attest the same, this Fonseca willingly complying with your
Conspirators, and sent his Letter to St. Omer's, that the Fathers there might
give their Approbation to the said Letter, in order to be sent to the Court of
Spain; which Letter was long and large, Attestations therein made against the
Merchants of the several Factories concerning the Matter of Fact before
mentioned, and other Letters were dispatched to Daniel Armstrong at Valladolyd,
and John Cross then at Madrid, in which they were ordered to confirm this
Attestation made or to be made by the Fathers in England, and of the English
Seminary at St. Omer's, and of the said Stapleton, together with that of the
said Fonseca, the abovenamed Spanish Agent, who then lived at Bruges in
Flanders. Therefore,

1. In this Villainous Contrivance to disturb the Nation in the Spanish Trade,
your Servant Coleman was very active in your Name, and on your behalf, and
engaged that your Letter to Villa Hermosa should be procured.

2. It is well known that your Brother and your self were so engaged with the
French King that it was all one to you what became of the King of Spain's
Concerns in Flanders; but you were both grieved to see the English Nation
enriched with the Trade it had with Spain; for, during the time of the Riches
and Plenty of England, it would be very difficult for you and your Conspirators
to bring in Popery and Slavery upon us.

3. What Agents you make use of to carry on this Wicked Design to ruin Trade!
Even Fonseca, that hated the English Nation, and much envied her Greatness, and
that she might be in a condition to be brought under the French Yoke, you
tamper with him, that though a Spaniard by Nation, yet he was wholly in the
French Interest.

3. A third Instance that I shall remember you of, by which you intended to
ruin our Trade, and that was in the adulterating, debasing and clipping the
Coin of this Kingdom. It may be said by you and your Partisans, That it is very
hard you should be charged with this vile Act; but, Sir, it can be proved, that
the Merchants, Goldsmiths, Brokers, Bankers, and the other Traders that the
Jesuits dealt with, all was by your Advice and Direction, and that your
Servant Coleman had in your Name promised them the management of the Mint: So
that your Conspirators were to be the Judges of good and bad Money, and were to
manage the same to the best advantage for your Cause, and several Materials for
Coining was provided by Smith your Agent, and lodged at Mr. Longhorn's Chambers
in the Temple. And this, Sir, I must observe to you for public Good, that
there has been few or none that ever has been executed but has been of your
Religion or Interest. That our Money has been abused is notorious. And all this
you did in order to impoverish the Kingdom, and destroy its Trade.

4. A fourth Instance of you and your Traitors to disturb the Trade of the
Kingdom, was the Fire of London. I have treated of that already. As it was the
Habitation for several Thousands of good Protestants, that stood in opposition
to Popery and Slavery; and as by the destroying this City you endeavored to
weaken the Protestant Interest, so now give me leave to tell you, it was with
this design, to ruin the Trade of the Nation; for you know, that London was
the Metropolis and Fountain of Trade, and when she was destroyed you could not
but conclude, that the Trade must be disturbed (with which the other parts of
the Kingdom were made happy) through the great devastation that the Fire, that
was carried on by your Wicked Instruments, had made.

IV. A fourth Project that you had to accomplish your Wicked Designs, was the
Attempt of maintaining of a standing Army, contrary to the Laws and Liberties
of England in the times of Peace, and labored that point much with the King
your Brother, to lay down the legal Force of this Kingdom (viz. the Militia) as
useless to the Government; and therefore you and your Party advised him to lay
them down, and to have Forces in every County under Pay, and they were to be
your Conservators of the Peace. And, Sir, had the Revenue of the Crown been
able to have born the Charge, you your self projected a standing Army, to keep
the People in due Obedience. Now, what that due Obedience was, I shall not need
to explain to you, for it was a standing Army alamode de France; nay, they were
to have the Power of the Civil Watch in the Night, which you said would excuse
many ancient useless Men from that Service. And for the accomplishment of your
wicked Enterprise, you advised, that the greater part of the Army should
consist of French and Irish, and that the Officers of this Army should consist
of as many Roman Catholics as could well be gotten to serve in that Army, and
you had several of that sort of Cattle that you kept in half-pay, in readiness
whenever your Brother should have agreed to your Advice. It was not for want of
Good will, but for want of Money, that your Design did not then take.

5. A fifth Project that you had on foot to enslave the Nation, and that was,
the advising and contriving with your damnable Conspirators the seizure of the
Charters, Franchises, and Liberties of the Cities, Towns, and ancient
Corporations of the Kingdom. It was, Sir, your self and your Conspirators that
invaded the Privileges, and seized on the Charters of most of the Towns that
had a Right to be represented by their Burgesses in Parliament, and by over
awing some of them, you procured Surrenders of them to be made to the King your
Brother, by which the Magistrates delivered up all their Rights and Privileges,
to be disposed of at his pleasure, and the pleasure of your self and
Conspirators. Upon this you procured new Magistrates to be placed in those
Places as would carry on your wicked designs and purposes of advancing Popery
and Slavery.

6. It was your Advice, together with your Conspirators, that put the late King
your Brother to turn out of the Commission of the Peace and the Lieutenancy of
the Counties, all such who had been zealous for the defense of the Protestant
Religion and Liberty, and had appeared vigorously against Popery and Arbitrary
Power, as persons disaffected to the Government both in Church and State, and
represented them as Fanatics, and Favorers of such; by which means you got in
Men of Villainous Morals, and such heartily joined in with your Conspirators, to
ruin the Protestant Interest, and to overthrow the Laws and Liberties of
England. This was done in the year 1679.

7. Notwithstanding some of your Conspirators represented you as a person whose
Judgment was for Liberty of Conscience, yet because the Protestant Dissenters
appeared earnestly in the asserting the Laws and Liberties of England, and gave
Countenance to the Discovery of the Popish Plot to, King Charles your Brother,
who was in it in every part and particular thereof, excepting that of his own
Murder; you and your Conspirators stirred up that King to raise a terrible
Persecution against those men, by which means you were the ruin of some
Thousands of Families, who by the severity of the said Persecution were reduced
almost to Beggary, or to live upon the Charity of Friends. Some were forced to
fly the Nation, and yet were more loyal under their Pressures and Provocations
than your Cutthroat Papists were under their then Caresses and Favors
received from your Brother and your self. Nay, a reverend Minister of the
Gospel of Christ, who had been very instrumental in your Restoration, yea, and
ventured his Life for your Brother's Restoration, in the year 1650, you
suffered to perish in Newgate, as a Reward for so great a piece of Service to
your Brother and your self and Family; and for no other reason, but because he
could not comply with some Rascally Ceremonies that our Ecclesiastical Vermin
had borrowed from the Church of Rome, to Adorn our Protestant Worship, and
because he would not take the Oxford Oath, laid upon the Nation to enslave it.

8. Another Project you had for the ruining the Interest of the Protestant
Religion, and the Interest of England, was the Advancing of Men that were
Enemies to the Protestant Interest into the greatest Places of Trust. As, What
a Set of Villains had you made Judges of the Land, by which means you brought
all the Matters of Civil Justice into great Uncertainties, by reason of the
Tenor of their Commissions, and the Ignorance of the Rogues you employed!
Therefore how miserable was the Nation, who were obliged to Answer to such
Judges that were forced to comply in all things with the Directions that were
given by you and your Wicked Cutthroats, or else to be turned out at yours and
their Pleasure?

If we look further, you had, in your Brother's time, the disposing of all
Military Employments; And how you did show your Hatred to the Protestant
Religion and the English Interest! You did in his time raise a great many
Persons to the greatest Military Trusts both by Sea and Land, Strangers as well
as Natives; so that by these measures your Conspirators became Masters of the
Affairs of the Government of the Nation, and of the course of Justice; and you
had all the Church Vermin engaged with you to subject the whole Kingdom to a
despotick Arbitrary power; and all these joined together to execute your wicked
Designs, to enslave and debauch the People of the Land.

9. To complete the Work, that nothing might stand in your way of Establishing
your Popish Religion, you murdered your Brother, who was uncertain in his
Engagements in the Conspiracy; for, when he found it was not safe for him to
appear in promoting Popery, he soon left you. Or if a Sum of Money could be
gotten from a Parliament, he commonly blessed the Nation with a Proclamation or
two against Popish Priests, Jesuits, and Popish Recusants, or pass a Bill or
so to the prejudice of the Popish Party; as he did in 1673, when the Test-Bill
passed; as also another in 1678. This obliged you and your Conspirators to
hasten his destruction, which you had long contrived. You found a fit Tool, and
as fit a Dose to do the Work; in it you had your desired Ends, and so you
mounted the Throne. Which brings me to the Second Point, What you did in order
to the Ruin of the Protestant Religion and the Government after your accession
to the Crown.

II. Your Tyranny was very cruel, but short, yet full of strange and surprising
Circumstances: It was highly astonishing to see a Popish Prince ascending the
Throne, to rule a Protestant Nation, and defend a Protestant Church; but, Sir,
you had no such Designs in your Head, for you showed what you would do with our
Laws, when you could engage your Conspirators to dispense with part of the
Oaths that you should have taken. It is manifest and notorious, that when you
were upon the coming to the Crown you was received by all the People of
England, Scotland, and Ireland as King, without the least opposition, for our
Ecclesiastical Vermin had made your way clear by their Doctrine of Passive
Obedience and Non-Resistance, and the Divine Right of Succession, and the
possibility of preserving the Glory and Grandeur of their Church of England by
a Popish Prince, and that there was more danger from Fanatics than from
Papists, and suchlike scoundrel Notions.

You cannot but remember, that King Charles your Brother, having received the
deadly Dose your Conspirators had prepared for him, on February the 6th,
1684/5, he went to his Place; that very day, Sir, you were proclaimed King, to
the sorrow of all that wished well to England, and its Religion, Liberties and
Laws: you then appeared at the Council Table as King, and by all your
Conspirators you was owned and saluted as such, to whom you were pleased to
make a sort of a Speech, in which you were pleased to declare your self to this
effect.

THat Since it has pleased Almighty God to place you in that station, and that
you were now to succeed so Good and Gracious a King, as well as so Kind a
Brother, you thought it fit to declare, That you would follow his Example, and
more especially in that of his great Clemency and Tenderness to all his People:
That you had been reported to have been a man for Arbitrary Power, though that
had not been the only Story that had been made of you: That you would make it
your Endeavor to preserve Government both in Church and State, as it was by
Law established: That you knew the Principles of the Church of England were for
Monarchy, and that the Members of it had shown themselves good and loyal
Subjects, and therefore you would take care to defend and support it: That you
knew the Laws of England were sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch as
you could wish; and therefore, as you would never depart from the Just Rights
and Prerogatives of the Crown, so you would never invade any Man's Property:
And that you had ventured your Life very often in the defense of the Nation:
And that you would go as far as any Man in preserving it in all its Just Rights
and Liberties.

This, Sir, is the sum and substance of what you were pleased to say at the
Council board; and one would have sworn that you would have taken up the Trade
of being Speech wright-general to the whole Band of your Conspirators. I am
confident your old Friends the Jesuits, that had been hanged but a little
before, could not have outdone you, though it had been to have saved their
Lives. Well, it was a Speech, and how true you were to this Speech you shall
judge, and your Conspirators too, if you will but consider.

1. You said, You would not invade any man's Right and Property, and that you
would preserve the Nation in its Just Rights and Liberties. And so you did, for
you, the next day after your accession to the Crown, published a Proclamation
for the continuing the payment of the Custom and Excise, which were expired by
the death of the King your Brother for several weeks after. Did not this show
you to be a man for Arbitrary Power, to invade the Properties of a great part
of the Subjects of England by your Proclamation; what Value you had for the
Rights of the Nation, for whom you had ventured your Life in a Coiled Cable;
and what Regard you had to its Laws, that at your first step in your pretended
Government you bring in a Proclamation equivalent to those Laws that expired as
aforesaid, by which the Excise and Customs in the time of the Reign of your
kind and loving Brother had been settled and paid.

2. You said, That you would follow the Example of your Brother, in his
Clemency and Tenderness to the People of England. What your Brother's Clemency
and Tenderness to the people of England was, I am yet to learn. What was his
Clemency to his old Cavaliers, that had served both his Father and him in the
Wars, to the ruin of themselves and Families, spending their Substance in both
their Services, and not so much as looked upon when you were restored? After
that Sir John Webster, a Merchant, had lent him 150000 l. Sterling, did not he,
after much Importunity, reward the said Sir John with the refusal of a
Land-waiter's Place, and graciously suffered the poor man to starve, as a
Reward of his Loyalty? Was not his Clemency such, that within the compass of a
very few years all his whole Interest was melted down into a small Regiment of
Pimps, Whores, and Bawds, on whom he lavishly conferred great Honors, and on
them he profusely spent the Treasure of the Nation.

Remember, Sir, how his Clemency was extended to those Ministers that brought
him home, and to that Party of Men that restored him to his Crown and Dignity.
Mr. Jenkins is a notable Instance of his Clemency, who ventured his Life for
his Restoration, in that Cause that Mr. Love lost his. What a Tenderness he had
for Mr. Jenkins* was seen in his murdering him in Prison, notwithstanding all
the humble application made to your tender Brother, for his release, in order
to preserve his Life.

His Clemency to Sir Henry Vane was admirable, for rather than Vane should not
be sent to Heaven, he broke through an Act of Parliament, lest the Martyr
should find delay in his passage thither. What can you say of his Clemency to
Great Essex, and Noble Russel, whom he basely and barbarously murdered? I think
that Sir Thomas Armstrong is another Instance of his Clemency. And so you were
as good as your word, in following the Example of his Clemency and Tenderness
to the People of England.

For upon your entering into the Regal State, you let England have a taste of
your Clemency. I must begin with my own Case; I sufficiently tasted of your
Grace and Favor after that with the hazard of my Life; I had discovered a
Damnable Conspiracy, carried on by the Popish Party, for the destruction of the
King your Brother and the Protestant Religion, and the Government of the
Nation; how you used me let all the World judge, notwithstanding the Credit the
Parliament had given me; as you may rememember in the Vote of March 15. 1679.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and
Commons in Parliament assembled, That they do declare that they are fully
satisfied, by the Proofs they have heard, that there now is, and for diverse
years last past has been, an Horrid and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy,
continued and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the murdering of
His Majesty's Sacred Person, and for subverting the Protestant Religion, and
the Ancient Established Government of this Kingdom.

Notwithstanding all your Clemency and Tenderness to the English Nation,
produce such a Vote for the Justifying your Reputation in the Nation, and for
ought I know, you may persuade your self that the Nation may be inclined to
receive you into favor again, and admit your tender Government of them once
more.

But to return to the Point. Notwithstanding the Power of Truth and the Credit
of this Vote, with what implacable Malice did you and your Banditti pursue me?
How often did you attempt to take away my Life by the Testimony of False
Witnesses? With what Importunity did you prevail upon the King your Brother to
withdraw that Protection and Subsistence that the said King allowed me at the
request of several Parliaments, so that I might starve for want of Bread? Nay,
to express your Clemency and Tenderness, how warmly did you prosecute me in an
Action of Scandalum Magnatum, for speaking this Notorious Truth of you, That
you were reconciled to the Church of Rome, and that it was High Treason to be
so reconciled? And what a noble Verdict a packed Jury of your Conspirators,
upon the prosecution, brought in against me, of One hundred thousand Pound
Damages? And thereupon you generously Charged me in Execution in the
King's Bench Prison.

And was you afraid that I was Able to have paid the Debt and Charges, and as
Willing as Able? Well, to prevent it, you resolved that I should not want your
Clemency and Tenderness; you therefore, to justify those Virtues to be
inherent in you, you prevailed with King Charles the Second to give you and
your Conspirators Leave to prefer two several Indictments of two pretended
Perjuries in my Evidence concerning the Popish Plot, but your Villains would
not let the King your Brother live to see those Indictments tried, therefore
they were brought to trial in your tender Reign. What sort of Witnesses did you
produce against me, but those very men that had been in no less than three
Trials proved and judged to be False Witnesses, the Religion they professed no
ways admitting them to be Credible; and therefore, as they were not believed
when they gave their Testimony without an Oath, so they were not to be believed
when they were upon their Oaths; for you know, tender Sir, they were of a
Religion that could dispense with Oaths, though false, for the sake of your
Catholic Cause.

These, Sir, were your Witnesses; and you had two Juries of Men that had as
large a Faith to believe as the Rogues had Consciences to swear, and so I must
averr Juries and Witnesses to be alike, for he is as criminal, and is as much
damned, that believes a Lie, as he is that makes one and swears it too; for the
Rogues your mercenary wicked Judges, and the Villains that were Witnesses, and
your packed Hell-born Jurymen, were all in (as it were) a Confederacy, to be
revenged on me for the discovery of the Popish Plot, and to cast a Reproach
upon the Wisdom and Honor of four successive Parliaments, and upon the public
Justice of the Nation.

Well, Sir, I was convicted, notwithstanding the Witnesses I brought in, who
were brow-beaten, abused by that Villain Jefferies, who had neither Law nor
Sense, nor Manners, but had the Impudence of Ten Carted Whores; therefore
nothing now remained for me but Judgment, which was your own appointing, with
the Advice of your twelve Villains that were of the Lambskin Order, and others
of your Conspirators, as a Mark of your Clemency and Tenderness toward me. The
Sentence was as barbarous and inhuman as it was unjust; for I was to pay to you
Two thousand Marks, to be divested of my Canonical Habit, and brought into
Westminster Hall with a Paper upon my Head with this Inscription; Titus Dates,
convicted upon full Evidence of two Horrid Perjuries; to stand in and upon the
Pillory for two several days; on Wednesday to be Whipped from Aldgate to
Newgate, and on the Friday following from Newgate to Tyburn; and to stand in
and upon the Pillory five times every year of my Life, and to remain a Prisoner
during Life.

This Sentence sounded ill in the Ears of most Men, and filled many with Horror
and Amazement, when they considered the great Clemency and Tenderness that you
did in your Speech but a little before mention to the Council, and therefore
some persons of known worth and quality made application to you to mitigate the
Sentence, but were refused with the gracious Saying, That I should go through
it if I had breath in my body. And then, judging that your Italian Comrade
might have this Clemency and Tenderness of yours under her Lock and Key,
application was made to her Ladyship, but they found that she was resolved upon
my Destruction; they returned home, holding up their Eyes and Hands to Heaven
with a Lord have Mercy upon us. Truly, Sir, it was their Good Will to me, but
it was their Inadvertency to make any Application to you or your Italian Pugg;
for it was the Example of your Brother's Clemency and Tenderness that you were
resolved to follow.

Since it was so, not only I, but all thinking men, did then judge that your
unparalled Sentence thus pronounced was to murder me; and therefore to
justify the inherent Clemency and Tenderness that you had for a poor English
Protestant, the said Sentence was executed with all the Circumstances of
Barbarity, for I suffered some thousands of Stripes, by which I was put to
unspeakable Tortures, and lay ten weeks under the Chyrurgeons hands. But, Sir,
your Malice and Malicious Clemency and Barbarous Tenderness did not cease here;
but because I, through the great Mercy of Almighty God supporting me, and the
extraordinary Care and Skill of a Judicious Chyrurgeon, outlived your Cruelty;
for such were your tender Mercies to me, you sent some of your Cutthroat Crew,
whilst I was weak in my Bed, to pull off those Plasters applied to cure my
Back, and in your most gracious Name they threatened me with all Courtesy and
Humanity to destroy me.

Surely, Sir, a Man would have thought that by this time you had given
Testimony enough of your Tenderness and Clemency, but I found to my Cost that I
was to taste a little more of your Grace and Mercy; for by your own Command I
was loaded with Irons of excessive weight, for the space of one whole year
without any intermission, and of your Princely Compassion they were not
suffered to be taken off even when my Legs were swollen with the Gout. Nay, that
I might appear to partake of the utmost of your Mercy, I was by your order shut
up in the Hole or Dungeon of the Prison, whereby I became impaired of my Limbs,
and contracted Convulsion Fits, to the hazard of my Life. But when you had
filled up the measure of your Sins, and the Nation came to its self, you were
by the just Judgment of God driven out of the Kingdom, and a Parliament freely
chosen did sit, observe the Judgment they made of your Grace and Clemency and
Tenderness; in order to which read the Vote of the House of Commons June 11.
1689. which was this; Resolved, That the Prosecution of Titus Oats, upon two
Indictments of Perjury, in the Court of King's Bench, was a Design to stifle
the Popish Plot; and that the Verdicts given thereupon were corrupt; and that
the Judgments given thereupon were cruel and illegal. Do you get such another
Vote to justify your Clemency and Tenderness, we will keep a Day for you, though
through the Blessing of God we may never see your Face again; but if we should,
give me leave to tell you, that the old Window of the Banqueting House stands
in the same place where it did you know when. But lest you or any of your
cursed Crew should say, That although I tasted not of your Grace, and Clemency,
and Tenderness, yet still your Clemency did appear to others that had offended
you, this makes me hasten to some other Instances wherein the World may judge
whether or no your Tender Mercies were not Cruelty in the highest degree.

2. Give me leave therefore to instance to you of the Usage of the Duke of
Monmouth, and those Men that were with him in the West, who did rise to have
delivered the Nation from your Designs of Popery and Slavery, which you had for
so many years with your Cutthroats carried on with such Success. That Noble
Duke was your kind and loving Brother's Son, and your own Nephew, and one that
for many years together had been very obsequious to you, and was, though
ignorantly, in the Conspiracy with you to ruin the Nation, and ventured his
Life in that wicked War against the Dutch, to oblige you and his Father; but
God had no sooner opened his Eyes, to make a true Judgment of your wicked
purposes, but you sought his Ruin, and took all Opportunities to be revenged
upon him and his Party, which, you know, once was very considerable. And when
God delivered him into your hand, you were pleased upon Tower Hill to murder
him. This I say because that he being a Peer of the Realm, notwithstanding his
pretended Attainder, he ought to have had the liberty of an attainded Peer,
that is, to have been heard at the Bar of the House of Lords, and to have
showed Cause why he should not be executed according to the Tenure of that Act
by which he stood attainded. But you, I conceive, was resolved to have his
Blood, and therefore you would not complement him with that piece of Justice
which is due to every man that is found guilty of any capital Offense: So that
he being denied of this piece of Justice, I do affirm, that he by your Clemency
and Tenderness was basely betrayed and murdered.

Well, did the business of the West end so? No, for remember how many of them
by your Villainous Kirk were murdered and hanged up in cool Blood, without any
manner of proceeding according to the form of Law and Justice; and this being
taken notice of by your own Crew, that had heard of your pretended Clemency and
Tenderness, as a thing that would not sound well in the Nation; therefore the
remainder were confined, and your Villain Jefferies and his murdering Brethren
were sent down to try these poor unfortunate wretches, from many of whom a
Confession was extorted upon the Promise of Pardon, and then they were
condemned and murdered, they being innocent of what they had confessed against
themselves; others that had been in actual Arms hundreds of them were hanged in
the principal Towns, and their Quarters hanged up in the Highways, as lasting
Monuments of your Grace and Compassion.

And you being glutted with Blood, you then thought of other Punishments for
some other of those Offenders; many Men and Women were ordered to be whipped
publicly in the Market Towns, others had their Estates seized, and a great
number were sold into America, to serve all days of their Lives; so that there
was nothing but the Voice of lamentation and weeping to be heard. In a word,
your Grace, Clemency and Tenderness was such, that several of the Western
Counties were made so many Fields of Blood and Butchery: Nay, Sir, those who
escaped your Mercy by virtue of your Proclamation, were forced to retire to the
Woods and desolate places, their nearest and dearest Relations not daring so
much as to harbor or relieve them, so that several starved to death, or
perished with cold for want of things necessary for the preservation of Human
Nature: Some fled to the Dutch for shelter, and were not only kindly received,
but as civily entertained, till you began to have some Shame in you, and
pardoned some, in hopes that they would be of use to you; and others came over
with the Prince of Orange, who, by the Just Judgment of God upon you and your
Adherents, banished you the Kingdom, and the Lords and Commons of England
deposed you as useless to God and Man.

But, Sir, this is notorious, that you never entertained the least Remorse of
Conscience for the murder of these men in the West, for those you pardoned
paid a Price sufficient for their Pardons; or if you gave them Pardon freely,
it was to prevent their setting up their Trades in other Countries. And
Jefferies your Tool, that you ought to have hanged, you let him go off with no
other Punishment than to be made Lord High Chancellor of England, who also did
enrich himself with the Sum of 15000 l. extorted from one person who wanted a
Pardon, for nothing else but the not delivering his Country, which he might
have done for half the Money. I am more sorry that Jefferies got the Money, than
for that Gentleman's losing that Sum. Truly, Sir, I was in hopes that the Time
of that Villain Jefferies had been come, in which he should not only have paid
his Debt to Nature, but to his Faults too; but he is gone to his Place, and
thereby he has saved the Hangman a Labor; but had he lived, he would in my
opinion have been made an Example for all his Villainies that he had committed,
both as a corrupt Judge and a traiterous Chancellor.

3. You were pleased in the years 1687 and 1688, to publish a Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, and professed in both the said Declarations, That it was
always your Judgment that no man's Conscience should be restrained in Matters
of Religion. Now, Sir, if that were true, why then did you persecute the
Protestant Dissenters for their Conscience, from Feb. 6. 1684, till the latter
end of the year 1686? And if it were not your Judgment, why then did you
proclaim Liberty of Conscience as your Judgment? But, Sir, to deal truly in the
point, you had a Popish Fabric to erect, and you wanted Liberty of Conscience
to be the Scaffold; and when you had done your business of settling Popery, you
would have laid Liberty of Conscience aside, as your Brethren abroad of the
Popish Religion have always done. And this was the Clemency your Brother was
pleased to show to Dissenters, and afterward he and you could with great
Tenderness suffer them to perish in Prison; and you your self, when you were in
the Chair, persecuted them, to the ruin of some Thousands of Families; you
surfeited your self and Party with the murder and ruin of so many Men, and yet
you pretend to Clemency and Tenderness. To conclude this particular, your
Brother and you made two Declarations for Liberty of Conscience, for no other
intent but to cheat the People of England into Slavery and Popery, to the end
that you might damn the Body and Soul of the Nation at once. From such Clemency
and Tenderness I trust God has delivered this Nation, and will preserve her
under the present Government, all your pretenses to the contrary
notwithstanding.

4. What shall I say of those worthy persons that you kept in Jayl for the
pretended Damages of 100000 l. and others of 10000 l. and others for one Fine
or another? What shall I say of the Murder of the Lady Lisle, and Alderman
Cornish, Mr. Ayliff, and Mr. Nelthrope, and poor Disney? These were Monuments
of your Clemency and Tenderness.

3. You promised in your Speech to the Council, That you would maintain the
Church of England as it was established by Law. Nay, I think, if you had not
wrong done you, you swore it too at your Coronation. And, Sir, (if you please)
call to mind how you kept your Promise and Oath in relation to the Church of
England and the Protestant Interest; nay, you gave a reason for your Promise,
it being the only Reason that you ever gave in your Life, I will put you in
mind of it, Because, said you, Her Members had showed themselves Loyal
Subjects, and that the Principles of the Church of England had been for
Monarchy. Therefore,

1. How did you maintain the Church of England as by Law established? Were
there not Laws in force for the preservation of the Church of England, that had
been enacted in the Reigns of several Princes that were your Predecessors,
amongst which Laws, as a security of the Church of England against Popery, That
all persons whatsoever, that were advanced to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or to
bear Office in either University, as likewise all Civil and Military Officers,
should declare they were not Papists, but of the Protestant Religion, and that
by taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Test; yet you and your
Conspirators annulled all those Laws that were made to secure the Protestant
Religion against Popery. Was this to defend the Church of England and to
maintain Her Laws? I leave it to all men to judge. But you and your villainous
Commissioners thought your selves so wise, as to reconcile Contradictions, and
therefore you were resolved to try your Skill upon the Church and the Nurseries
of Learning; which proved fatal to you and your Party by the Just Vengeance of
Almighty God.

2. Did you not, against express Law, and against the Promise of your
maintaining the Church of England, set up an Ecclesiastical Commission, and
empower the Persons named in that illegal Commission to take cognizance, and to
give arbitrary directions in matters Ecclesiastical, in which Commission there
was one who professed the Popish Religion, and others that were Abettors of
Popery and Popish Superstition; therefore to what deplorable condition was the
Church of England reduced, that a Commissioner for the Church of England's
Affairs should publicly abjure the Protestant Religion, by which means he was
not only very unfit, but also incapable of holding any public Employment! And
did not the Banditti give you such proof of their submission to your Popish
Directions you gave them, that they had continued in their Places to this day,
had not God of his Infinite Mercy delivered us from them and your self? For
they were men of an agreeable disposition to have furthered your designs of
Popery, notwithstanding all your Promises to maintain the Church of England,
for they took care that none should be preferred that had any zeal for the
Protestant Religion; for, if you will be serious in considering who they were
that you preferred to the Dignities in the Church, and upon what terms, you must
own, that they were men of such Morals and Principles, as rendered them a very
scandal to that villainous Design that you and your Conspirators were carrying
on against the Church of England.

3. I pray, Sir, was the suspension of the Bishop of London another
demonstration of your Purpose and Resolution to maintain the Church of England?
Let any of your traiterous Crew stand forth and answer for you; Was not that
Prelate suspended for refusing to obey an Arbitrary Order sent to him by your
Banditti Commissioners for the suspending of Dr. Sharp, now Archbishop of York,
for preaching against Popery according to his Office and Calling, without so
much as citing the said Dr. Sharp before him to make his defense, or observing
any common forms of Process commonly used in such cases: The Bishop complied
with your Suspension, and what damage it was to him he can tell better than I;
but it did work for our Good, and hastened our Deliverance, but it showed that
you had but little regard to your Oath and Promise to maintain the Church of
England.

4. Another Specimen you gave us of your pious Resolution of maintaining the
Chapter of England as by Law established, was the dealing with Magdalen College in
Oxford. In the first place you turned out the President, who was legally chosen
by the Fellows of the College, who, if I mistake not, are sworn to choose one
from among themselves to bear that Office; then you turned out all the Fellows
for refusing to choose one of your recommendation, without so much as citing
them to appear before any Court that could take legal cognizance in that
affair, or obtaining any Sentence against them by a competent Judge; and the
only reason you gave for the turning them out, was, because they had refused a
person that was a Papist, who was not only incapable by the Laws of the Land,
but also by the Statutes of that College, of bearing the Office of a President
or Fellow of that Community. And having expelled both President and Fellows, you
put the said College into the hands of Papists, that you might the better
maintain the Rights and Liberties of the Chapter of England as by Law established.
But I hope it may be a warning to that Community, and to all others of that
University, how they advance the Prerogative of the Crown so high, and nourish
those two pestilent Doctrins of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, and the
Divine Right of Succession, les^ those Doctrins do expose them to a greater
Danger than the last.

5. Another demonstration that was given by you of your steadfast Purposes of
standing by and maintaining of the Chapter of England, was your proceeding against
the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, 1687. You had a great Favor for one Francis
a Benedictine Monk, a Rogue that was fit for any Villainy that you could put him
upon to act; him you sent to Cambridge to corrupt the Youth there, and no doubt
but for his time he did the business for which you sent him. You planted him in
Sidney College, where you had placed one Basset a Papist in that House as
Master, but your Monk had an Apartment, wherein he performed the Office of a
Priest according to the Chapter of Rome; but being a Fellow that had taken no
Degrees in any University either at home or abroad, you were resolved that he
should be a Master of Arts in the University of Cambridge; and in order to this
you sent a Letter to the said Vice Chancellor, to admit the said Father Francis
to be a Master of Arts without taking the Oaths; which the Vice Chancellor
refused, as contrary to the Law of the Land and the Statutes of the University:
Upon this you caused the Vice Chancellor and the Delegates of the University to
be summoned before your Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Affairs, where that
Villain Jefferies, contrary to all Law or Reason, pronounced Sentence, that the
Vice Chancellor being guilty of great Disobedience to the King's Commands, and
other Crimes and Contempts, should be deprived of the Office of
Vice Chancellor, and suspended of his headship of Magdalen College in the said
University of Cambridge. Thus, Sir, you were pleased to maintain the Chapter of
England, by suffering the Learning and Gravity of that University to be
trampled upon, and by letting in a parcel of silly, impudent, and illiterate
Popish Priests and Friars, who were to join with you in supporting the
Protestant Religion, as it was then by Law established. Unless your
Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Affairs judged that to destroy the two
Universities as to Learning, and to break in upon their Laws made to preserve
their Communities, would be a means to preserve the Church of England, I cannot
but wonder at those extravagant Proceedings in the last years of your Tyranny
against them, since they had so highly espoused your Cause when you were Duke
of York, against the Sense of the whole Nation.

6. Another Reason you give us to believe that you did design to stand by and
support and maintain the Chapter of England, was your proceeding and causing to be
summoned before your Ecclesiastical Commissioners all the Chancellors and
Archdeacons of England, and requiring them to certify the Names of those
Clergymen who had read the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, as well as
the Names of those who had refused the same, without considering that the
reading of it was not enjoined the Clergy by the Bishops, who are their
Ordinaries: So that this was another way you intended (even by these
extrajudicial Proceedings in your Court of Commissioners Ecclesiastical) to
maintain the Liberties of the Chapter of England. This was one great cause why
several Persons of Quality both in Church and State refused to be concerned in
this Commission, for they at last clearly saw, that this damnable Commission
tended to nothing less than the total Subversion of the Protestant Religion,
for you used it to no other end and purpose than to oppress such persons as
were eminent for Learning and Virtue, that should at any time or season preach
against Popery and Superstition. And it was God's great Mercy to the Protestant
Interest that they did at last see, for sure I am that in the latter part of
your Brother's time, and in the beginning of your time, they were given up to
such a secure state, and judicial blindness, that the Protestant Religion was
in greater danger of being suppressed than ever it was since the Reformation,
notwithstanding your Promise of maintaining and preserving it.

7. Another Indication of your Care for the maintenance of the Chapter of England
was the breaking through those Laws which forbid the erecting Churches and
Chapels for the exercise of the Popish Religion, and also against Monasteries
and Convents, and more particularly against the Order of the Jesuits; for you
did, contrary to your Oath and Promise made to support the Chapter of England, give
out arbitrary and illegal Orders to erect Monasteries; and in contempt of the
Law you set up several Colleges of Jesuits to corrupt the Youth of the
Nation. Nay, Sir, that you might not leave your self without Witness of your
steadfast Resolution of maintaining, supporting and defending the Chapter of
England, you raised up a Jesuit that was in the Popish Plot, in which the
death of the King your kind and loving Brother was plotted and contrived, and
the subversion of the Government both in Church and State, to be a Privy
Councillor and a Minister of State: By all which you did evidently show, that
you were restrained by no Laws, and therefore the Chapter of England must perish,
you being so well seconded in your Popish Progress by your most excellent
Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Affairs. But to conclude this Paragraph, how
those Villains that acted in that Commission of yours can look Mankind in the
Face, after they have done so many things against all Law, Honor and
Conscience, I do not understand: The truth is, those that are yet alive have
with the Whore in the Proverbs wiped their Mouths, and say, They have done no
wickedness; and, without all doubt, if they might be trusted, would with as
great earnestness appear against your Cause and Interest, as they did wickedly
in your time espouse it; but they would be such a Reproach to an honest
Government, as would render the best and most honest Cause suspicious, if
engaged in it.

IV. I come now to consider a 4th Passage in your Speech to the Council,
wherein you were pleased to say, That you had been reported to have been a man
for Arbitrary Power, but you did assure them that you would preserve the
Government in Church and State, as by Law established; And That you knew that
the Laws of England were sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch as he
could wish. How you preserved the Government of the Church, is plain enough;
nothing indeed is more plain than this, that you intended its Destruction and
utter Subversion, and that nothing less would serve your turn, notwithstanding
its Principles were for Monarchy, and its Members had showed themselves Loyal
Subjects. How fared it then with the State? Surely the Civil Government was
preserved, since the Laws of England were sufficient to make the King as great
a Monarch as he could wish: In truth, Sir, there was but a lamentable account
to be given to your more than Glorious Successor of your management of Affairs
in the Civil Government, all things were out of order at his accession to the
Crown, which you may have forgotten; therefore, Sir, be pleased to remember, in
the first place, your Villains of your Council, and of your Ecclesiastical
Commission: As they were in a Conspiracy against the Chapter of England, to turn
our Religion into downright Popery, so they were in a Conspiracy against the
State, to turn the well established Government of this Land into downright
Slavery, and this not secretly, as if those Rascals were not ashamed of what
they did, for they had that matchless Impudence to act in an open and
undisguis'd manner; and to carry on your villainous purposes, you and your
Accomplices set up the Dispensing Power, by virtue of which you might suspend
and dispense with the execution of the Laws at your pleasure: and in order to
give this devilish Maxim of yours and your Conspirators countenance and credit,
you so managed that matter, that you obtained an Opinion from the Judges, most
of which were mercenary Rogues, who declared their opinion, That this
Dispensing Power was in the Kings of England; as if it were in the power of
these Villains to offer up the Laws and Liberties of the whole Nation to your
self, to be disposed of by you arbitrarily at your pleasure, and expressly
contrary to those Laws that were enacted for the liberty of the Subject.

In order to obtain this Judgment, your Conspirators did before hand examine
secretly the Sentiments of the Judges, and procured such of them as could not
in Conscience concur in so villainous an opinion or sentence to be turned out,
and others that had neither Law nor Conscience were substituted in their rooms,
so that by changing of hands they found out 12 matchless Rogues, from whom you
obtained that wicked Judgment which, if my Memory fail me not, was laid down in
these 5 particulars. 1. That the Kings of England are Sovereign Princes. 2.
That the Laws of England are the King's Laws. 3. That it is an inseparable
Prerogative of the K. of Engl. to dispense with Penal Laws upon necessity and
urgent occasions. 4. That the K. is the sole Judge of that necessity. 5. That
this is not in Trust given to the K. but it is the ancient Remains of the Crown,
which never was nor can be taken from him. Give me leave, Sir, to examine these
Particulars, and let the world see how you were abused, and how you abused the
Government by the Opinions of these 12 mercenary Rogues.

1. That the Kings of England were Sovereign Princes. What then? Must you by a
Dispensing Power do what you list? were you not subject to those Laws which you
were sworn to keep? And if you had not fled, might you not have been called to
an account? Might not the People, from whom you derived your Authority, have
had any Power over you? And was it not dangerous both to Church and State to
have a Popish Prince so mighty, that no Protestant House of Peers or Commons
dare control him? Truly, Sir, I own that the Kings of England are sovereign
Princes, yet the Nation by their Representatives did never allow the Kings of
England to do what 12 mercenary Judges should deliver as their Opinions; for,
Sir, it was never intended when you assumed the Government, that your Will and
Pleasure should stand for a Law, for the Laws that support the Grandeur of the
Crown limited your Will to Reason, and tied your Commands to the Word of God,
the Laws of the Realm, and the Weal of the People. And since, Sir, you regarded
not these things, but followed the Sentiments of your corrupt Judges, your Will
was unlawful, and Commands unjust.

The Kings of England always have been, and still are Sovereign Princes, but
what makes them so? Is it not the Law of the Land? And does not the Law set a
boundary to their Government as well as to the Peoples Obedience? Is there not
a mutual Contract between King and People? Now, when any K. shall by a
Suspending or Dispensing Power dissolve this Contract, and break in upon our
Laws, and overturn the Government, the People cease to be his Subjects, and he
to be their King. It is your own case, Sir, by your Dispensing Power you did
not only pretend to be above Law, but also that you were not bound by Law; though
by your Oath you were as much bound to observe the Law as a King, as your
People were bound to observe the Laws as your Subjects. But the People of
England seeing that it was in vain to expect any Justice or Righteousness from
you, (for means of reformation was propounded, but was denied to be complied
withal) several noble Lords saw themselves slighted, their Counsels rejected,
and the Protestant Religion upon its last Legs, they therefore did implore the
help of the Prince of Orange, now our Gracious King; he comes over, seizes
your Treasure, your fortified places, Navy, and Naval Stores, and with one
Consent of the People of England was made our Sove -Lord and King, and has his
health very well without the help and aid of a Dispensing Power; God send him a
long and prosperous Reign.

2. The Laws of England are the Kings Laws; if your Dispensing Vermin did mean
by the Laws being your Laws, that is, that you were entrusted with the
Conservation and the Execution of them, then we agree with the Rogues; but how
does this Trust reposed in the King, for the time being, entitle him to Suspend
and Dispense with these Laws: but if by the Laws being yours they understood
that they were your Property, either to Execute or not Execute, either to keep
or break at your pleasure: I pray Sir, to what end were they made, and to what
end were you Sworn, to keep and maintain these Laws, why was there the trouble
of an Oath to keep the Law? But Sir, here they laid down a notorious falsehood,
for the Laws of England are the Laws made by King and People as the Rule of the
Government of the King on the one hand, and of the Obedience of the People on
the other.

3. That it is an inseparable Prerogative of the King of England to Dispense
with Penal Laws upon necessity and urgent Occasions, this was laid down as good
Law. But Sir, I pray consider, were not all the Laws of England Enacted by the
King and the People of England, met in Parliament, for the security of the
Government and of the Subject; how then could these Villains give you a Power
of annulling these Laws at your Will and Pleasure, since you could not suspend
or dispense with them, but by the same Authority by which they were made? It is
true, the King of England, for the time being, may pardon a Punishment that a
Transgressor has incurred, and to which he is condemned, as in cases of
Felony and Treason, yet it cannot be inferred from hence, with any color of
reason, that you or any other King could entirely suspend the Execution of
those Laws relating to Felony or Treason, unless, Sir, your villainous Judges
could have proved by any other Authority, than barely their Opinions that you
were clothed with a Dispotick and Arbitrary Power, and that the Lives and
Liberties, Honors and Estates of the People of England, did depend wholly upon
your good Will and Pleasure, and were entirely subject to you, which must
infallibly follow on your having a Power to suspend the Execution of the Laws,
and to dispense with them.

It may be Sir, some of your Dispensers may say, That you were not well
informed when you took the Coronation Oath to maintain the Laws of the Land,
and that you had prejudiced your self greatly by yielding to the Oath, and that
you had weakened your Authority too much in submitting your self to the
observation of those Laws.

These things were much talked of by some of your Bully Conspirators, when they
little dreamed of your taking the Air at St. Germains: Nay, some of the Devils
Brokers roared this out of their Pulpits by the direction of Old Hodge their
guide. But, Sir, I pray, inform me how it could be that you should not be well
informed, when you yielded to take the Oath at your Coronation to observe, and
keep the Laws of the Land? It is impossible that you should be ignorant of that
which all the World knew, and all your Predecessors before you; as it was
almost impossible that you should not be acquainted with the Oath that you were
to take, and the Laws you were to preserve by that Oath. So this, know that you
were bound to those Laws immediately upon taking the Oath; and I wonder much
that you should be a stranger to the Coronation Oath, and to the Laws by which
you were to defend your Government that had been twenty four Years a looker on
in the Reign of your Brother. Therefore this Plea is as frivilous, as the
Opinion of your never to be forgiven Judges was Impudent and against Law. But
this is one of the made Thoughts that ever you, or your villainous Judges
could be guilty of, that it was a blemish to the Sovereign Power of the Kings
of England to submit to the Laws. I pray, Sir, What blemish would it have been
to your Sovereign Power to have submitted to the Laws of your Country, which
your Predecessors were contented to acknowledge and observe? You derived your
Authority to your self by virtue of the Laws? Why then was the Observation of
the Laws such a prejudice to you and your Sovereign Power? But we saw the Laws
broken, and you forsworn, and your Subjects deposed you. In this, I am sure,
you have found a greater blemish and prejudice, than the observation of the
Laws would have been.

But to be short, you may plead for your self and your Judges, That were under
a necessity and an urgent occasion. Well, What was that necessity? What were
those urgent occasions that could put you upon forswearing your self, and
bringing your self under the guilt of Perjury. In truth, Sir, your necessity
you lay under, was the subversion of the Protestant Religion, and bringing in
Popery, and the subversion of the Civil Government, and bringing in Tyranny and
Slavery. Is not Perjury a most grievous Offense, but much more grievous when it
is voluntarily committed? And then a King committeh Perjury willingly when he
does any thing willingly against the Oath he has taken, not by force but by
freewil, not unadvisedly but with great consideration, not to his hurt but to
his advantage, not to perform a thing that was impossible or dishonest, but to
bind himself to a condition that is honest and possible too. Now when a King
breaks such an Oath, there can be no color or pretense of necessity, or
urgent occasions to excuse his Perjury.

4. That the King of England is sole Judge of that necessity. I never took you
so much behind hand in Sense and Reason, but that you might plainly see that
this is but a bantre of these Rogues, for they neither stated the necessity and
the urgent occasions you had to forswear your self, and never inquired whether
any necessity, or any urgent occasions could excuse you from lying under the
guilt of Perjury. Then they came off with an impudent lie, and say the King is
sole Judge of that necessity. He is sole Judge of nothing but what he is
entitled to by the Law; where the Law makes him a sole Judge there I do, and
own my self bound to obey him as such. But once more, Sir, Where was this
necessity of which you were to be sole Judge? When did it spring? Out of what
part of the World? I believe, if you could have convinced the Nation of this
necessity, and these urgent occasions, they would not so readily concurred to
your going to St. Germains, were your Popish Friends oppressed. And did the
necessity arise from thence? If it did, Why did you not tell the Parliament of
this Oppression? Were they in want of Places at Court, and Employments under
you, which they could not hold? Truly a great many Protestants went without
them, notwithstanding their being qualified. Oh! but the Priests of the Church
of Rome were in danger of the Law. I never could yet see that day. If they
would be quiet, and the Religion of the Church of Rome was your Religion: Well,
if it was, Had you not better to have refused the Crown rather than to have
taken it with such Encumbrances and Clogs, as should expose you to such
necessities and urgent occasions of Perjuring your self, and Damning your Soul,
and Ruining of three Kingdoms? It was well you were the sole Judge of the
necessity; for if an honest English Parliament had sat in the time of your
necessity and urgent occasions, they would have made these Rogues have swung
for their villainous Advice.

5. That this is not in Trust given to the King, but the Ancient Remains of the
Crown, which never was, nor can be taken from him; you, nor no King in England,
ever had any thing but what you received in Trust from the People of England in
Parliament assembled, therefore this was the greatest of Impudence that these
Twelve ignorant Devils could be guilty of, for what Authority, Power, or
Riches, have the Kings of England, but what they received from the People: and
it is plain the Power and Authority that you received was for the benefit of
the People, and not for the ruin and destruction of the Laws you consented to;
you were entrusted with the Conservation of them, not to Suspend, or Dispense
with them at your will and pleasure.

But what King of England was there, since the pretended Conqest, that was not
Sworn to keep the Laws, and defend the Rights and Liberties of the Church and
People of England? and who Administered this Oath to them? but one or more, in
the behalf of themselves and all the People of England. Your Brother, though
bad enough, took the Government as a trust reposed in him by his good People of
England, what part was it then that was not a Trust? they trusted him with vast
sums of money, they trusted you but with a very little. I pray Sir, would your
Scoundril Conspirators but tell me what parts were the Remains of the Crown,
and how they came so to be; if they cannot it is all Cheat and Nonsense. By
your management (notwithstanding all that might have been said to the contrary,
even in your Reign, without the danger of being hanged,) you obtained from your
Judges this wicked Opinion. I suppose you were not Idle, but was resolved to
proceed according to this Judgment of theirs; for you presently invaded the
Liberties both of Church and State. I have given you some instances of your
Invasion upon the Rights of the People of England, in relation to Matters of
the Church. Now let us proceed to see how you carried your self in reference to
the Civil Rights and Liberties of the People of England, which brings me to a
second Instance of your invading our Civil Rights.

2. As your Brother did begin, and made a very great Progress in, so you went
on to invade Privileges, and to seize the Charters of the Towns that had a
right to be represented in Parliament; and by your Tools procured Surrenders of
them to be made to you, especially where they were poor, and not able to defend
them. And a Gentleman that valued himself upon his Oath that he had made to a
Corporation, whereof he was a Magistrate, and therefore refused to deliver the
same; you rewarded him with a two or three years imprisonment, and had not God
interposed, it had been to the ruin of himself, his Wife and Children. By these
Surrenders, Sir, you caused all the Magistrates to give up their Rights and
Privileges, to be disposed of at your pleasure, and the pleasure of your
Villains the Conspirators; and by this means you placed in several of these
Towns Popish Magistrates, notwithstanding their incapacity, or such as were
Popishly affected, and willing to concur with you in all your evil Designs and
Purposes, assuring your self, that when necessity, or your urgent Occasions
should force you to call a Parliament, you might have such a Parliament
returned as should at once set up Popery and Arbitrary Power. Nay, Sir, our
danger in your time, and in the time of your loving and kind Brother, did most
(and does still) arise from those Beggarly and Paltry Borroughs that either are
by Charter or Prescription enabled to send Members to Parliament.

3. That you might not fail in the Counties of obtaining your wicked ends, you
gave Orders to Examine all Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and all other that were in any Public Employments, if
they would Concur with you in the Repealing the Test and Penal Laws; and those
whose Consciences would not permit them to comply with your wicked Designs and
Purposes were turned out, and others who you found would be more compliant to
you in your intentions, in defeating the End and Execution of those Laws which
had been made with so much Care and Caution, to preserve not only the
Protestant Religion, but also our Civil Rights and Liberties; and into many of
those places you put in Papists, and other persons of Arbitrary Principles;
notwithstanding the Law had incapacitated the former, and the other for want of
Reputation and Interest could do their Country but little Service; unless, like
Devils, they could do mischief by serving your Designs, and the Purposes of
your Conspirators: so that this Nation was in a deplorable Condition, and must
have perished had not God raised up the Prince of Orange, now our King, to come
over and deliver us out of your Hands.

4. As your Brother in his time hated the Peoples Petitioning him for the
redress of their Grievances, and had a Set of Men ready to Abhor and Detest
such Popular Petitions, though it was the Subjects Right to Petition the King
for the redress of Grievances, under which they groaned in his Reign. So you
was pleased to show your aversness to Petitioning; witness your proceeding
against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops, who offered a most
humble Petition to you in terms full of Respect, and exceeded not the number
limited by Law, in which they set forth their Reasons for which they could not
obey a certain Order; which you, by the Advice of your Popish Villains, sent
them to appoint their Clergy to Read in their Chruches, the Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, they were sent to Prison; and afterward brought to a
Trial, as if they had been guilty of some enormous Crime, they were not only
obliged to defend themselves under this Persecution; but also to appear before
four Villains, one Professed Papist, and the other three had not taken the
Test, and by Consequence were Men whose Interest and Inclination too led them
to Condemn them. And the Judges that gave their Opinion in favor of those
Prelates were turned out; thus you may see a fourth Instance you have given us
of your invading our Civil Rights.

But, Sir, while I speak to you of these things, give me leave to plead with
you, What King was there that ever reigned that was too great to be petitioned
by the meanest of his Subjects? It cannot be pretended that any Kings how great
soever their Power has been, and how Arbitrary and Dispotick they have been in
the exercise of this Power, have ever reckoned it a Crime for their Subjects to
come with all submission and respect, in a due number, not exceeding the limits
of the Law, to represent Reasons why they could not execute such, or such an
Order. Deal freely with the World, send to your Dispensing Rogues, and ask them
whether it were one of the remains of the Crown that empowered you to wrest out
of the Hands of the Subject this undoubted Right of Petitioning the Prince for
theredress of Grieveances?

5. How did you treat a Peer of this Realm? Was he not used by you, and your
villanious Conspirators as a Criminal, only because he said, That the Subjects
were not bound to obey the Orders of a Popish Justice of the Peace? Tho it was
evident that such being by Law rendered incapable of all such Trusts: No regard
was due to any of their Orders. This being the security which the People of
England had, and still have by the Law, for their Lives, Liberties, Honors and
Estates, that they are not subjected to the Arbitrary Proceedings of Papists,
that were contrary to Law put into any Employment Civil or Military. This was
another instance of the invasion you made upon us, in respect of our Civil
Rights and Liberties, and manifested your self to be a Man for Arbitrary
Government in subjecting our Persons and Estates to the Arbitrary Proceedings
of Popish Magistrates and Officers under you.

6. You apprehending that the great Remedy of your Grievances, and Security of
our Religion was a Free Parliament; and least you might lie under a necessity
of calling one, you and your Accomplices did endeavor to make it impossible,
or at least very difficult to be obtained; for you could not but apprehend that
a Lawful Parliament being once Assembled, would call you and your Villains to
an account for all your open Violations of the Law, and for your Plots and
Conspiracies against the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and Liberties of
the People of England, you endeavored, under the specious pretense of Liberty
of Conscience, first to sow Divisions between the Protestants of the Church of
England, and Protestant Dissenters; the Design being laid to engage all
Protestants that are equally concerned to preserve themselves from Popish
Oppression into mutual Quarrellings. So that by these some Advantages might be
taken by you to bring about your Villainous Designs and Purposes, and that both
in the Election of Members of Parliament, and afterward in the Parliament it
self; for you could not but see, that if all Protestants did enter into a
mutual good understanding one with another, and concur together in the
preserving our Civil Rights and Liberties, that it would have been possible for
you and your Banditti to accomplish your wicked Ends. What could we expect from
you, when you struck at the Foundation of all our Civil Rights and Liberties,
in the hindering the Nation of the Choice of a Free and Lawful Parliament? For
did you not require all Persons, in the several Counties of England, that
either were in any Employment, or were in any considerable Esteem, to declare
before hand that they would concur in the repeal of the Test and the Penal
Laws, and that they would give their Voices in the Elections to Parliament,
only for such as would concur in it? such as would not thus pre-engage
themselves were turned out of all Employments, and others who entered into these
Engagements were put into their Places; many of which are Papists, and contrary
to the Charters and Privileges of those Buroughs, that have a right to send
Burgesses to Parliament. You ordered such Regulations to be made as you thought
fit and necessary for the assuring your self, and your villainous Conspirators,
of all the Members that were to be chosen by those Corporations; and by this
means you gave your self, and Tribe, hope to avoid the being called to an
account for your Villainies: though it was then, and is still apparent that all
Acts made by Popish Magistrates are Null and Void of themselves; so that no
Parliament could have been lawful, for which Elections and Returns had been
made by your Popish Sheriffs, and Mayors of Towns; and therefore, as long as
the Authority and Magistracy was in such Hands, it was impossible for us to
have had a Lawful and a Free Parliament.

You might have known that the Constitution of the English Government and
Custom, time out of mind. All Elections of Parliament Men ought to be made with
an entire Liberty, without any sort of force, or the requiring the Electors to
choose such persons as should be named to them; and the persons thus freely
Elected ought to give their Opinions freely upon all Matters that are brought
before them, they having the good of the Nation before their Eyes, and
following in all things the dictates of their Consciences. Therefore you having
usurped an illegal Authority, and resolving upon the utmost Violations of our
Laws, you would not give us the least hopes of having our Grievances redressed
by a Free Parliament legally called and chosen.

It is true, you would have called one in which all Elections should have been
carried by Fraud and Force, and might have been composed of such persons of
whom you and your Traiterous Crew would have been well assured, in which all
things would have been carried on by their Direction and Interest, without any
regard to the Good and Welfare of this Nation, which I prove to you and your
Villainous Crew, both at home and abroad. For did you not try the Members of
the packed Parliament, that sat down in the Year 1685, to gain them to consent
to the repeal of the Test and Penal Laws? And did you not dissolve that
Parliament when you found that you could neither by Promises, nor by
Threatenings prevail with these very Members to comply with your wicked Designs;
and those who would not comply were branded, as if they were Disturbers of the
public Peace? For you may remember, that though the Prince and Princess of
Orange did endeavor to signify in terms full of Respects and Duty to your
self, the just and deep regret all your wicked and ungodly Proceedings had
given them; and in compliance to your desires they had signified their Thoughts
concerning your Repealing the Penal Laws and Test, which though they did it in
such a manner that they had just Ground of hope, that they had proposed an
Expedient by which the Peace of England, Scotland and Ireland, and a happy
Agreement among the Subjects of all Persuasions might have been certainly
settled. You and your Hellborn Crew put such Villainous Constructions upon
their honest and sincere Intentions, as that you were not ashamed to condemn
them both as persons that designed to disturb the Quiet and Happiness of the
Kingdom. But, Sir, the people of England always Testified a most singular
Affection and Esteem for the Prince and Princess of Orange, as persons
zealously Affected with, and concerned for the Advancement of the Protestant
Religion and Interest; and therefore many of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and many Gentlemen, and other persons of Note, laid our miserable Case before
them, and beged their Aid and Assistance. The Prince of Orange upon due
consideration of our deplorable State, to which we were brought by you and your
wicked Accomplices, found that in point of that Duty he owed to God, and in
return of the great Value the people of England had for him, that he could no
way excuse himself from espousing our Cause or Quarrel in a Matter of such high
Consequence, and from Contributing to the utmost of his Power, for the
maintaining both of our Religion, and our Laws, and our Liberties, and to
secure us in the perpetual Enjoyment of all our Rights. Therefore he came over
with a Force sufficient, which through the Blessing of the Great God, was
sufficient to suppress you and your villainous Conspirators.

You know, Sir, that as you and your Conspirators were not only full of
Cruelty, and Guilty of the greatest Inhumanities and Barbarities. So you and
they were full of lies and deceit; for upon the coming over of this Great
Prince, you were sensible of the Greatness of your Guilt, and had no great
Confidence in your own Forces, which induced you to offer to the City of London
some seeming Relief from their great Oppression, you hoping thereby to beguile
us of a firm Establishment, and full Security of our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion; and finding that the Kingdoms Eyes were fully opened, then you and
your Hellborn Crew gave out, with as much Malice as Falseness, that the Prince
of Orange intended to Conquer and Enslave the Nation. No, Sir, the Design of
that mighty Deliverer was the security of our enjoying our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, and that there might be no danger of the Kingdoms relapsing into the
like Miseries for the time to come.

Well, Sir, you remember that the Prince arrives and you fled before him. He no
sooner comes but he was bid welcome by all True Protestants. You run away. A
Convention was called, and he, to our great Joy, was chosen our King. A
Parliament sits down, and his Majesty joined with them in making such Laws, as
have secured us and our All; he Fights our Battles; he Loves our Nation; and we
Love our King, and we shall not refuse any thing that may be for his Honor,
Greatness, and Content. You are deposed as useless in the sight of God, and
driven from amongst Protestants to graze at St. Germains, where you may take
your ease till the French King shall be as weary of your Company, as we were of
your Wicked and Tyrannical Government. You have made many attempts to be
restored; sometimes you Threaten us, at other times you would Flatter us to a
second Entertainment; but that is but a foolish thought of your Counselors at
St. Germains, which brings me to the last point of my Memorial, which is to
show you,

3. The Unreasonableness of your attempting of your Return hither, on which
particulars I hope you have leisure enough to reflect, and to advise about with
your worthy Ministry you have attending your Person there; but least they
should not have Honor and Honesty enough to deal plainly with you, I will lay
down Six undeniable Arguments, why it is morally impossible that you should be
ever readmitted to reign over us. 1. Because we cannot bind you by the most
Solemn Oaths. 2. Because we are Protestants. 3. Because we are Englishmen.
And, 4. Because we are Freemen. 5. Because we have a King of our own Religion
and Judgment, to whom we have sworn Allegiance, who goes out and in before us,
and fights our Battles for us. 6. Because of your Attempt upon the Person of
our King, in employing your Traitorous Assassins to murder him.

1. Because we cannot bind you by the most Solemn Oaths; we saw our Laws
over-turned, our Liberties seized, our Religion corrupted and subverted, and
you Forsworn: The Laws of Nature taught us to provide for the defense of our
All which was at Stake. And can any Man think it hard that the Kingdom laid you
aside? And we laying you aside for the Breach of your Contract and Oath, made
to the People of England; Can you expect that we should in the least be guilty
of so base a Compliance, as to submit our selves to the Government of a Man,
that by his Abominable Perjury dissolved his own Government? You have time now
to consider that Perjury in a King is a most Grievous Offense against God and
his Own Crown and Dignity, but much more Grievous when it is volantarily
committed: And when a Prince commits Perjury willingly, when he does any
thing willingly against his Coronation Oath, taken not by Force, but by
Free Will, not unadvisedly, but with great Consideration, not to his Hurt, but
to his Advantage, not to perform a Thing Dishonest or Impossible, but that
which is both Possible and Honest: For when a Prince (not being forced
thereunto by just Fear or irrisistible Necessity) breaks such an Oath as
there can be no color to excuse his Perjury, it arguing him and convincing him
of Fraud and Deceit, and gave occasion to all thinking Men that you had no
manner of regard to your Coronation Oath; so it puts you under an absolute
Incapacity of being Restored, since the both Houses of Parliament, upon the
breach you made of your Contract, have thought fit to lay you aside, as a
Person useless and dangerous to the public Weal of the Three Kingdoms. Your
Pretenses therefore to the Imperial Crown of this Realm are very foolish and
frivolous, for by the Laws of all Nations, you having been guilty of the most
notorious Perjury, you are therefore Infamous; and the Laws of your own
Synagogue say that no Infamous Person is fit for the Execution of an Office of
Honor and Dignity; a perjured Man is always repelled from bearing witness in
any Cause whatsoever, because that being Convicted to have Forsworn himself in
one Cause, it is not only a Presumption, but a sufficient Proof that he will
Depose falsely in another: And this is so true, that although he has amended his
Life yet he cannot be admitted for a Witness be it either in a Civil or a
Criminal Cause. So, Sir, you having once Forsworn your Self in subverting our
Religion, Laws and Liberties, by the advice of a parcel of Men that feared not
God, nor reverenced Men: How do you think that we can ever trust you again? For
if the Nation should be brought under such dismal and deplorable Circumstances,
(which God avert) as once more to submit to your Administration of the
Government; it would not only be a strong presumptive Conclusion, but Proof
that admits of no Objection that you would run again into the same Enormities,
if not worse; for I fear, and so do all True Protestants, that by your Crew
that you have with you, you are possessed with strange and very vile Opinions:
And these are such as have not only in times past, but are still entertained by
you, and your villainous Conspirators both at home and abroad, about the
Coronation Oath which you took when you entered upon the Administration of the
Government of this Realm. And they are these Four, 1. That Subjects cannot
receive an Oath of their Prince without the Authority of some Judge; and that a
Promise made before no competent Judge can bind any Man, much less a Prince;
and they have affirmed that this was your Case. I would have you remember, Sir,
that he that administered you the Oath was a lawful and competent Judge, because
that Law and the Custom of the Realm had made him so; and therefore to him you
Swore, and in Swearing to him you Swore to the whole Nation that you would
defend their Laws and Liberties. In a word, this Coronation Oath you took was a
lawful Oath, and not only so but it was lawfully taken, as well because general
Custom has the force and strength of a Law; for the persons present do stand,
and are taken by general Custom to have Power to give and receive that Oath.
But a bold Assertor of your Cause was pleased once to tell me that there was no
Parliament in being when you took this Oath; What then? When you took the
Coronation Oath there were persons (who upon your taking the Oath) that did
take the Oath of Fealty and Homage to you in the behalf of themselves, and all
the Nobility, and Commons of England; and this Oath must avail them though
absent, as though they were present; and if they were to be bound by the one
though absent, then certainly you were bound by yours though they were not
present.

2. These wicked Conspirators of yours have Asserted, That Princes being above
the Law are not bound to observe Oaths and Contracts, which have their full
force and strength from the Law; and that Princes may alter and change their
own Laws at their Pleasure. This Doctrine was carefully propogated by your
trusty Roger and his inferior Clergy by your Direction, in order to bring
about that wicked Design of yours of Subverting of the well established
Government of this Realm, and introducing French Slavery. But, Sir, this you
must now know that the Princes of England are not above the Law, and therefore
cannot alter them at their Pleasure without the manifest breach of their
Coronation Oath. I confess, they may by their Judges interpret the Law in an
Interval of Parliament, and in time of Parliaments: The Parliament are the best
interpreters of the Law, and not only so but the Kings of England by and with
the advice and consent of Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, may
Repeal and Abrogate Laws as they shall think fit. But what you did was against
Laws in force, to the manifest breach of your Oath, and you rendered your self
odious to God, and dispensed with those Laws that were for the preservation of
Persons, Honors, Estates, and Religion of the People of England; and by this
means you dissolved the Government, and for which Cause you were hated of the
People; and at last the Kingdom departed from you; you provoked that God that
made you a Man, and that People that made you a King.

But, Sir, your trusty Guide Hodge, with his inferior Clergy, deceived you
much, and those who believed this Doctrine, when they taught that your Oaths
made to, and contract made with the People of England, had their full force and
strength from the Law of the Land; for they had their strength and force from
the Law of Nature which binds Kings, Princes, Lords, Priests, and all Men
whatever. Therefore, Sir, did you not against the very Laws of Nature break
your Contract with the People of England, and the Oath you made to them? Does
not the Law of Nature oblige all Princes to keep their Contracts even with
their Enemies? How much more ought you to have kept your Contract with your
Friends and People? How could you expect to wear the Name of an honest Man,
since that the Laws of Honesty charge Princes to keep their Oaths and
Contracts? There is nothing becomes them better, nothing commends them more,
and nothing that Men require so much at their hands.

In the last place, Princes Oaths to, and Contracts with their Subjects and
Allies, are as good as Laws, they have the same force as Laws, they have the
same strength and virtue against their Successors which they have against
themselves; nay, let me tell you, that they are of greater strength than
Princes Laws; for Laws may be Repealed, but Contracts can never be Revoked; and
why so? The Reason is plain, That Laws may alter according to the necessity of
Affairs, but Contracts and Oaths can never be Revoked, they admit of no Change,
no Alteration; if once perfected they can neither receive Addition,
Substraction, Diminution, or Enlargement, they must not be wrested but taken
according to the true meaning of King and People. But, Sir, you may say, Why
may not Princes break their Oaths, and dissolve their Contracts made with their
Subjects at their Coronation? To this I give you this Answer.

Before you had Sworn to maintain our Laws, Liberties and Religion, you were
free; and before you made a Covenant with us, you were at your liberty: But
when you had Sworn, and when you had perfected your Contract, then of necessity
you were bound to keep and perform them; and you could not have added to, or
detracted from any thing in such a manner perfected, without the consent of the
people with whom you made this Contract; for we were to have been benefited by
this Oath and Contract of yours, and not deceived again. If Princes may break
their Oaths and Contracts made to, and with their Subjects, How can we deal
with such a King? How can we tell when we obey? We must be then at great
uncertainties, and so by consequenue we cannot be safe. Furthermore, Did it not
lie at your door to have preserved your self from Scandal and Fraud? Of which
you took no care; therefore you made no Conscience of of your Oaths and
Contracts. Again, Sir, we must suppose you to be a reasonable Creature; and if
so, we must also conclude you ought to have submitted to Reason, that you might
have, at least have had the reputation of a Man, and not be signalized with the
Character of a filthy Monstrous Beast. Hence it is that Tyrants, in sacred
Writ, are called Beasts, because they will not submit to, nor be governed by
the Rules of right Reason. In the last place, Sir, other Men may in their Oaths
and Contracts have an Eye to their Profit, but you ought to have had an Eye to
your Honor, and to have had an especial regard thereof. Now what can be more
Dishonorable in a King, than to break his Word, falsify his Faith, and
violate his Contract? And was not your Word, Faith and Contract confirmed by a
solemn Oath?

3. There was a third Doctrine that was much promoted by your Conspirators,
that although Kings should be strictly bound to stand to their Contracts and
their Oaths; yet if they were induced to make a Contract, and to take an Oath
in things wherein they were not well informed, or if the Contract and Oath do
contain things too much derogating, or diminishing their Jurisdiction or
Authority Royal, or if they have made a Promise that may be prejudicial to
their Greatness, they may then lawfully break their Contract, Faith and Oath.

This Doctrine was very industriously spread about by your Party, especially by
your Jesuits and your Jesuited Papists, and Passive Obedience Men. But
certainly, Sir, your Conspirators represented your understanding to be but of
Irish Standard, and to be of the same Scantling with their Honesty. Give me
leave to ask you this one fair Question, Was you not well informed what you
were to do, and what you did promise to do when you took the Coronation Oath to
defend the Protestant Religion, and preserve and maintain the Laws of the
Realm, and by them to govern this great People you took the Charge of? Can any
Man think, Sir, that you should be the only Man that was Ignorant of that which
all the Nation knew, and what your Grandfather, Father and Brother had done
before you? Where, Sir, was the Dishonor or Blemish that might fall upon you,
if you had kept your Oath, and made the Laws of the Land the Rule of your
Government? If you had been a good King, you would have delighted to have been
bound by the Laws of the Land, and have rejoiced the Hearts of the People of
England; and then you would not have at this time have been obliged to France
for your Subsistence.

But, Sir, God in his just Judgment gave you up to believe these lies, and
therefore you violated those Laws by which you were Sworn to govern, to
gratify your Popish Hellborn Crew; they have got you to themselves. We have a
King that thinks it no Blemish to his Regal Authority, to maintain and keep our
Laws, he judges it no Dishonor to preserve the Liberties of his People, and
their Honors and Estates: You have the reward of your Unrighteousness, I wish
you much Joy of it.

4. Some of the Doctors and Casuists of your Synagogue of Rome say, that
Princes who may dispense with others may give a sufficient Dispensation to
themselves, and so revoke their Contracts and break their Oaths; for that they
have Might, and Power, and Authority; there is no Law, no Judge that can compel
them to keep their Oaths, and observe their Contracts.

It is manifest that you did take upon you to dispense with others, and to give
your self a Dispensation too; and we own that we were not then in a Condition
to call you to an Account; but you were Admonished very often by the best and
greatest of your Subjects, to reform all that was amiss: But after all this
Admonition, you did remain incorrigible; then what could we do but make your
Actions, Cruelties and Tyrannies, and Perjury known to the World. And we
implored the Aid and Help not of the French King, but William Prince of Orange,
who came and suppressed you as an incorrigible Oppressor and Tyrant. And your
Party appearing barefaced to murder our King, and invade the Kingdom with a
Foreign Force, in order to enslave us, will be treated as Villains and Common
Rogues, and receive the just recompense of Reward for all their Treasonable
Conspiracies against our King, and the well established Government of the
Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion.

To conclude this point, How detestable and odious has your Perjury made you,
it has excluded you from that great Honor to which you arrived, and it has
removed you from your native Country; in a word it has clothed you with so
much infamy, that it is impossible for you to attain that Honor, Power and
Authority, and Majesty you have lost? And therefore it is highly unreasonable
for you, or your Conspirators ever to attempt your Restoration.

2. As your Perjur is an argument why it is not only impossible for you to be
restored, and folly for you to attempt it, so in the second place we are
Protestants; And what can a Popish Apostate do at the head of a Protestant
Interest? The Popish Queen Mary she no sooner obtained the Crown, by a
Protestant Interest, but she destroyed that very Interest by which she was
advanced to the Throne. This we well remember, Sir; and we need not burn our
Fingers again the third time. Suppose, Sir, that we should have so little sense
as to try you once more, and should succeed; What Monsters must we appear to
the World, a Body of Protestants with a Popish Head? This does much astonish
me, that our little Prick-ear'd Priests of the Church of England have so much
admired your Cause, and pleaded it with such earnestness; when as they cannot
but conclude that you must of necessity deal by the Church of England, as you
would with an impudent Harlot. Your Brother was careless in the maintenance of
our Religion, because he was a Papist, though a loose one: And can we otherwise
conclude but you who have at all times, and in all places wherever you have
come, showed your self a bigoted Papist, will not only discountenance the
Protestant Religion, but destroy it with all that Zeal that is consistent with
the Principles of a perverse Member of the Romish Synagogue. You in the time of
your short Tyranny made a sad Havoc with the Protestant Religion; and can we
expect better usuage from you, seeing you having Seven Devils more within you
rageing against the Protestant Interest than you had before you left us.

What I say to you in this particular, I speak not without Witness, for it is
most certain that you have, and do to this very day entertain a very great
aversness to any Man that bears the name of a Protestant. Therefore since by
your late behavior, to those whose Principles have led them to espouse your
Interest, and have followed you into France, if they have any Sense of their
English Liberties, and of the Protestant Religion, will abhor the thoughts of
your return hither: For if you appear so violent against our Religion now you
are under so great an estate of Sufferings; What will your declared Hatred be
against Protestants here in England, if we should admit you to reign over us?
For if you can presume to that degree of Malice, as to deny your Protestant
Tools your Grace and Favor at St. Germains; What can we that are Protestants
expect from you whenever you shall return? Do you think that any of us should
be so stupid to expect fair Quarter from you, since your very Religion lays you
under the necessity of Converting us with a Faggot, and bringing us to your
Obedience with the dint of a Dagger? Nay, Sir, your Passive Obedience Curs fare
not much better, though they saved you from your being prosecuted for your
being deeply interested in the Popish Plot, and from being excluded from the
Succession to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and also from being beaten out
of the Kingdom by the late Duke of MONMOUTH. What reason than have we not to
believe that you will not only in general invade the Protestant Religion, but
also once again attempt the depressing the Church of England? In your short
Reign you sent Seven Bishops to the Tower; but if ever you should return I will
not excuse the whole Twenty Six from being more hardly used. Upon which
consideration I will appeal then, Sir, to your Judgment, or the Judgment of
your Friends here, or those with you at St. Germains, whether or no it is
impossible for you to gain so great a Point as to be received again as a King?
And whether it would not be the greatest Folly or Madness in you, or any of
your Party to attempt it? For have you any that are with you, that are
Protestants, upon a Principle of Conscience, How have you used and treated them
(and if they have no better usage from you since they follow you in their
Afflictions, and are contented to share with you in your Hardships) as not to
enjoy the Liberty of serving God according to their Dictates of their own
Conscience? How must it fare with them if you should arrive to that State and
Condition, in which you should stand in no need of them? And if so, What can we
expect from you that have hated your Person, and do hunt down your Cause and
Interest out of the Nation? Therefore the Duty that we owe to Almighty God, and
the Affection and Zeal we have for the Protestant Religion, will oblige us to
pursue you as a Murderer, and an Assassin of the People of England, and a
Traitor to the Nation; and those who shall be found fighting under your Banner
will be used as Banditti and Robbers, and Protestants that shall not have the
benefit of Repentance.

3. Consider we are English Men; and that very Consideration might satisfy any
Man that will but consult his Reason of the impossibility of your being
restored to your pretended Right, and of the folly of your many attempt, in
order thereunto. Had your Interest been an English interest, than your
Conspirators might have had some color for their attempt of this Nature; but
your Interest is a French Interst, and therefore your Interest that you have
espoused is incompatible, or inconsistent with your being restored. Here are
two Points that must be considered. 1. That your Interest is a French Interest.
2. That a French Interest is not consistent with your Endeavors after a
Restoration; and both these Points fairly proved will justify the refusal of
the Kingdom of Englands admitting you to act, and execute the Office of a King
here again amongst us.

1. Your Interest is not an English but a French Interest; for as you followed
your loving and kind Brother in most of his Virtues, so you persued the same
Interest that he pursued: For was not the Interest of your Brother, and the
Interest of the French King and yours inseperably united? Knowing (says your
Quondam Secretary) the Interest of our King, and in a more particular manner of
my immediate Master the Duke, and his Most Christian Majesty, to be so
inseperably united; that it was impossible to divide them without destroying
them all. Again his Majesty [the French King] was pleased to give Order to
signify to his R. H. my Master, that his Majesty was fully satisfied of his R.
H's good Intentions toward him, and that he esteemed both their Interests but
as one and the same, and that my Lord Arlington and the Parliament were both
looked upon as very unuseful to their Interests. And again Father Ferier begged
his R. H. to propose to his Most Christian Majesty what he thought necessary
for his own Concern, and the advantage of Religion; and his Majesty would
certainly do all that he could to advance both, or either of them. -- I
communicated it to his R. H. to which his R. H. commanded me to answer, as I
did the 29th of the same Month. That his R. H. was very sensible of his Most
Christian Majesty's Friendship, and that he would labor to cultivate it with
all the good Offices he was capable of doing his Most Christian Majesty. That
he was fully convinced that their Interests were both one. That my Lord
Arlington and the Parliament were not only unuseful, but dangerous both to
England and France, and therefore it was necessary they should do all they
could to dissolve it. -- I did communicate this Design of mine to Monsieur
Ravigney, who agreed with me that it would be the greatest Advantage to his
Master, to have the Duke's Power and Credit so far Advanced. -- Again, If we
can advance the Duke's Interest one step forward, we shall put him out of the
reach of Chance for ever. -- Then would Catholics be at rest, and his Most
Christian Majesty's Interest secured with us in England, beyond all
apprehensions whatsoever. -- Our prevailing in these things would give the
greatest blow to the Protestant Religion here, that ever it received from his
Birth. -- If the Duke should once get above them (after all the Tricks they
have played with him) they are not sure he will totally forget the usage he
has had at their Hands: For my part (says he) I can scarce believe my self
awake, or the thing real, when I think on a Prince in such an Age, as we live
in, to be converted to such a degree of Zeal and Piety, as not to regard any
thing in the World in comparison of Christ.

These are the Discoveries of your Old Servant Mr. Coleman; but to rivet the
Matter, I pray, consider what Discoveries you were pleased to make of the Union
of your Interest with that of the French King, which, Sir, will put the Matter
out of dispute. Give me leave to put you in mind of your Letter you wrote to
the French King's Confessor, wherein you were pleased to own that the
Interests of the French King and yours were so clearly linck'd together, that
those that opposed the one should be looked on as Enemies to the other; and
that the French King had told you that he was of the Opinion, that neither the
Lord Arlington, nor the Parliament were in his Interest, nor yours.

2. As it is as clear as the Day that your Interest is not an English but a
French Interest; so now I must tell you in the second place, that your Interest
being a French Interest, it will render your return impossible, and the attempt
in order to it very foolish and irrational. You know that the English Nation is
never safe, unless a check be put upon the growing Greatness of France.

Therefore do but observe the Address of the House of Commons, March 10. 1676,
they put the King your Brother in mind of the great Danger that the Nation was
exposed to, by reason of the growth of the French King's Power and Greatness.
Now any Man that is in the Interest of the French King, his Interest is no ways
reconcilable to the Interest of England. 1. As to its Peace. 2. As to its
Trade. And the Consequence of both these are the Riches of the Nation, which
must be consumed by a Prince that is of an Interest different from that of the
People, it is true the present War with France has proved very chargable to the
Nation; but here is our Happiness that we have a King that advances the
Interest of our Trade, his People and He go Hand in Hand, Their Interests are
the same with His, and His the same with Theirs; which to me is an Argument,
that when it shall have pleased God, by His Arms, to reduce the French King to
Reason, that then no Nation under the Heavens can or will be more happy than
the English Nation: But if a Prince shall, instead of pursuing the Interest of
his People, pursue their Destruction, by setting up and advancing the Interest
of a Foreign Power, his Government cannot stand. This, Sir, was that which lost
you your Crown, And can you then expect by that Interest to regain the Crown of
England, by which you strangely lost it? Therefore, to conclude this Head, let
not your Conspirators think that it is either probable or possible that ever
the People of England will ever be brought into a French Interest, or ever
admit you to resume the Throne and Government, since that you purely lost it
for the sake of that Interest.

Your Scoundrel Abettors here at Home, are such a sort of Animals that the
Reformed Nations Abroad are at a stand, and cannot tell what to make of them,
their Carriages of late Years have been so unaccountable; and since it has
pleased God to put it into the Hearts of most of the Princes of Europe, though
of the Romish Communion, heartily to embrace the late Revolution in England, as
the last Effort for the Common Liberty of Europe, and have entered into the
strictest Alliance with our King (though of a different Religion) to support
it; it looks like a Dream to meet with Men that call themselves English
Protestants embarked in your Interest, in opposition to the Interest of their
Native Country.

A little Priest of the Church of England, in a Sermon of his on the Day your
Father made his Exit, was pleased to threaten us with an endless War that would
be entailed on the Nation; he is a mighty Votary for your Cause and Interest,
notwithstanding his Oath to King William to the contrary. But, Sir, a thousand
such Fellows can never reconcile your Interest with that of England, nor would
your Restoration put an end to his supposed War; for it is not reasonable to
imagine that so many Noblemen and Gentlemen who have associated, and by their
Association have engaged to support the Interest and Cause of our King, will
tamely submit to your Restoration: Or that King William will ever abandon his
Throne, or that its possible that the Common Cause of Europe will ever be
suffered to sink in such a manner as to comply with the Pride and Ambition of
your Self, or of him whose Cause you have espoused, and whose Interest is the
very same with yours: When you were upon the Throne your Aim was to destroy the
Interest of England, but we have been too many for you, and the Throne is
filled up with one that will maintain and support our Interest, notwithstanding
the vain Efforts of your Crew both at Home and Abroad to the contrary. And
therefore that Loggerhead of a Cathedral Priest has not made one single
Convert to your Cause and Interest, by the Noise he made of disputed Titles and
endless Wars. I will observe this to you that the Rascal has more Preferment
than Learning or Honesty, but what can we expect of an Apostate?

4. We are Freemen, and therefore we can never be supposed ever to admit you,
who have always been a Person of Arbitrary Principles, to govern this Nation.
You cannot but remember that the English Nation has a very great Security for
its Liberties; and that is the Government it self, with a good King at the head
thereof, and that is our present Happiness; for our King Rules not upon the
same Terms as your Brother of France does; for he by Force Usurps that share
which his People ought to have in the Government, and for several Ages past
has been in possession of an Arbitrary Power, (which yet no prescription can
make Legal) and he exercises it over the Persons and Estates of his People in
a most Tyrannical manner: And this your loving and kind Brother and you aimed
at, Witness your Dispensing Power that you took upon you when you ascended the
Throne. But our King has so ordered it, that his Subjects shall retain their
Proportion in the Legislature; the very meanest Commoner of England is
represented in Parliament, and is a Party to those Laws by which our King is
Sworn to govern himself and his People. It Is true you Swore, but you made no
Conscience of your Oath, nor did you in the least boggle at the Violation of
our Laws; you hated that way of Government which you had solemnly promised to
maintain and defend, Witness the Names you used to give the Parliament of
England. Now according to the Laws of the Realm no Money is raised but by
common Consent: But you were pleased to raise Money upon the People by your
Proclamation. The very Day after you had promised to invade no Man's Property:
Now no Man is for Life, Limb, Goods, or Liberty, at the Sovereigns Direction;
but how soon it would have been had not a period been put to your Tyranny? For
your Sycophant Parasites were very zealous to have delivered up those
Privileges in to your Hands, judging it would not be well with England till
you were as Absolute as the Monster of France, by which we might easily
understand your Intentions. For, Sir, who knows not that the inclination of a
Prince is best known either by those that are about him, and most Favor with
him, or by the current of his own Actions? Those who were nearest to you, and
most your Favorites, were your Irish and French Courtiers, and your Popish
Priests and Prelates, who these Men stood affected to. Your Discretionary
Dispotick Power can never be forgotten: No Man but may remember, that in their
common Discourse were for advancing your Will and Pleasure over your Subjects
to be equal with that of the King of France is over his. This was but a Copy
which those Villains had industriously taken from your own Words and Actions.
In Scotland you did publicly set up for that Power, and openly declared you
would be obeyed without reserve.

The attempt you and your Conspirators made in the time of the Lord Chancellor
Hyde upon our Liberties, is never to be forgetten; a Bill was prepared to
enable the King your Brother in the time of any interval of Parliament, to
raise what Money he pleased upon an extraordinary occasion, as the Dutch War
was pretended to be. This had taken its much desired effect, had not that Lord
Chancellor been awakened by an intimate Friend of his, who, understanding what
was doing in the House of Commons, came to him and showed him what the
Consequences were which such an unheard thing would produce; and he using one
Argument above all the rest, in telling him he came to his Honor and Greatness
by the Gown, and not by the Sword; and if that Bill passed, he advised him to
consider what his Gown, or all the Lawyers Gowns in England were worth, which
that Lord Chancellor, though one of the Actors with you to enslave the Nation,
being a Man of Sense, had that Honor as to think it no Dishonor to retreat from
that Devilish Invention, which he to comply with your Ambition and Pride had
set on foot to destroy us at once: So that Bill, though once read in the House
for enabling the King, your Brother, to raise Money at pleasure, was by the
Providence of God, and the Prudence of that Noble Penitent Lord droped so far,
as that it dwindled into a Bill of 75000 l. not exceeding a Months Tax. No
doubt but you had procured this Bill to be dressed in the French Mode for
emergent Occasions; yet had it passed in the same manner as you and your
Accomplices designed, there would not have wanted emergent Occasions, and
extraordinary Services to have given Color for keeping that Power on foot
until Dooms Day in the Afternoon.

The French King, whose Example you followed in this particular, got his Power
by such a villainous Stratagem; but he has not been at leisure yet to call his
Parliament to dispute that Point. I question not but that your loving Brother
and you would have found other Matters of moment, to have diverted you from
that way of raising Money; so England must have taken leave of Parliaments for
ever, and we must have submitted all we had to your French Discretion. But
through the Blessing of Heaven, and the Care of our Legislators, we are
delivered not only from your Government and your intended French way of
Governing; for we continue to have the same Right (modestly understood) in our
Propriety that our Prince has in his Royalty, and in all Cases where the King
himself is concerned we have our just Remedy, as against any private Person in
the Nation, in the Courts of Westminster Hall, or in the High Court of
Parliament; for his Prerogative is not like that you would have usurped, but
what the Law has only determined. His great Seal, which is the legitimate
Stamp of his Royal Will and Pleasure, yet it is no longer current than upon the
Trial it is found to be according to Law and Justice. The King cannot commit
any Man by his own particular Warrant, he cannot be himself a Witness in any
Cause whatever, tho your Brother would have been one against me. The Balance
of public Justice being so delicate, that not the Head only but even the
Breath of the King would turn the Scale; nothing is left to the Win of the
King, but every thing is subject to his legal Authority; by which means it
follows, that as he can do no Wrong, nor can he receive Wrong. But you by your
Dispensing Power put your self in a state of Wronging the Nation, and
destroying your self and Government; but had you kept to the Measures of an
English King, you might have remained to this Day to have been the only
intelligent Ruler over a rational People, your Person had been Sacred and
Inviolable, and whatever Excess had been committed in your Reigh, would not
have been imputed to you as being free from the Necessity and Temptations: Your
Ministers would have been only accountable for all, and must have Answered it
at their Perils. You had a vast Revenue, and if any emergency of Affair should
have appeared, you had at your Call a number of Men to have advised with, a
supply would have been readily granted. You were the Fountain of Honor, the
disposer of many profitable Places both in Church and State; but this would not
serve your turn, for you would not be abridged the Power of injuring the People
of England, but against all Law invaded our Rights, and designed nothing so
much as enslaving us and our Posterity for ever: And we that have tasted so
much of the sweetness of Liberty, and on the other hand have smarted under your
short, but cruel Tyranny will never be entangled again with the French Popish
Yoke of Bondage, but stand in defense of the King we have chosen, and the
Liberty we have recovered as long as we have a Being in this World. Therefore
consider with your self the impossibility of your return, to that Government
you abused, to the Administration of those Laws you violated, to a Nation that
you made a Field of Blood; and if you had remained, for ought I know, England
might have been a Howling Wilderness. In fine, then I am sure if you should
make any attempt to return it will be in vain, and appear very rediculous.

5. We have Sworn Allegiance to King William, who is of the same Religion and
Interest with us, who delivered us out of your Hands and the Hands of your
villainous Conspirators, and has fixed us upon those Foundations, against
which France, Rome, nor Hell shall prevail; he has secured us, our Liberties,
Laws and Religion; he has brought himself and Government to that Perfection,
notwithstanding the vexatious War which lies hard upon us, that he is capable
of doing good to all Mankind, and he has totally disabled himself from doing
hurt to any; he wants not the French King's Purse, nor his Friendship; he wants
not his Interest, for his Interest is his Peoples, and his Peoples his, by
which they are so united, that the attempts of your Scoundrel Crew for your
Restoration will be in vain; the Hearts of the Nation are set against you, and
for your perfidious dealing both in Church and State the People of England will
trust you no more.

Sir, We have Sworn Allegiance to this King we chose in your stead, and we are
bound to stand by him; our choice of him was from a Principle of Love to God
and the Protestant Religion which he has asserted. You kept not your Faith
with us, and therefore our Allegiance ceased to you, your Actions have been
very plain and open, and so pernicious that it was a Wonder of Wonders, tha^ we
and our Religion have been delivered from Blood and Oppression: And Sir I would
let you know that we are not afraid of you and your Adherents, for I believe
the Protestant Religion and Protestant King will stand notwithstanding al^ your
Attempts; and if you had brought your French Dragooning Apostles over to us,
yet we would and should have maintained our Ground, and destroyed ^^em and you.
We value not your little Two-penny Stuff that you have left ^^hind you to plead
your Cause: your impertinent, ignorant Non-juring Clergymen can never preach
us out of love to that Loyalty that we owe to K. William; ^e have scarce a
Williamite Cobbler but can baffle them all. These things consi^ered, How can you
ever expect any thing less than that Judgment the Psalmist ^rays for to be
inflicted upon his Enemies? Has not God already set a wicked Tyrant over you?
Have you not been Judged by the Lords and Commons of England, and Condemned?
Was not your Reign short? And has not another taken your Office? In time, Sir,
the Judgment may be completed upon you. There is of your Issue that have had
no Hand in our Miseries, and for this Cause our Eyes are set upon them for
good, and we shall pray for their long Life: But as for you, that God would
cloth you with Shame and Confusion of Face; and that he would upon the Head of
our Protestant King let the Crown long flourish: And I do not question but God
will hear the Prayers of his Faithful Subjects, and will by his means bring the
Nation to such a Settlement that our Allegiance will be firm to him and his
Successors, notwithstanding all those villainous Attempts that you and that
Monster of Mankind your Brother of France, by his and your Traitorous
Accomplices, have made to deprive us of so great a Blessing. Which brings me to
a Sixth Consideration.

6. The last Reason I shall give you, why it will be impossible for you to
return to the Administration of the English Government, and that all Attempts
of that nature will be in vain, because of your late barbarous and villainous
Attempt you by your Conspirators have made upon the Person of our King, and
your purpose of backing that intended Murder by an unnatural Invasion; you had
some that pitied you, but now our Hearts are shut up against you, and are
hardened against all your Cursed Adherents: For now your Plot is discovered, and
it is a Plot and a Villainous One, nothing can be plainer; no Man of Common
Understanding but must see your Conspiracy to bring in Popery and Slavery, and
to destroy the Protestant Religion and the Liberties of England. We know, Sir,
the Doctrine of your Popish and Non-juring Priests too well, and your wicked
Practices; and we are now assured that you will not stick at any thing that may
bring your wicked Designs about. You must excuse me if I am plain with you, I
would not asperse you with hard Words if they were not very true, I should not
have been so Hot if you had not been concerned in the late wicked Design of
murdering our King, but if you had succeeded it would have been no more than
you did to your Loving and Kind Brother; but all this as well as the other is
owing to you and your Popish Traitorous Crew, who have debauched Men's
Understandings, overturned all Morals, and destroyed all Divinity. What shall I
say of you and your villainour Party? What is your Charity such as to destroy
Kings? And where was the Humility of insulting over the Nation? The Mystery of
Iniquity is revealed, and you are disappointed: The Nation sees that you are no
Changeling as to y^^r Vices, and you will find that Englishmen are no
Changelings: Therefore it w^ll be in vain to make any more attempts to be
Restored again for the future.

To conclude this Memorial, Sir, give me leave to tell you that I have thus f^^
laid open the Conspiracy against our Religion and Government, and indeed it wa^
more than time it should be discovered, for I think here has been nothing
asserte^ but what has been and can be made out; we see how the French have
been courted by you and your Party; with what Ease have they been assisted, and
wit^ what Difficulty the Dutch, both in your Brothers and your Reign: We see
your Brother and you abandon the Prince of Orange, now our King, in compliance
with his and the Nations Enemies. How can any Man think upon the French
Depredations and Cruelties exercised at Sea upon the Subjects of England
without Regret? Call to mind your notorious Treacheries in that Affair:
Remember the constant Irregularities and Injustice from term to term of those
who should have administered Justice between King and People: Remember the
search you made throughout the whole Kingdom to find Men of Arbitrary
Principles, that would bow the Knee to Baal in order to their being promoted to
all public Commissions and Employments, and disgracing and displacing all
those that durst, in so universal a Depravation, be honest and faithful in
their Trust and Offices. We saw to our great Grief the Defection of
considerable Persons, both Male and Female, to the Popish Religion, as if they
entered by Couples, Clean and Unclean, into the Ark of that Cursed Synagogue,
not more in order to their Salvation than for their Temporal Advantage and
Safety. Sir, the State of Ireland managed by your Brother and you would require
a Volume to represent it; and in your Time we could not but observe that all
your Affairs and Councils in the Nation tended to a Popish Revolution. And by
the Foresight and Civility of the Man of Sin, there was an English Cardinal
prepared, like Cardinal Pool, to give us Absolution, Benediction, and to
receive us to the Obedience of the Sea of Rome. It is true your Conspiracy had
taken effect had you not met with many Disappointments; but the last
Disappointment was the overturn of all your Designs at once, which was
occasioned by the Arrival of the Prince of Orange: Guilt made you to flee. The
Sense the Nation had of your wicked Intentions, against our Laws and Liberties,
caused the People of England to make choice of our Deliverer to reign over us:
He is anointed our King, and as God has set a Crown of pure Gold upon his
Head, so we question not but the same God will satisfy him with long Life and
Happiness, and that he will give him the Spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge, Zeal and
Faithfulness, to do what in him lies to the bringing on the New Heavens and the
New Earth wherein Righteousness and Peace shall dwell, by repairing the
Breaches and decayed Places that you have made and caused amongst us. And from
hence, Sir, remember that though Hand join in Hand, yet the Wicked shall not go
unpunished; they are Gods own Words, who has also declared with the greatest
Solemnity, that there shall be no Peace to the Wicked, Isa. 57.21. You have
leisure to consider of these things; and so Farewell.

FINIS.

