July 18. 1671.
ON a Trial before the Lord Chief Justice Hales, between Nathaniel and John
Letten Plaintiffs, and Leonar Moresco Widow Defendant; concerning the Custom
of Merchants, in case an Accepted Bill of Exchange be lost; The Question was,
Whether the Accepter was bound to pay the Money on the second Bill; And upon
Hearing, by consent of Counsel on both sides, a Verdict was agreed on in these
Words.

WE find the Custom of Merchants to be, That if the first Bill which is
Accepted be lost after Acceptance, and before payment thereof, The Merchant who
Accepted such Bill, is bound to pay the Money upon the second Bill to the Party
by the Bill appointed to Receive the same, or to such Person to whom it is by
Endorsement appointed to be paid; If the Party who is to Receive the Money,
shall give unto the Party so Accepting sufficient security to save him harmless
for such payment, and not otherwise.

With this Case, as it relates to the Parties, Plaintiffs and Defendant, it is
not intended, nor is it any way proper to intermeddle; nor is it possible for
any person, without knowledge of the particular circumstances attending it, to
give any judgment therein: But because the right stating and determining the
general Question, and the Custom of Merchants therein, may be of universal
Concern; and because on this Occasion various Discourses have been amongst
Merchants themselves, who seem of different judgments and apprehensions
thereabout; It is thought necessary to propose the same to the serious and
mature consideration of Merchants, and to desire their judgments thereupon,
which may serve as a Rule in future, and lead the way to the settlement of
other Matters of like nature, now controverted amongst Merchants.

In order to the Resolution of the said Question, It has been observed,
FIrst, That generally and universally all Merchants agree in this, That though
the first Accepted Bill were lost, yet that the Party to whom the Money was due
ought not to lose the same; and that the Accepter is bound to pay the Money on
the second Bill, so as he may be secured to pay the same but once.

Secondly, That concerning the way and manner, whereby the Accepter may be
secured, the Merchants do not agree amongst themselves.

I. Some affirm, That the Party requiring the Money on the second Bill, is
bound by the Custom of Merchants to give good security by Bond in a penal Sum
to the Accepter, to save him harmless against his Accepted Bill; and that
unless such security be given to the satisfaction of the Accepter, the Accepter
is not bound to pay the Money.

II. Others affirm, That though it be usual and oftentimes practiced by
Merchants in such Cases to give security one to another, to avoid trouble; yet
that there is no such Custom to necessitate a Merchant so to do, or to debar
him of his Right for default thereof: But in such Case, The Merchant claiming
the Money may bring his Action on the second Bill; and that if on Trial he
prove the Acceptance of the first Bill, and his right and propriety to the
Money, he ought to have judgment against the Accepter for the principal Sum,
but not for any costs of Suit, unless the loss of the Accepted Bill was by the
Accepter himself; And the Judgment in this Case is a Security to the Accepter
against the Accepted Bill.

III. Others affirm, That the payment of the Money on the second Bill (after
the usual time limited by the Custom of Merchants for payment of Bills) to a
person to whom the same is duly endorsed, and his Receipt and Discharge
thereon, is of it self, according to the nature of Bills of Exchange, and the
Custom of Merchants, a sufficient discharge of, and security against the first
Accepted Bill.

The Reasons and Grounds for each of these several Opinions seem to be in
substance as follow.

Those which Assert the first Opinion allege,

First, That they have often known it practiced, in case of the loss of a first
Accepted Bill, that security has been given to save the Accepter harmless, and
that they never knew it otherwise.

Secondly, That the Acceptance is that only which obliges the Party on whom
the Bill is drawn, and that therefore he ought, on payment, to have up his
Obligation, or else to be well secured against it.

Thirdly, That if persons be dishonest, it may fall out, That the first
accepted Bill may be endorsed to one man, and the second Bill to another man:
In which case they do conceive, he that has the Accepted Bill is by preference
entitled to the money; so that if the Accepter should pay the money on the
second Bill, and not have good security, If afterward the first accepted Bill
should be found endorsed to another, That person would Recover payment by
virtue of the said accepted Bill, and so the Accepter should be forced to pay
the same Bill twice, besides the trouble and vexation of Suits; and that
therefore he ought to be secured against these inconveniences before he part
with his money.

Those that are of the second and third Opinions,

First, They propose some things to be considered in reference to the Customs
of Merchants in general, as

I. That every Usage or common practice amongst Merchants, does not amount to
the denomination of the Customs of Merchants, so as always to oblige; many
things passing between Merchant and Merchant in a way of civility and
friendship, by way of accommodation, which cannot therefore presently be called
a Custom; as for instance:

It is usual, and the common practice of Merchants, Upon the taking up and
delivering of money by exchange, That the party who takes up the money and
draws his Bill, does give his first Bill on the Post-day, and sends for his
money on the second Bill a day or two after; Yet no Merchant will say, That
this use and common practice is an obliging Custom; But rather the contrary,
That it is only a common Civility, and that the party that draws the Bill, may
by the true and ancient Custom of Merchants, refuse to deliver any Bill before
he receives the money for the value therein expressed.

II. That no one, two, or more particular Merchants, affirming, That they have
known such a thing practiced in in such a case, and that they never knew it
otherwise, is a sufficient ground to determine that practice to be a Custom of
Merchants, so as to oblige all Merchants in the course of Exchange thereunto:
For though it might be so practiced between some, which those particular Men
heard of, Yet the same Case might be contested by others, and adjudged after
another manner, which they might never hear of.

III. That the Customs of Merchants do not separate between Justice and
Equity, i. e. in English, between Law and Chancery, but both are comprehended,
and ought to be considered in the determination of any Matter amongst Merchants
touching Bills of Exchange; So that there is no Rule so positive, but that
differing circumstances may alter the Case.

There are some common principles which are taken for foundations, and
unalterable, not so much because they are received for the Custom of
Merchants, as that they are in their own nature just and equitable, and carry
the reason with them, that bears testimony to and for them: Such are these
following:

That every man's word should be as good as his deed.

That every Creditor must have a Debtor.

That every one should answer for his own Act, or for his own neglect, and that
thereby another should not be detrimented.

These and such like are principles upon which all the several particular
Customs of Merchants are founded, and are inviolably to be observed.

But there is no particular Custom, to which a not otherwise can be subjoined,
because the circumstances may vary the Case; for instance:

It is a received Custom of Merchants, That if there be a neglect of
protesting a Bill within the time limited, That then the Drawer is discharged,
and the Party claiming the money shall have no Recourse against him for the same.

To explain this Case, suppose

Thomas receives of Richard 100 l. and gives to Richard his Bills of Exchange
for the same sum on William of Amsterdam, payable to Richard or his order at 2
Usance.

This Bill is not paid by William at Amsterdam, nor protested in due time for
non payment by Richard, or his Assigns, Yet Richard comes and requires
satisfaction of Thomas.

If the Question be barely and singly put to most Merchants, Whether Richard
that paid the value has Recourse on Thomas the Drawer, in case the Bill was
not paid by William on whom is was drawn, It is probable they will readily
answer, That Richard has his Recourse on Thomas the Drawer, or that Thomas is
bound to pay the money to Richard, if the Bill were not paid by William on whom
it was drawn, and a Protest made for non payment in due time, and not
otherwise; and that they have often known, that the Drawer was discharged, and
no way liable, unless a Protest for non payment were made in due time, without
which they never knew that the Drawer was chargeable.

This Answer seems very plausible; but let the matter be examined.

The Case is this:

Thomas had no money or effects in the hands of William, on whom he drew the
Bill, nor was William any way indebted to Thomas; But Thomas having occasion
for money, takes up this money of Richard, and gives him his Bill for the same
on William, hoping he would honor his Bill, and orders him upon payment to
Redraw the money on him again, which he promises William to pay.

Richard by neglect keeps the Bills by him, or sends them to other places to
negotiate, so that it happens that the Bill comes not to Amsterdam, till the
time mentioned in the Bill, and the time limited by the custom of Merchants
there, for making the Protest, be expired.

When the Bill is presented to William, he returns answer (to a Protest then
made after the limited time) that he will not accept or pay the said Bill.

Richard Returns back to Thomas, who answers, That the Protest was not made
in due time, and that therefore he is by the Custom of Merchants discharged.

If this should be taken for Good, Then Richard would be a Creditor without a
Debtor: William could not be his Debtor, because he did never accept the Bill;
and Thomas should not be his Debtor, because the Protest was not made in time.
Then, Thomas would gain 100 l. for nothing, and Richard would lose as much. Can
this rationally consist with justice and good conscience? And if not, No more
can it consist with the Custom of Merchants, which is bottomed on that
foundation.

The Case being on Evidence made out to be as above expressed, Thomas shall by
the Custom of Merchants be obliged to repay the money to Richard; and those
very Merchants which gave their opinion in the general, with a not otherwise,
will no doubt on the consideration of these Circumstances subscribe hereunto.

If the Case have this variation from what is above,

That William was really indebted to Thomas,

Then Thomas shall not be obliged to pay back, or to answer the money to
Richard; But only shall be bound to assign unto Richard so much of his Debt
owing by William, as the said Bill did amount to; It will not be material,
whether William be solvent or insolvent, for that Richard by neglecting to
protest in time, has lost the security of Thomas, and so is to take William
only for his Debt, whether he be good or bad.

If the Case have this variation,

That the Bill of Exchange was accepted by William,

Then Richard shall have no Recourse at all on Thomas; but having William
obliged by his Acceptance, shall take him only for his Debtor.

And in case of William's Insolvency, and that Thomas drew the money only on
his Credit; Thomas may, if he will, repay the money to Richard, and take up the
Bills, which is esteemed fair dealing; but if he will not, Richard has no
right, according to the Custom of Merchants, to enforce him: But in this case
Richard must come in as a Creditor to William, and Thomas must be charged as a
Debtor to William.

Having thus premised these things, concerning the Customs of Merchants in the
general,

Secondly, They allege, That in some Cases, and under some Circumstances,
though the Accepted Bill be lost, yet there may be no need to require security
of the party that demands the money on the second Bill, nor any reason for him
to give it; and so the General Assertion before laid down is not to be admitted
with a not otherwise.

I. If the Bill of Exchange be drawn payable to a person directly, without any
expression of order, as thus:

AT double Vsance pay this my first of Exchange to Mr. A. B. five hundred
Crowns at 56 d. per Crown value, of Mr. C. D. and put it to Account, as per
advice of

E. F.
To Mr. G. H. Merchant in London.
All Merchants will agree, That A. B. has no power according to the Custom of
Merchants to Endorse or Assign the same to any other; and that if he should
take upon him so to do, yet such Endorsment is invalid, and the party to whom
such Bill is Endorsed cannot have any recourse upon the Accepter in his own
name or right, by virtue of such Endorsement: And that G. H. is only liable to
pay the money to A. B. and to no other; unless C. D. who paid the value, should
before the actual payment countermand the same; which not being done, though
the first Accepted Bill be lost, it would be altogether needless for G. H. to
require security of A. B. because the payment of the money to A. B. and his
Receipt does fully discharge G. H. the Accepter from that parcel.

II. That the Accepted Bill is not only lost, that is to say, mislaid, or out
of the way for the present, but extinct and destroyed, may possibly in some
Cases, as in destruction by Fire or Shipwreck, be certainly known, and
sufficiently evidenced: And if so, Then it will be unnecessary to require
security against that which is certainly known not to be.

III. It may fall out sometimes accidentally; whereof there is experience, That
the Accepted Bill has been lost by the person that Accepted it, or by his
servant, and in such Case it seems unreasonable, that the party claiming the
money on the second Bill should be forced to give security.

Thirdly, They say, If such a Custom were admitted, That on the loss of an
Accepted Bill the party claiming the money should be remediless without first
giving security, many inconveniences might ensue.

I. It Is probable some persons may not be able to give security, and yet of
such persons there would be the greatest reason to require it: But that a poor
man in such a Case should lose his money, and another enjoy it without any
right, would be very unjust.

II. It may be considered, That a great part of the money remitted by Exchange
is for the Account of persons residing beyond sea; and what Factor will be
willing to become security, and procure another also to be security with him,
whom he must indemnifie, when as he must depart with the money presently, but
his Bond lies out against him forever. So that in such Case the Foreigner will
be at a loss, and hereby the Trade may be discouraged and lessened.

III. May not a person out of design to gain time, and to keep the money,
pretend he has Accepted a Bill when he never did; and so if both Bills cannot
be produced, remain with the money? It has been several times known, That when
money has been demanded on a Bill not Accepted, Answer has been made on the
Protest, by the party on whom the Bill was drawn, That he had Accepted the
other Bill; when as in some time after both Bills have been produced, and
neither of them Accepted: Now if the other Bill had miscarried, the falsity
could not have been detected.

IV. The Accepter on this pretext, to gain time and keep the money, may be over
curious and dislike the security tendered: And if it be answered to this, That
then the party may bring his Action, and the Court will judge of the security;
It may be considered, 1. That this will be a means to beget Suits, instead of
preventing them: 2. That it may deter men from offering themselves as security,
lest they should thereby come to have their Credits questioned in a public
Court, and so render it more difficult to obtain security: 3. It would be a
double charge if the security were not approved, or allowed of.

Fourthly, They say, The only reason of requiring security is to indemnifie the
party that pays the money on the Bill, that he be not charged twice for the
same parcel, but that he be assured that he pays the money to the right party:
This they conceive is done by a Trial at Law, and a Judgment thereupon; because
on Trial the Court will examine all Circumstances, and the party claiming the
money must prove his right and propriety.

Obj. Suppose the Bill of Exchange be made payable to A. B. or his order, and
that A. B. has Endorsed the Accepted Bill to L. M. and the other Bill not
Accepted to J. K. and taken a value of each of them; Shall not L. M. having the
Accepted Bill recover payment of G. H. notwithstanding his former payment to J.
K. on the other Bill unaccepted, or any Judgment had thereupon; it being a Rule
in the course of Exchange, That it is only the Acceptance of the Bill that
obliged G. H. on whom it was drawn to the payment, and that Endorsements of
Bills amongst Merchants does transfer Property?

Answ. It is answered, That the payment of one of the Bills to J. K. in case
the said Bill was duly endorsed by A. B. to him, and paid at or after the due
term, limited by the Custom of Merchants for payment of Bills of Exchange, was
a good payment of that parcel, and a due discharge to the Accepter of his
Acceptance, and ought to be accepted as a good Plea in Bar, to any Action
brought by L. M. on the Accepted Bill against G. H. the Accepter, or E. F. the
Drawer; if there have been a Judgment in the Case, That has determined the
Endorsement to be duly made, and so there will need no other matter to be
examined but the payment.

For the clearing this matter, upon which the main difficulty depends, It must
be considered,

First, That though there be two or three Bills given, viz. first, second, and
third, Yet they are all to be understood to be but one parcel, and the giving
of several Bills, is intended to supply the Inconveniences that might happen by
the miscarriage of the Post or other accident, and therefore to Parts not far
remote, as to France, Holland, etc. there is usually given but two Bills, first
and second; and to Parts more remote, as to Venice, Italy, etc, there is given
three Bills, first, second and third.

Secondly, That the tenor of every Bill of Exchange is conditional, to pay the
one, the other not being paid: This Condition is always expressed in the second
Bill, and sometimes in the first; however it is always employed, for a first
denotes there is a second, and amongst Merchants it is always so understood;
and therefore when they give but one Bill, it is usually expressed, Pay this my
sole (or my only) Bill.

Thirdly, That the Acceptance of one Bill, does oblige the Accepter to the
payment of the parcel, and is not, nor ought to be restrained to the particular
Bill underwritten, or to any particular person to whom the same is Endorsed,
but is understood generally of the parcel, and to pay the same to such person
as at the time of the falling due of the Bill (according to the Custom of
Merchants) shall have right to demand and receive the same.

That the Acceptance is not restrained to the Bill underwritten, but is to be
extended to the Parcel, which takes in all the Bills: It is supposed no
Merchant, acquainted with the Trade and Course of Exchange, will deny: Yet if
any shall say, That the Accepter is strictly obliged to the Bill underwritten,
and not to the Parcel generally; and that upon the Acceptance of one Bill the
other are rendered invalid, and become only Scrolls; They are desired to
consider,

I. Whether this be not contrary to the very design and end of giving two
Bills, which is to prevent the Inconvenience may happen by the loss of one.

II. Whether this would not in a great measure cut off the Trade and
Accommodations of Merchants in the Trade of Exchange. Bills are sent for
Acceptance, and then transmitted to other places to negotiate: But who would
dare to adventure an Accepted Bill, if the miscarriage thereof should be the
loss of the money.

That the Acceptance cannot be restrained to any particular person, to whom the
same is payable or Endorsed, is evident; Because, according to the Custom of
Merchants, the person that paid the value has power of Countermanding the
payment, at any time before it be due and actually paid, or duly Endorsed to
another; and in case of Endorsements, it is the same still, for he that paid
the value on the last Endorsement has the power of Revocation: Hence it is,
that it is so unsafe for a Merchant to pay a Bill before it be due; because if
he that paid the value does signify a countermand before the Bill be due, and
make out his title to the money, he that paid the Bill before due, shall be
adjudged to have paid it in his own wrong, and be obliged to pay it again,
notwithstanding he had his Accepted Bill delivered him up by the other.

Fourthly, That the Acceptance of a Bill, is always to be understood according
to the nature and tenor of Bills of Exchange, and the Condition therein
expressed or employed, viz. to pay one, the other not paid, and so the
Obligation by the Acceptance is to the parcel, and not to any of the Bills
distinctly and separately, but conditionally: So that G. H. having paid J. K.
may truly and justly answer to L. M. demanding by his underwritten Bill, That
he has performed what his Obligation by his Acceptance obliged him to, viz. to
pay the parcel, i. e. one Bill, the other not being paid: And this Plea in this
Case, is the same in effect, and ought to be so taken, as that of Conditions
performed to a Bond in the Course of our Law, is.

Fifthly, Though Endorsements of Bills of Exchange do amongst Merchants
transfer Property, Yet there is no rule of preference, so as positively to
determine the Right to be in one and not in the other: In the Case alleged,

I. Suppose L. M. with the Accepted Bill endorsed to him, and J. K. with the
other Bill Endorsed to him, come both together at the time of payment to demand
the money of G. H. It is supposed there is no Custom of Merchants obliging him
to pay this and not that, but that it is in the choice of G. H. to pay which of
them he pleases; though it may be best for him to prevent trouble to pay
neither, and to keep the money till the matter be determined, which in foreign
Parts would be in a day or two by the Court Consulate, but in England if he be
sued, he may pay the money into Chancery, and thereby be discharged, and leave
the two Competitors to try their Title. If he resolves to pay one, it will be
readily granted, that in prudence he will choose to pay him that has the
Accepted Bill, thereby to take up his firm.

II. Suppose as this Case is, That the first Bill Accepted does not appear at
the time limited for payment, but only the second Bill Endorsed by A. B. to J.
K. In this Case there cannot be a preference, because there appears but one
Claimer: That which our Law in some Cases gives a Right by way of preference,
viz. The time of Assignment, as in Mortgages the first takes place, will not
here be material, the doubt being about the Acceptance, and not about the time
of the Endorsement. Oftentimes there is no Dates put to the Endorsements on
Bills of Exchange: and when there is, It may fall out that the first Accepted
Bill may be Endorsed after the second.

Obj It is further Objected, That L. M. who paid his money to A. B. upon the
Endorsement of the first Accepted Bill to him, might not do it on the Credit of
A. B. the Endorser, nor on the Credit of E. F. the Drawer, but on the Credit of
G. H. and his Acceptance; and that he would not have trusted A. B. but depended
on G. H. the Accepter: Whereas J. K. who took the Endorsement of A. B. on the
second Bill, must needs be understood purely to trust A. B. in the Case: And
it is probable, that L. M. in confidence of the solvability of G. H. the
Accepter, might not send for the money at the time, knowing the Accepter to be
always liable: And if in the mean time G. H. should pay the money to J. K. on
the second Bill, and that thereby L. M. should be debarred of any Recourse
against G. H. the Accepter, he should be remediless, not having protested in
time; Which would bar all Civility, and also obstruct the Trade, by hindering
the Negotiating of Bills of Exchange.

Answ. This Objection is founded on Suppositions and Irregularities, and seems
to be the Language of a Goldsmith Banker, and not of a knowing Merchant: For
the clearing the same,

First, It is to be considered, That of late years there are two kinds or sorts
of Negotiating Bills of Eexchange; one very ancient between Merchant and
Merchant in the Course of Exchange, whereby a Bill on Amsterdam is made use of
at Paris, etc. one and the same Bill by several Endorsements supplying several
men's occasions in distinct places: The other very novel in England, between the
Goldsmith Banker and the Merchant or Factor; The Goldsmith by way of discount
advancing the money, and the other assigning him the Bill.

Secondly, That it should be a Rule to every man in the Course of Exchange, to
take care that he delivers his money to a sufficient responsible person:
Whereas the first supposition in the Objection is, That L. M. paid his money to
A. B. on the Credit of G. H. the Accepter, and not on the Credit of A. B. the
Endorser, etc. It is answered, That J. K. might pretend also, that he paid his
money on the Credit of E. F. the Drawer, and not on the Credit of A. B. the
Endorser; and the Consequences would be as fatal to J. K. if the Accepted Bill
were paid to L. M. for that he could never have recourse on E. F. the Drawer,
but only on A. B. the Endorser; and the like recourse may L. M. have, though
the Protest were not made in time. L. M. should have taken care to whom he
delivered his money, and if he looked on the Accepter only, he therein acted
irregularly, and the same ought not to be any Argument on his behalf.

If it be seriously examined, it will appear, That many, if not most of the
Frauds and Abuses touching Bills of Exchange have risen, or been occasioned
from this irregular proceeding, in not observing the Rule abovementioned.

Whence is it, That some persons, when their Credit is low, that they cannot
take up money by Exchange, do pretend to deliver money by Exchange, and causing
the Bills to be made payable to them or Order, Negotiate the first Bills (which
are delivered on the Postday) on the Credit of the Drawer, and thereupon
receive the money, and presently absent themselves, and never pay the value to
the Drawer.

Whence is it, That some Factors (designing to make an advantage by Failure)
having Bills sent them to receive for other men's Accounts, do negotiate, or
rather discount the Bills with Goldsmith-Bankers, and thereby defeat their
Principals; But from this, That the Bankers (who make great advantage on such
occasions) rest and rely on the sufficiency of the Drawer or Accepter.

And thus, upon this Supposition, it comes to pass, That some persons (who are
or would be reputed honest men) do for gain become assistant, and helpful to
others to carry on unjust and fraudulent designs.

It is true, That Bills of Exchange made payable to such a person or order,
being Endorsed by him for a value received, ought to have their Course; and in
such Case the Goldsmith Banker will say, The Merchant ought to have taken care
whom he entrusted.

And may it not with as much and more reason be said to the Bankers in the
present Case, They should have taken care whom they entrusted and delivered
their money to?

Thirdly, That in matters of Exchange all punctuality ought to be observed, as
well in demanding the money on a Bill, as in paying it: It is acknowledged,
that the Accepter is always bound for the parcel until payment: But if any will
forbear or neglect to send for his money in the proper time, such neglect ought
not to be to the prejudice of any but himself.

A Master of a Ship firms three Bills of Lading for a Bag of 500 Pieces of
Eight, received at Cadiz from William, to be delivered at London to him or his
Order: The Master keeps one Bill, William keeps the other two; One of which he
assigns to Richard, for the value of him; The other he assigns to Thomas, for
the value of him. The Ship arrives at London: Richard forbears or neglects for
some days to send for the Bag of money: In the mean time, Thomas sends his Bill
of Lading, receives the Bag of money, and delivers up the Bill of Lading with a
Receipt thereon. Shall Richard in this Case have any other recourse than
against William, who dealt unjustly in assigning one parcel to two persons; and
he cannot blame the Master for delivering the money to Thomas, but himself for
not sending for it sooner.

So in the present Case, L. M has no reason to blame G. H. for paying the
money to J. K. but rather to blame himself for not sending for it sooner.

Fourthly, To that Supposition in the Objection, That this would obstruct
Trade, by hindering the Negotiating of Bills of Exchange; It may be Answered
from what is before alleged, That the fraudulent and unjust Negotiation of
Bills, by insolvent persons, may in some measure be thereby prevented: But the
Mercantile and true Negotiating of Bills of Exchange, by persons of Credit,
will be advanced, and the Honor of the Trade of Exchange preserved.

It is a Principle taken for granted in the Course of the Trade of Exchange,
That all Merchants Trading in Exchange, are (or ought to be) persons of Credit,
able to draw by Exchange, and therefore the damages recoverable in Case of
Protest for non payment, according to the Custom of Merchants, is only the
common Charges of the Protest, Commission and Port of Letters, and the
Rechange, that is, the difference of price between the Redrawing and the
Remittance. And nothing can ever advance the Trade of Exchange, or uphold the
Honor of it, unless it be managed by persons of Credit and Reputation.

The Objecter would introduce a new Principle, and takes it for granted, That
Bills of Exchange are Negotiated by persons of no Credit or Estates, such as he
dares not trust of themselves: And that he might continue to deal with ( i. e.
to fleece) these securely, is the Ground of his Objection, and the Trade he
fears would be obstructed.

The Result upon the Whole.
FRom these several Discourses and Argumentations there may arise a
Determination of Two Questions.

First, What Course should be taken, in Case an Accepted Bill be lost?

This seems to be Resolved thus:

I. That the Accepter by virtue of his Acceptance, underwritten on one Bill, is
bound to satisfy the parcel, that is to say, one Bill or the other; or if one
miscarry, then the other.

II. That if the Accepted Bill were lost by the Accepter himself or his
Servant, then he ought to pay the money on the other Bill without requiring
security.

III. That though the Accepted Bill were not lost by the Accepter or his
Servant, Yet if the Bill were payable to such a person, and not to him or his
order, and no countermand signified to him, The Accepter might with safety pay
the money to him on the second Bill, without any other security than a
discharge for the same.

IV. That if the Bill were payable to Order, The Accepter on payment of the
money on the other Bill, might require security to indemnifie him from the
Accepted Bill, or any trouble and charge arising by reason thereof; which, if
it can be complied with, is a good way of Accommodation, and has been often
practiced.

V. The not giving security in this Case, ought not to render the Accepter
Unactionable, or destroy the Right of the party claiming the money by the other
Bill.

VI. That the Accepter paying the money to a person to whom the other Bill was
rightly Endorsed, after the time limited by Custom for payment, and having up
the said Bill, and a discharge thereon, ought not to be further chargeable by
the Bill on which the Acceptance was underwritten.

VII. That the Accepter if he be not contented to pay the money on the other
Bill, and that the Demandant and he cannot agree thereabout, Yet the Accepter,
if he be a Merchant of Repute and Credit, and without sinister designs, will
maintain the Honor of Exchange, and be ready, as he ought, (were there a Court
Merchant in England) to pay the money into the Court; Which should be his
security for that parcel against all Claimers: Whether this is practicable in
the Course of the Common Law, Learned Counsel must direct. However, if the
Accepter be sued at the Common Law, he may address to Chancery, pay the money
into that Court, and take the Indemnity thereof.

Secondly, What Course is to be taken when one parcel is really transferred to
two persons; The Accepted Bill to one, The other Bill to another?

This seems to be thus Resolved:

I. When there appears but one of the Bills at the time limited for payment,
the payment thereof ought to discharge the Accepter of the parcel, that is to
say, of the other Bill or Bills. This Case will be the same in substance with
the other Question; there it is in supposition, here in reality; therefore the
Resolves to that may be applicable to this.

II. When both Bills appear at the time of payment, It is in the Accepter his
choice to pay either of them, there being no positive Custom of Merchants that
gives Right by preference.

III. That though it be in his choice to pay either, Yet it will be most
advisable (if he pay any) to pay the Accepted Bill, that so he may take up his
firm.

IV. That it is best in that Case for the Accepter to pay neither, but to pay
the money into Court, as is proposed in the seventh Resolve on the former
Question.

V. That in this Case it may be equal, and prevent trouble and Charges, for the
two Demandants to agree, and jointly to bear the hazard or loss.

VI. That where they cannot agree, and that the whole money is paid and adjudged
to one, the other ought to have his Recourse only against the Endorser, who is
obliged to make good, not only the Principal, but all Charges and Damages: And
that in this Case, the time of the Protest will not be material, the Redemand
of the money not being for any failure of the Party on whom it was drawn.

Of the Time of the falling due of Foreign Bills of Exchange.
MAny Disputes have of late years arisen amongst Merchants, concerning the time
of the falling due of Bills of Exchange; which is a matter of great moment, in
order to the making of Protest in the due and limited time: For when on the one
hand, some apprehend Bills to be due sooner, by over diligence, discontents,
animosities and quarrels are occasioned amongst Merchants; and on the other
hand, while others take them to be due later, by neglect, they run into hazards
and inconveniences: Therefore it would be requisite, and a very necessary Work,
so to settle this by a Universal Concurrence of Merchants, that in future all
Quarrels and Disputes herein might be prevented.

In order to which, upon this occasion, That which has been observed of the
difficulties and differences concerning this particular, is also humbly offered
to the Consideration of Merchants.

These difficulties for the most part do arise from the difference between the
New and Old Style, and the inequality of the Months of the Calendar, some
Months having 31 days, some but 30, and February but 28, except in the
Leap-year.

The First Case.
Bills of Exchange are drawn from Paris, payable in London at 2 Usance, and
bear Date, the 6 December, 6 January, 6 March, 6 July, 6 August: To find out
when these Bills are due in London,

First, Some do examine when they would have been due in Foreign Parts,
reckoning the 2 Usances from the Date, and then substracting the 10 days for
the difference of the Style; as thus, 2 Usances from the 6 December is the 6
Feb. the 6 February New Style is the 27 January Old Style; and so they make the
Bills above to fall due in London, the 27 January, 24 February, 26 April, 27
August, 26 October.

For reason of this their way and opinion, They allege, That the Bills being
made in France, the 2 Usances ought to be accounted according to the
Computation in France.

Secondly, Others do examine what the true Date of the Bill is according to the
English Account, and substracting the 10 days for the difference of the Style
from the Date, they then reckon the 2 Usances, as thus, The 6 December New
Style is the 26 November Old Style, 2 Usances from the 26 November is the 26
January; and accordingly they account the Bills before mentioned to fall due,
the 26 January, 27 February, 24 April, 26 August, 27 October.

To evidence this manner of Reckoning to be the true and right way, and that
the other is not proper, nor ought to be settled, it is alleged,

First, That the Command or Direction by the Bill of Exchange is to the
Merchant in London, to pay such a sum in London at 2 Usance, which does
necessarily imply 2 months to be accounted in London from the Date: Though the
Bill be made in France, yet its reference is to the Merchant in London, who is
to pay it there at such a time.

If the 2 Usances should be calculated according to the Account in France, it
would fall out, That sometimes there would want in London 3 days of 2 months,
as in the Bill Dated the 6 January, and at another time there would be 2 days
more than 2 months, as on the Bill Dated the 6 March; whereas the Merchant in
London ought to have 2 months time for the payment of his money; which
calculating according to the second Opinion he would always have.

Secondly, If the first manner of Accompting were allowed, it would fall out,
when both Styles are put to some Bills of Exchange, and but one Style to
others, though all from one place, and of one day, That there would be two or
three days difference between the falling due of the one and of the other; as
suppose one Bill Dated at Paris the 6 January. 27 December.
All Merchants will conclude (the real Date according to both Styles being thus
expressed) That this Bill would fall due the 27 February. Whereas another Bill
Dated at Paris the 6 January, if the 2 Usance be reckoned as in France, and
then the 10 days subtracted, that Bill would fall due the 24 February.

Now that both these Bills being Dated on the same day at the same place,
payable at the like Usances, should not fall due on one and the same day in
London, would be very incongruous and unreasonable.

It is true, That according to this Rule, It will fall out (in regard of the
difference of the month of February) That some Bills that vary 2, 3, or 4 days
in their Date, will fall due on one and the same day: Bills Dated at Rouen the
7, 8, 9, and 10 January, will all fall due in London the last of February: The
7 January New Style is the 28 December Old Style, and 2 Usances from the 28
December is the 28, that is (except in the Leap year) the last of February: The
8, 9, and 10 January New Style is the 29, 30, and 31 December Old Style, and to
reckon 2 Usances from the 29, 30, and 31 of December, would be the 29, 30, and
31 February, if February had so many days; but because that month has but 28,
or at most but 29 days, they must all fall due the last of February. And
whereas some would account the two first of those Bills to be due the 26 and 27
February, The same would be inconsistent with the General and Universal
Received Custom, That every Usance is to be taken for a month as it falls in
the Calendar; and as to go beyond the month would be an addition, so not to go
to the extent of it, would be a diminution of the 2 Usances; according to the
Proverb, Where it is not to be had, the King must lose his Right: So where the
days cannot be found in the month, there they must be content with what there
is. But it does not from hence follow, that any shall lose or abate of his
Right where it may be had, and no more does it in this Case; and therefore they
ought to reckon as far as the month will bear. If any shall say, That the 29
December wants 2 days of the end of that month, and that therefore the Bill
must fall due 2 days before the end of the second month following; It is a
Method not known or practiced amongst Merchants, and would occasion new
Disputes never heard of: For by the same reason it may be pretended, That a
Bill Dated in Rouen the 28 February, shall not be due in London till the 20
April, because that day is 10 days before the end of the month, as the 18
February was, on which the Bill was Dated.

Thirdly, That this latter way of Accompting, according as the months fall out
in England, from the true Date of the Bill, was the ancient practice, and the
other way never insisted on till within these 30 years last past; as also that
in France and other Parts, on Bills from England, they first find out the true
Date, and then reckon the 2 Usances: As for instance: A Bill Dated at London
the 26 December, at 2 Usance, will be accounted due at Rouen the 5 March, thus,
the 26 December Old Style is the 5 January New Style, and 2 Usances from the 5
January is the 5 March; whereas if they accounted according to the other way,
it would be thus, 2 Usances from the 26 December is the 26 February, and the 26
February Old Style is the 8 March New Style: So the Bill should not be due at
Rouen till the 8 March, whereas in truth, according to the practice there, it
is due the 5 March: Also Bills Dated in London the 18, 19, 20, and 21 December,
at 2 Usance, are accounted due at Rouen the last of February. And thus much
has been lately certified from the said place.

Many persons, because of the Disputes about the way of accounting the time, do
calculate both ways, sometimes one way, sometimes the other, according as they
find their interest and advantage, which occasions much inconvenience and
disorder; and therefore it is proposed, That the latter way of accounting
beforementioned ought to be only practiced, as being most reasonable, most
certain, and the truly ancient Custom and Practice.

Second Case.
Bills of Exchange are drawn from Paris, payable in London at 2 Usance, and
bear Date the 10 March, 10 July, 10 December.

Some do calculate these Bills thus: The 10 March is the 28 February, 2 months
from the 28 February is the 28 April; and so they make these Bills to fall due
the 28 April, 30 August, 30 January.

But others affirm, That these Bills ought to be calculated after this manner,
viz. The 10 March is the last of February, 2 Usances from the last of February
is the last of April; and accordingly they are due the 30 April, 31 August 31
January, and not before.

For reason hereof they say, It is by Universal Custom and Practice amongst
Merchants acknowledged, That Usance from France is one month, according as the
months are in the Calendar, and that the difference between Old Style and New
Style is 10 days; so that always the 10th of one month New Style is the last of
the former month Old Style, and a Bill being Dated the last of one month they
must reckon to the last of the two months following, or else they do not allow
two full Calendar months for the 2 Usances, which undeniably ought to be done.

Obj. It is Objected, That if so, then it would fall out, that two Bills which
differed but one day in their Date, should differ three days in the time of
their falling due; as suppose one Bill Dated the 9 March, that would fall due
the 27 April, and another Bill Dated the 10 March should not fall due till the
30 April.

Answ. It is Answered,

First, That where Bills are of one and the same Date and Time, there it would
be incongruous and unreasonable if they should not fall due on the same day:
But where there is a difference in the Date, though but of a day, there is not
the like Reason, because of the inequality of the months, which are to be taken
as they fall.

Secondly, This Objection may be retorted; for suppose two Bills were Dated,
one on the 10 March, the other on the 11 March, according to their manner of
accounting, the one would be due the 28 April, and the other not till the 1
May; so that there would be the like difference: Whereby it is evident, That
this Objection is of no weight or consideration.

Third Case.
Bills of Exchange Dated in Paris and payable in London, are not made at Usance
or double Usance, according to the ordinary course, but after this manner, viz.

Au quincieme du mois prochain payez.

On the 15 of the next month pay, etc.

An quincieme de May prochain payez.

On the 15 of May next pay, etc.

Per tout le mois d' Aoust payez.

In all the month of August pay, etc.

Au fin du mois prochain payez.

On the last of the next month pay, etc.

Au fin d' Aoust prochain payez.

On the last of August next pay, etc.

The Style not being inserted, the Question on such Bills is according to what
Style those expressions shall be taken.

Some would have to be reckoned according to the Foreign Style, alleging, That
the Drawer at Paris speaks the Language of that place, when by his Bill he
says, On the 15 of the next month pay; and so the Bills abovementioned should
be due the 5 of the next month, the 5 of May, the 21 of August, the 20 or 21 of
the next month, according as it has 30 or 31 days, and the 21 of August next.

Others do affirm, That such expressions are to be understood and taken
according to the Style in the place where the Bills are payable; for though the
Drawer make the Bills in Paris, yet by his Bill he speaks to one in London, at
London; and till the Bill come to London to the Party on whom it is drawn, it
may be said to be silent, but then being presented to him for Acceptance or
Payment, it speaks with authority, and must be answered, either with a refusal,
or else with compliance. So that what construction would be made of a Parisians
Word or Order, if he were in person at London, and should say to his Factor, On
the 15 of the next month pay, etc. the same ought to be made of the like
expression in his Bill; and accordingly such Bills are, and ought to be
accounted due and payable on the 15 of the next month, the 15 of May, the 31 of
August, the last of the next month, and the 31 of August next.

This last way of reckoning when such Bills are due, according to the Style
where the Bills are payable, is conceived most agreeable to Reason and the
Nature of Exchange, and ought to be the only Method and Rule in such Cases.
However it were better that persons would always take care, that the Style,
according to which such expressions are by them intended, should be inserted in
the Bills, which would prevent all inconvenience: And if they neglect so to do,
they must only blame themselves if it answer not to their apprehensions and
occasions.

The following Rules were in former times by all generally received as the
Custom of Merchants.
First, That Usance, whether it be one month or three months, according to the
Custom of the Place where the Bill is drawn, The months are always to be
accounted according to the Calendar, whether the months contain in them more or
less days.

Secondly, That these Usances are to be accounted from the true and real Date
of the Bills, according to the Style and reckoning of the place where the Bills
are payable.

Thirdly, That New Style being always 10 days before Old Style, it must always
be, that the 10th of one month New Style is the last of the former Old Style;
and that Usance being a full month, it must extend from the last of one month
to the last of the next, etc.

Fourthly, That for all Bills payable at a certain day or time, mentioned in
the Bill of Exchange it self, if there be no declaration in the Bill what Style
is thereby intended, it ought to be understood according to the Style of the
place where the Bill is to be paid.

By these Rules, as being the Custom of Merchants in London, it is conceived,
That all Questions touching the falling due of Foreign Bills of Exchange, may
and ought to be determined.

FINIS.
Sir,
YOu are desired seriously to peruse and examine the Matters contained in this
Paper, and to return your Thoughts thereupon in Writing, wherein you agree, and
wherein you differ, with the Reason thereof; and what else you have observed of
the Custom of Merchants therein.

Dated this 18 of August, 1671.
To Mr. (...) Merchant in London.
Pray let your Answer be left at Mr. Benjamin Billingsley's, a Bookseller, at
the Sign of the Printing Press on the South-west Walk of the Royal Exchange.




