REFLECTIONS ON THE STAGE, AND Mr Collyer's Defense OF THE SHORT VIEW.

In Four Dialogues.

LONDON, Printed for R. Parker at the Unicorn under the Piazza of the Royal
Exchange, and P. Buck at the Sign of the Temple at the Temple gate in
Fleetstreet. 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable Charles Montague, Chancellor of the Exchequer, etc.
SIR,
AS the dispute with the Stage is drawing to an end, so it seems to go off on
Mr Collier's side, the greatest numbers have with him declared against a
Theater, and those who vindicate the Poets or their Writings, will with their
best Argument, want the most powerful Protection to defend em from the
partiality of the Public. Thus Necessity as well as Inclination, forced me to
shelter these Reflections under your Name, that alone can influence the opposite
party, to read any thing further on a Controversy, which they fancy is cleared
entirely in their favor. However, there are none of 'em bold enough to oppose
your Sentiments, and your opinion being against 'em they will not presume on a
Majority to stand out against Reason and Conviction. The Sovereign Excellence
of your Judgment will prevail over Faction and Prejudice, and bring the most
obstinate Enemies of the Drama to Temper and Moderation. The Beauty of your
Genius will make 'em ashamed of their Malice and Ignorance: and when we talk of
you they will readily agree with us, that the Muses even in this age, have
produced some things both useful and pleasant You Will pardon me, Sir, that while
I have your Picture before me, I only view those perfections which are most
agreeable to my subject. That I avoid looking on what is great and wonderful,
and turn the prospect to what is mild and- lovely. That I forbear mentioning
those extraordinary Qualities, which have rendered you the Glory of your own
Nation, the admiration of others, and under his Majesty's Courage and Conduct,
the best support of the Government, in its most pressing exigencies. That while
with many millions I feel the benefit of your Ministry, I omit paying you those
acknowledgments, which every true English man owes your prudent Council, and
happy administration in the high Station to which his Majestys Wisdom has
advanced you. The fears which restrain me from persuing so tempting a Theme,
will to you be the least criminal part of this address tho to the World they
would be inexcusable, but that it is expected from better hands, who are more
capable to do it Justice, tho no man can be more willing than,

SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, J. Oldmixon.

THE PREFACE
MR. Collier fancying by the success his Book met with, that his Arguments were
unanswerable, and that no body would venture to attack him, should he go on
with his Views of the Stage or the Poets, has left off all measures in the
Defense of his first Book, shown himself in the colors others painted him
before, and discovered as much arrogance as could be expected from one of his
extraordinary resolution. He uses indeed the word Ceremony with a great deall
of affectation, has been furnished with some expressions which look like good
breeding; yet tho he boasts so much of his manners, he very seldom puts 'em in
practice. If he has been plentifully railed at in Print, 'twas because he, and
not the Poets was the Aggressor, and had he not been proof against just Censure
and true Raillery, he would have him down his Arms; at least been on the
defensive part, but he makes a new bustle, values himself on his noise, and
bewails the silence We suffered under a great while, 'twas our fault We began
with them no sooner. Who he means by We, his Readers are at a loss to guess,
nor can they imagine how he became priviledg'd to use the Royal Style, but he
will be free with Dignities, it is his misfortune, and he rather deserves pity
than blame for it. He says, some of the Stage Advocates pretend his remarks on
their Poetry were Foreign to the business, and certainly they have good reason
for what they pretend. If the Stage is not capable of amendment, why such care
to inform the Poets how they may write better? I think they might have spared
their Complaints against his Criticisms, they are so weak and impertinent, that
I never heard of one Person who has been convinced by 'em. It Is true, he
happened on those Plays which are most liable to exception, but has made so
little use of his opportunity, that his Adversaries need not be afraid of his
Judgment, for the hurt he can do 'em is as little to be dreaded as the mischief
Mr -- s Farces, the Amphytrion, Love in a Nunnery, Caesar Borgia, and
Limberham, have or shall do the Age; those things being read by as few People
now, as Mr Collier's Books will be ten years hence. He has shown the delicacy
of his Taste, by the pieces he chose to work on; they were little better than
Rubbish before, Mr Collier has nicely found out some Places more dirty than
others, which is very meritorious, and he ought to be proud on it. His friends
should have advised him to have omitted his Remarks. His Profession, the
particular squeamishness of his Conscience, might provoke him to war with the
Lewdness and Profaneness of some Comedies. 'Twas Commendable in him to begin to
reform the Drama, and there was scarce an Author who professed Writing that way,
who had not declared for it. Religion had been so much exposed, that the Pit
itself began to be disgusted. Those who had any shame, blushed at the treatment
Virtue met with from our pitiful Writers; 'twas Mr Collier's good Fortune to
cry out first, and he had been much more Happy, if instead of declaring for the
extirpation of this sort of Poetry, he had touched on those faults which were
really such, and not made some passages (innocent in themselves) guilty, by the
meaning he put on'em. If he had directed those Gentlemen who are capable of
diverting and instructing the Age, to the means of succeeding, and not
blackened 'em as much as lay in his power, without the Ribaldry of
Billingsgate, to render 'em incapable of profiting or pleasing, by giving the
world a mean Idea of their Wit, and a frightful account of their Morals. If he
had done this, who would not have applauded the attempt? On the contrary, he
falls on their Intellects, and dissects their Plays, Examines 'em as much as he
could like a man of Art, and as zealous as he is for the cause of Religion, he
could not hide his Vanity, and was not satisfied with being thought a good
Christian, unless the Town would believe him a Wit and a Critic. It must be
agreed with the multitude, that he has some claim to the first of his
Pretenses, but I question if any body who has the least acquaintance with the
Belles Lettres, can imagine he is at all qualified for the last. A man that
writes so irregular a style himself, is not likely to amend another's Language;
and certainly there never appeared a Book on such a Subject, which he designed,
to refine as well as regulate the Theater, that in all Countries has been
esteemed the standard of Eloquence, Crammed with such rough periods, and huddled
together with so many incoherent Metaphors. I mention this, as little as some
may think it to the purpose, because many have mistaken the brisk turn of his
sentences for a lively Wit, and his much Eloquence for a fine way of writing.
This but not a little assisted him in the success his Books found, and the
approbation some men of sense once gave 'em, and if that part of his Books
which is most cried up is in these Dialogues proved to be that which least
deserves it, we may hope he will not long deceive the people with his Elegance.
The Dialogue is made use of, being to be managed with more freedom than a
regular discourse, and these Chapters containing nothing but what another might
have observed, had he read the Short View and the Defense with the same
application; 'twas not thought necessary to be very exact in the form, those of
his objections which relate to the sense of Antiquity, and its authority, are
answered by a person whose Learning and good Sense, will doubtless be more than
a match for Mr Collier's. If he is dealt with somewhat freely, let the Readers,
especially those of 'em who are extremely nice in Civility, remember, that it is
Mr Collier who gave the first ^^oke, who, tho he is mightily for distinguishing
(...) by their Professions and Quality, has never been scrupulous how he
scandalized his Adversaries; he has fallen on the men, when he should only have
attackt their Poetry, a sort of usage he condemns them for with respect to the
Clergy. He seems very Jealous of his honesty, and one would think it being so
tender a point, he should not have made the same errors in his Defense, which
he was charged with in the Short View. 'Twas reasonable to hope there would
have been none of those miscitations and unfair dealings his Complainants urged
against him, and to which he has, it is true, said something, but so little to
the purpose, it is Charity to call it so. He triumphs on the Victory he has
obtained over Vice, and the helps he has given Conscience and Modesty by his
discovery of the danger of a Stage. He has indeed a peculiar Talent for setting
Smut off to the best advantage, and making some of our Licentious Writers speak
more obscenity than they ever was guilty of. If the world are obliged to him
for this, and his endeavors to ruin their finest pleasure, by pretending it is
fatal to their Virtue, they ought to give him public thanks, and take care by
their large Collections and Contributions, that he may have no reason to repent
his opening his Mouth in their service. But the best and most valuable part of
the Town have other sentiments of his Performance. They know well enough there
were other reasons for his speaking at last, not quite so generous as he
represents 'em; and can see, that tho perhaps he succeeded in his Chief End,
what he made subservient to it, was nothing but pretense, as will be
demonstrated in the following Pages; and the Reader is desired to be favorable
to the General Charge made against him in this Preface, since the particulars
will be proved on him hereafter. I should now give the Characters of the
Persons introduced in these Dialogues, but I have observed that in these cases
men are used to mean of themselves all that they say well of their fine
Gentlemen; and the World have been too much surfeited with this piece of
Vanity. I rather choose to leave my persons and their reflections to the Candor
of the Reader, who will use 'em well if he thinks they deserve it, if not, all
that I can say for 'em will do them little service.

The first Dialogue.
Savage and Bevill. Bevil. COme, Sir, you shall not put me off, we have time
enough, and I Will know what you have to say against Mr Collier's Defense. If his
Short View displeased you, this last Book sure will have a better fortune; it
has not been published above a Fortnight, and we are already threatened with a
second Edition.


Sav. It may be so, and his argument not one jot the stronger. I have known an
Heroic Poem bear three Impressions, and lose as much by the fourth, as it got
the Booksellers by the other three; but this is little to the purpose. The
Stationer often makes his advantage of the weakness of the people, yet time and
good information have at last been fatal to his Interest.


Bev. Ay, ay, you Critics make the weakness of the people the reason that the
Booksellers grow rich, and when your own, or your Friends Writings are
condemned by the present time, you put us off to futurity. Truth, I know not
why we should not judge as well as our Children.


Sav. Your Children will be impartial and biased by no faction; had not Mr
Collier's Book been supported by a numerous Party, the fallacy of his argument
had appeared long e're this.


Bev. Prithee who has Mr Collier to support, him? and what could have raised
him such a Character, if his Cause had not been good, and his allegations
against the Stage just? You know how his misfortunes had rendered him obnoxious
to the Kingdom, yet he has worn off the prejudice people had against him, by
his generous undertaking, to reform our pleasures, and performing it with so
much wit and judgment.


Sav. There were several men of sense that once liked the design and his
management, who, when they saw what he would insinuate at the bottom, the
entire ruin of the Theater, examined him more curiously, and were as much
disgusted with his Short View as my self. The Defense cannot pretend to the same
reasons to please as his first Book, this was a Quarrel with Vice, and that
only with those who attackt him. Whatever his first aim was, his second is, I Am
sure, liable to exception; and we may speak on it the more freely, because it is
not to vindicate the Immorality of the Stage, but the Merit of those who write
for it, when they really deserve well from us.


Bev. You would be Mr -- s Champion, and defend his Farces against Mr Collier,
and all that oppose him.


Sav. No, not against all that oppose him, 'twould be difficult to find any who
admire his Plays, and I am't willing to set my self in opposition to the whole
World.


Bev. Then Mr Collier was in the right to make his remarks on him.


Sav. The world, perhaps, are in the right not to admire that Gentleman as a
Comic Wit, but Mr Collier showed little acquaintance with the subject he
treated on, when he entered the List with Mr -- The Town is ready to give him
up to his resentments, and will be obliged to him, if he will undertake what no
body else thinks worth their while, to make him ashamed of his Scriptions.


Bed. He took Sir.


Sav. So did -- who in time has found out what his Genius was most capable of,
and confesses by his practice, that nature designed him rather for a Tailor
than a Poet.


Bev. Well, what have you to say to the Relapser? has not Mr Collier showed
himself a nice Critic on that Author, and exposed his Poetry more than his
Morals.


Sav. He has found out indeed that his Play should not have been called the
Relapse, because Lovelace and Amanda are persons of Inferior consideration. He
forgot sure, that this was designed as a second part of Loves last Shift, where
those persons are the top Characters in the Play, and perhaps he has mistaken
both the Fable and the Moral. Why may not the Fable be a continuation of that in
the Fool in Fashion, where Lovelace and Amanda are the chief of the intrigue,
and the moral be to show, That when persons venture too much on the sincerity
of their conversion, and fly too presumptuously into temptation, they expose
themselves to the danger we see Lovelace in, and their Wives to a Revenge which
the strongest Virtue is only a Guard against. This is the most reasonable, as
well as favorable Examen can be made of the Fable and Moral. Young Fashion,
it is true, employs a great part of the Plot, and breaks the Unity of Action,
but that is all.


Bev. And enough of Conscience, grant that you allow what Mr Collier says.


Sav. Not at all. He has examined the Play according to his opinions, given a
Fable and a Moral to an Action, which is only an irregular episode of one more
Important, and runs out on this into several heads against the Authors Conduct,
which his Friends cannot think a fair way of arguing; for his Fable and Moral
are not the Fable and Moral the Relapser designed, and consequently Mr Collier
is answerable for Ignorance, or what is worse.


Bev. Are not the Unities broken?


Sav. What then, the Unities may be broken, and the Author never the worse
Christian. I hope the Divine will not for his own sake make it a sin not to be
a Critic. What had Mr Collier to do with the Unities, his business was with
the Moral, he mistook it wilfully or ignorantly, and the sentence he passes on
the Relapse, is of course illegal. Nor (to continue the Law Phrase) should the
Readers, who are the Judges, give Judgment where there is such a flaw in the
Indictment, and that much more considerable than a Misnommer.


Bev I see you will never agree with the public, nor approve any one that has
not got his reputation by the assistance and recommendation of the Wits in
Convent Garden. Had Mr Collier railed at their Lewdness, and let their Wit
alone, his Adversaries would not have resented it, but their Poetry must not be
touched. You, I perceive, are of their opinion, and cannot bear that an
Interloper in Criticism should make such discoveries.


Sav. They are strange ones I own, such as none but himself would have thought
on; but to show you that I am not one of that singularity of taste which you
accuse me for, I agree with the multitude in some things, and yet at the same
time disagree with Mr Collier.


Bev. How so?


Sav. I think Mr Congreve has a great deal more Wit, good Sense, and even
Learning than the Author of the Short View, at least of that part of Learning
which a man would desire to be master of; and that most of what he has said
against him in that Book and the Defense is groundless and malicious.


Bev. What are there no Profaneness and Immorality in his Plays, no abuse of
Quality, nor faults in Decency, no Nonsense, nor Extravagancies, which a man of
Wit, good Sense and Learning ought not to have published?


Sav. We have very few men of sense that have not in some measure or other been
guilty of all these accusations, the humor of the Age has tempted too many of
'em to please it sometimes against their Judgments, and perhaps their
Consciences; but Mr Congreve has been as little culpable in this as any man. Mr
Dryden, I hear, confesses his errors, 'twere pity to deny him that Liberty. Mr
Congreve, on the contrary, pleads not guilty, and the world is to determine who
is in the right, he or his accuser.


Bev. If you leave it to the world to judge between 'em, I know what will
become of your man of Sense and Learning.


Sav. It may be you will find yourself mistaken, Mr Collier will not have so
many Advocates for his Defense as he had for his Short View, and Mr Congreve
has diverted the Age too much to fear they will not hear what he says for
himself. His Adversary begins to make it a personal Quarrel: he fancied that if
he stuck close to his first Principles, he might not be able to encounter a
person who had so long been the favorite of the Town. And therefore as often
as it lies in his way, he has struck at the Man, his Morals, and Understanding.


Bev. Sure he has said nothing of him which he could not find in his Writings.


Sav. He has however Insinuations and Inuendo's, which might shock some
credulous people, and make 'em believe Mr Congreve guilty of such things as he
himself was afraid to name. Whatever Language he uses, I own, it is not
Billingsgate, yet Rogue and Rascal are less hurtful than Scurrility, colored
as handsomely as some sort of men, artful in abuses, can paint it.


Bev. You say he has abused him, and accuse Mr Collier of abundance of errors;
but where is the proof?


Sav. Here, I have his Books by me, His Short View, and the Defense, and if I
thought it would not tire you, we would examine the last together.


Bev. No fear of that, Sir.


Sav. The Controversy, it is true, begins to draw toward an end, and those of
both Parties, who were at first most warm for or against the Theater begin to
cool.


Bev. The Play Houses don't find it so, their Audiences lessen apace, and their
Whims can hardly draw Company enough to pay their Charges.


Sav. Their Whims have done 'em more hurt than Mr Collier's argument.


Bev. I have been otherwise informed.


Sav. If you think so read the Defense, and I Will endeavor to convince you that
whatever you have been informed, it is impossible for a sensible man to think
ill of the Stage, from what he has said or can say on the subject. Come, before
'twill be time to part, we may go a great way through his last Book, we'll take no
notice of the first, but as we cannot well avoid it. If you read it, I Will stop
you where I have any thing to object.


Bev. Def. p. 2.
Agreed. Had these obnoxious passages lain hid in a Learned Language.


Sav. I perceive Mr Collier's Conscience had not been troubled, had the Smut
been in Latin. He supposes (and considering his Ceremony is very Civil to the
Age) that no body then would have understood 'em but himself. He is a little
too covetous of what he rails at so much. Certainly Profaneness and Obscenity
are as guilty in one Language as another. But Mr Collier seems so fond of those
Passages, that he would have none share in 'em but himself, could he help it.


Bev. This is Malice, he tells you, Def. p. 2.
he would rather unchain the Tiger in Bartholomew Fair.


Sav. Yes, and I Am obliged to him for his Metaphor, and that fine expression of
disobliging the Paper a line or two lower.


Bev, But since the Reader is directed to the Evidence, he may disappoint 'em
in this evasion if he pleases.


Sav. That is, if he will read and understand 'em as he meets with 'em, or as Mr
Collier did: P. 15.
And not read a Page for a Period, but to take his Liberty and argue with a
Question. Are there not some passages which depend entirely on what went before
'em, and on the Character of the persons who spoke 'em? How can a man judge of
the thing but by the Character? and all that ever writ have made the persons
they introduce, speak according to their Characters. Has not Milton in the best
and most Religious Poem that has been writ since our Saviors days, made his
Devil say of God Almighty?

Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heaven. And who, that should light on this
Verse, would not think the Author guilty of horrid Blasphemy, unless he read
what went before, and considered who spoke it. View p. 96.
Mr Collier says, that no pretense of Character or Punishment, could justify
Profanesness on the Stage, and by his arguments against treating some
Blockheads of note like what they are, or showing a lewd Fellow as he is
ridiculous, one may be sure he meant that such Characters ought not to be
exposed. But Pere Bossu is quite of another Opinion, I have his Book before me,
and I Will read you his own words, which you shall have translated if you cannot
perfectly understand 'em. He is talking of the justness of Character; it is
true, his subject is Epick Poetry, but this part of the Chapter relates to
Character in all Poetry; and he is known to have been a good Man, as well as a
great Judge, and the gravest and moralest Critic, that has treated on this
affair. Cae que nous disons ici n'est pas pour Exclure du Poem ce que La
Morale Condamne, Un Poet ne doit Jamais donner de mauvais Examples mais il y a
bien da la difference enter un mauvais Example and L'Example d'une mauvais e
action au d'une mauvaise e person. Les Lacedemoniens ne pretendoient point
donner de mau vais Examples a Leurs enfans quand pour Les eloigner de
L'yvronerie, ils Leur mettoient devant Les Yeux, des exclaves quils fa isoient
euyvrer expre^. Il est donc permis au Poet demettre, des Achilles, and des
Mezences, comme des Ulysses, and des Enees. Il peut representer La prodig dite,
and L' avarice comme La Liberalite and La Just economie d un bon menager and
d'un honete Bourgeois. Mais quoi qu' il fasse. Ou pour la Vertuou pour le Vice,
ou pour quelque qualite indifferente il doit au moins Savoir ce qu'il fait, non
Seulement parce qu'il lui est honteux de l'ignorer mais parce que cette
connoissance Le fait agir a^e^ beaucoup plus de justesse. Which is in English,
as near as I can render it. What we have said is not to exclude every thing out
of a Poem which Morality Condemns. A Poet ought not to give ill Examples; but
there is a great deal of difference between an ill Example, and the Example of
an ill Action or an ill Person. The Lacedaemonians did not intend to give their
Children ill Examples, when they set their Slaves whom they made drunk on
purpose before their Eyes, to deter 'em from Drunkenness. A Poet is permitted
to show an Achilles or a Mezentius, as well as an Ulysses or an Aeneas. He may
represent Prodigality and Avarice, as Lawfully as Liberality, and the just
economy of a good Husband, or an honest Citizen. But whatever he does, whether
for Virtue or Vice, or any other indifferent quality, he must know what he is
about, not only because it is scandalous for him not to know it, but because
this knowledge will make him manage himself with much more justness. Thus we
see Bossu would not have been displeased with Dorax's Rant in Don Sebastion.

View. p. 65.
Shall I trust Heaven
With my revenge, then where is my satisfaction?
No, it must be my own, I scorn a Proxy.
He would have considered this Bully was a Renegado and a Mezentius in point of
Principles, tho this is not so outrageous as what that Atheist says in the last
Moment of his Life.

Nec mortem horremus, nec divum parcimus ulli, Nor fear I fate, but all the
Gods defy. Vir. Eneid. Dryd. transl. This judicious Critic, tho a Christian
and a Divine, is not so scrupulous as to throw such lines as these out of a
Poem, When he knows the Character of the man that spoke 'em. Manuel in the
Mourning Bride is a wicked Prince, and as Mr Collier says, swaggers in these
Heroic lines.

Better for him to tempt the rage of Heaven,
And wrench the Bolt red hissing from the hand Def. p. ^^.

Of him that Thunders, than but think such Insolence,
It Is daring for a God.
But Bossu would have excused this Sally when he found him punished; it is true,
it is not immediately for this, but it is for his Crimes in general, and his Lust
and Pride being two of the greatest, our Adversary ought not to have imputed
his punishment only to his Tyranny. There are worse passages in Milton's
Paradise lost than any Mr Collier has quoted from the Stage Writers, yet none
ever pretended to blame Milton for Profaneness. We may have occasion to say
more on this matter hereafter. So pray read on.


Bev. P. 2.
The profane part tho bolder and more black.


Sav. Why not more bold and more black, or bolder and blacker? but this is
nothing, here is a Sentence, which for its Eloquence can hardly be matched in
Cicero. Sometimes this profane part is a Picture, then a Criminal, then an
Adversary, and then a Disease, and in the compass of five lines Mr Collier is
both a Painter and a Judge, a Champion and a Physician.


Bev. P. 3.
You may understand his meaning.


Sav. It must be as the Proverb says then.


Bev. For which I have said that Fondlewife 's, etc. is a fit of buffoonry.


Sav. To say this of a Character is certainly of the Author in Mr Collier's way
of expressing himself. He says the Plot and no Plot swears at length. I suppose
few will question but he means the Author of the Plot and no Plot, in the Play
he has called so. For who else is this Plot and no Plot that swears so (as our
Author very assumingly affirms without ground or instance) and is so
scandalously Smutty and Profane. Pref. to Def.
He says he may be excused for breach of manners, because he speaks it of
Fondlewife, and not the Author. Why then will not he excuse the Author's
familiarity with Quality in other places, since he does not design to affront
the Character, but to expose Folly and Extravagance.


Bev. But which way do I call 'em Slaves? Why, because they were free. Def. p.
4.



Sav. This is wonderful, P. 16.
and worthy the arguments which follow. Is liberty then always fastened to a
Chain, and familiarity a proof of servitude. He puns on his own words, and then
reasons on his pun: A very extraordinary way of arguing.


Bev. His remaining instance from my Preface is much like this. P. 16.



Sav. His words are, these men sure (having named the Stage Poets just before)
take virtue and regularity for great Enemies; and a little further, like
Foot-pads, Pref. to Short View.
they must not only rob but murder. You may see now how unanswerable the
remaining instance of his ill-breeding was, and consequently how just his
answers were to the others, and thus make a judgment of his extreme Ceremony.


Bev. Def. p. 4.
Railing is an unchristian Talent.


Sav. Mr Collier calls every thing that is against him railing, and bad
imputations. But satisfied with his own sufficiency, he is not in the least
disturbed with 'em, and at once condemns 'em all as without color or truth.
The severity he has been treated with, was what his own ill Language provoked;
and he should not have blamed such a way of answering Books, unless he had used
another in the defense.


Bev. ^ef. p. 8.
But granting Mr Congreve his definition.


Sav. Which every one is ready to allow, except our adversary, who will make
Aristole as well as our Stage Poets speak what he pleases. He affirms the
translation of (...) may as properly be the common, Def. p. 7.
as the worst sort of people. Mr Congreve had provided against his exception,
by explaining his construction a little after from Aristotle himself, but (...)
will serve as well the other way; (...) is, Def. p
if Aristotle, whether he will o^ no, shall say what Mr Collier would have him,
which neither Aristotle, nor his Interpreters, nor the Critics who have writ
after him ever intended. Comedy is an Imitation of the worst sort of people,
and the Vulgar being most liable to err, they are the fittest subjects for the
Poet; but when Quality level themselves with the Vulgar, by being guilty of the
same Vices, they expose themselves to the same Satyr. Comedy meddles not with
Persons of the degree of Marquisses, while they maintain their native Dignity,
but when they fall from it, and stoop to the weaknesses of the multitude, she
thinks they are lawful Prize, and may freely make use of 'em. This Mr Collier
very generously allows: For, he says, granting Mr Congreve 's definition, P. 8.
Covetousness, Profusion, Spleen, Singularity, well managed might possibly do;
forgetting that he has all along aimed at the destruction of the Stage in
general, and proving by I know not what sense of Antiquity that it ought not to
be suffered under any regulation. Thus we see Mr Congreve's first postulate is
far from being false in the Generality stated by him. P. 9.



Bev. I never thought you would defend Mr Congreve's Postulata.


Sav. He desired those who would not allow 'em to forbear reading his
Amendments, they were laid down with such caution, and used so seldom, that
'thad been barbarous to deny him so small a request, which indeed was but
Justice. His adversary has shown that you shall get nothing of him without hard
blows. Well, let us go on with him.


Bev. I cannot but take notice of his saying that the business of Comedy is to
Delight as well as to Instruct; P. 9.
if he means as much by as well he is mistaken.


Sav. How if he does not mean as much by as well who is mistaken then? I doubt
a Gentleman in whom it is no new thing to mistake. Mr Congreve says a little
after, that ill men are to be laughed out of their Vices, that others might be
at once warned and diverted at their expense. Amend. p. 8.
He puts the Instruction first, and when he says, fools are to be laughed at,
it is to make 'em ashamed of their faults. The reproof is the end. However, all
sorts of Poetry ought to please, as Horace tells us, Et prodesse^^ Volunt and
delectare Poetas, And again, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. Hor.
If so, certainly Comedy ought, which is to ridicule people out of their errors
and follies. Rapin Reflex. sur le Poet.
A great modern Critic has told us, that Poetry is agreeable only to render it
useful, and that Comedy, which is an Image of Vulgar Conversation, corrects the
public errors by showing the ridiculousness of private. The same Author adds,
that since Poetry is so much the more useful, by how much the more it is
agreeable, the business of this art is to please, l'importance de cette art est
de plaire. And in his Reflections sur l' Eloquence, speaking of the difference
between the Pulpit and the Theater, he says, (...) ^haire ne doit pas estre
comme lae Theater ou l'un ne va que pour le plaisir. The Pulpit ought not to be
like the Stage, where men go only for their pleasure. Racine in his Preface to
the Tragedy of Berenice tells us, that to please is the principal rule, la
principale regle est de plaire; and if it is so in Tragical, it is much more so
in Comical representations. That the end of Comedy is to please, none will
dispute that know any thing of this matter. Some have thought Pleasure its
chief design, these, tho the greater number, are to be sure in the wrong, as
much as those who fancy Pleasure little requisite toward rendering it useful.
No Comedy can be profitable that is not pleasant: What reason then had Mr
Collier to Insult on Mr Congreve's meaning as much by as well, had he desired
to be understood, so, which it is plain he did not. And (...) but one who was
resolved on any terms to make him in the wrong, could have mistaken him here?
however, he triumphs on his Success, and very arrogantly assures us, Mr
Congreve's first rule signifies little. We have seen the contrary, and his
second then does not fall of course. 'Twou'd be indeed hard if you should think
a Poet a Fool or a Cuckold because there is a Fop or a Jilt in his Play. If the
Poet draws his own Picture, he is always so favorable to himself, as to throw
his likeness into the draught of the fine Gentleman: What he says he ought to
be accountable for, there he does his best, and if he errs it is an error in the
Character. What the Coxcombs and Scoundrels are guilty of, let their Originals
answer for, and take care to give no more occasion for such offense. Mr Collier
is very well read in Mr Dryden's Prefaces, and one would think should have been
kinder to the man from whom he learnt the best part of his Criticisms.


Bev. Mr Congreve 's fourth Postulatum. Def. p. 11:



Sav. Hold, what says he to the third, that relates particularly to himself? P.
5.



Bev. Nothing, I suppose, he thought it below him; he had said before, all he
shall say is, he pities the men, and despises their malice.


Sav. Very Philosophical! However, you will find him I believe hereafter, and as
little to the purpose as if he had finished here.


Bev. You cannot allow of the fourth Postulatum.


Sav. I think that is most exceptionable. Scripture phrases ought not to be
used in ridiculous things; and perhaps this is the greatest fault our Comic
Writers have been guilty of. 'Twou'd be easy to amend these errors, and very
hard to starve two or three hundred Families, because Jehu is called a Hackney
Coachman.


Bev. P. 14.
And put him under the circumstances of Contempt. I shall now go back to his
third.


Sav. To be put under the circumstances of Contempt is a very happy expression,
and I believe copied from Crack in Sir Courtley Nice, who says he is under the
circumstances of a sweat, and under several other such circumstances. The
remarks we made on his answer to the third proposition, will serve as a reply
to this.


Bev. I remember you said something more satisfactory a little before, when he
directed his Reader to the Evidence. 16. 17.
Well, here are Pages for you, can you urge any thing against these.


Sav. Mr Collier thunders against the Licentiousness of the Stage in his way,
but his Pathetick is only tautology, the same thing over and over in short
Sentences. It Is his manner when he is, or fancies he is in the right, he uses
his Adversaries unmercifully, and like Cowards at an advantage, beats 'em on
the Ground.


Bev. I have done with Mr Congreve 's Preliminaries, P. 18.
and shown the unreasonableness of 'em. If he demands 'em as a right, his Title
is defeated. If he begs 'em as a favor, he should have petitioned another way.


Sav. Very pithy and modest.


Bev. 1. This Expedient is not always made use of. p. 19.



Sav. A thousand and Instances could be given to the contrary; and there is
scarce a Play whose end is not moral and instructive, 19.
let there be never so many errors in the Poem.


Bev. P. 20
2dly, These comprehensive lines do more harm than good.


Sav. That is sometimes. This expedient is not always made use of, he divides
well, and without doubt has studied Dr Eachard's Contempt of the Clergy with
application.


Bev. But here is an instance of an uncourtly and vicious ending in the Old
Batchelour, which, according to Mr Collier encourages lewdness.


Sav. As much as that in Love for Love. The miracle to day is that we find,
A Lover true, not that a Woman's kind.



Bev. 20.
This last word is somewhat ambiguous, and with a little help may strike off
into a light sense, etc.


Sav. We have to do with a Gentleman who is very charitable on these occasions,
and can help a man out at a dead lift, as well as any one. Who, without Mr
Collier's assistance, would have taken Not that a Woman's kind for Bawdy? Yet
he is not satisfied with his charge, but accuses the Verses for want of weight
and apothegm? when he has struck 'em off into another sense, I question not but
they would be more weighty.


Bev. A Ballad is more licentious.


Bev. If by sententious he means sentences, he has made a very merry reflection;
for we have no less than three important sentences in this Paragraph, extremely
full of Apothegm; here you have another taste of his Eloquence.


Bev. When a Poet has flourished on an ill subject, larded his Scenes with
Smutt, played his jests on Religion, exhausted himself upon Vice.


Sav A fine parcel of Metaphors.


Bev. Pray let me go on, don't interrupt me before you have heard the whole
period. What can a dry line of good Council do.


Sav. You may discover what a relish he has of good Council, by the epithet he
puts to it, a dry line or two would stick in his Throat, and nothing be so
easily swallowed as what went before it.


Bev. Pure spite, of my Conscience. P. 22.


Thus when the greatest part of Quality are debaucht on the Stage, it is a broad
Inuendo they are no better in the Boxes.


Sav. I protest against his Inuendo's, I mistrust his Conscience would be quiet
enough, if a man in a much higher case was condemnd by an Inuendo; but such
things are not legal now adays, and no man, as Mr Collier himself can witness,
suffers without proof.


Bev. I answer, the case is not parallel.


Sav. P 22.
You shall judge of that, he says, in his Short View. There are but four Ladies
in this Play, and three of the biggest of them are Whores. A great compliment
on Quality, P. 12.
to tell 'em there is not above a quarter of 'em honest. Mr Collier, by the
way, has taken care to engage the people of Condition to appear on his side, by
pretending to procure 'em a privilege from Satyr. The Aldermen and Country
Justices are biased by the Enclosures he has made for those inferior
Magistrates, as if 'twas any affront to my Lord Mayor or Court of Aldermen to
show one of their Brethren may be a Miser, or an abuse of Magistracy to think a
Justice of Peace a Blockhead; those who have any converse with the Country know
such things are very much in nature, and that there are but too many instances
of the other in the City. Our Adversary has secured the Clergy to himself by
blazoning their Scutcheons. The married people, by railing at the affronting
(...) Matrimony, and the unmarry'd by telling the world that Love is a paltry
passion.


Bev. You forget the Parallel you promised me.


Sav. If three of Mr Cognreve's Ladies out of four are Strumpets, and Mr
Collier makes this observation immediately, A great Complement on Quality, P.
22.
to tell them there is not above a quarter of them honest: is it not the same
as it four women were shown upon the Stage, and three of 'em were vicious, that
thence we must conclude three parts in four of the whole Sex stark naught. What
he says in excuse, that the representation in the Double Dealer turns more on
Condition than Sex is false. Neither is it the Quality which makes the
appearance. The sentiments in all cases mark the Character, and point out to
the Comparison in manners. If a man speaks or acts like my self, and he is
reproved for it, let his Quality be what it will, I should think my self
concerned.


Bev. P: 24.
You are in the rignt thus far; but how will you excuse Mr Congreve for saying,
Women do more harm than good?


Sav. Mr Collier says that Mr Congreve quotes it from Aristotle, and Mr
Congreve owns the same: adding the authority of Bossu after him; and sure he
will not blame that Gentleman for following two such Critics.


Bev. His precedents from Virgil are unserviceable upon two accounts. 1st, The
fact is misreported.


Sav. We shall now have another opportunity to make a Judgment of his Modesty
and Learning. He says the fact is misreported. But who is it that happens to be
so little acquainted with Virgil? Why no less than the famous Bossu, that has
been allowed by universal consent to understand him the best of any Critic
that ever writ on him; and he gives more Examples than Mr Congreve has quoted
from Virgil, to show how much oftener you find the women in the Eneids under ill
Characters than good ones. However, Mr Collier tells us, Creusa and Laimia are
perfectly passive, Anna a very innocent Princess, yet she is in the Cabal with
her Sister Dido, the Nurse and the Witch, who contrive the destruction of
Aeneas and his Trojans; besides a great many other qualities which would render
her innocence suspected to any one else. Then as for Camilla, why is she thrown
into the black Pit? For the same reason as Creusa and Lavinia, and that is
because they all occasioned a great many misfortunes to the Hero. Camilla
particularly bore arms against him, and there might be more said for the
throwing her into the Lift than the other two. Bossu informs us, Virgil
designed to show the Sex that War is not their Trade, and to expose the Levity
of Women when he brought her into the field; adding a little farther, that this
Levity made her forget her Dignity, the care of her person, and was followed by
several accidents of ill consequence; and tho, as Mr Collier affirms, she stood
firmly by Latinus, yet her engaging in an ill cause, in opposition to so pious
a Hero as Aeneas was ground enough for making her keep company with the rest in
that black List; if we will believe Virgil and Bossu before our resolute
Adversary, who assures us so daringly that the fact is misreported. He is very
fond of telling of Noses, and proving Pere Bossu in the wrong, for saying
Virgil had but too exactly followed Aristotle's thoughts in his Poesy; that
there are more bad women than good, and that they do less good than harm. But
if he goes to polling, he will perceive he had no occasion for his first and
second account, how Mr Congreve's precedents from Virgil are unserviceable. 24.



Bev. Mr Congreve countenances an Author in his misbehaviour.


Sav. Speaking of Aristotle and Bossu very familiarly.


Bev. And makes his court thus awkardly to the Ladies. 24.



Sav. Mr Collier is not always to be taken at his word; we have Mr Congreve's
Amendments by us, pray let us see how he countenances 'em. He says, In an Epick
Poem Ladies of Quality may be used as Aristotle pleases, but Comedy was meant
to complement, and tickle, and flatter, Amend p. 27.
and all that. Is this countenancing the Philosophers.


Bev. No, the quite contrary: It Is strange Mr Collier should misunderstand him.


Sav. I think 'twou'd be stranger if he should not, for he will understand
nothing which is not for his purpose; are not his dapper Sentences against Mr
Congreve's breeding very fair dealing, and must not this be a very Honest Man,
as well as a Just Critic.


Bev. The Satyr of a Comedian and another Poet have a different effect upon
reputation. P. 25.



Sav. By the Satyr of a Comedian he means the Satyr of a Comic Poet has a
different effect upon reputation. Yes, and because it has so, Comedy is much
more useful for Satyr than any other kind of Poetry. If 'twas allowable in
Juvenal and Persius to expose men of Quality, 'twas in order to correct their
follies, and reform the Age. Now since (as Mr Collier owns, in twenty sentences
one after another, to express the same thing) the Eye is much more affecting
than the Ear, that certainly is the most commendable and profitable Satyr which
obtains its end soonest. All Satyr is Abuse which does not design Instruction;
what touches a man's reputation nearest is most likely to amend him; and sure
one ought not to be afraid of Instructing a fool, for fear the world should
have an ill opinion of his understanding. The Ancients made so little account
of this, that they did not stick at showing their Actors in Masks, representing
the Persons they brought on the Stage, and calling 'em by their names. This
would be outrageous in our times; our Comic Poets have always disguised the
Originals of their Copies so much, as was necessary to make 'em see their
defects, and not be disgusted with the Picture, because too singular. Their
Characters, whoever gave occasion for 'em, have always been general, and if a
Fop has been styled a Lord, every body knows that the Author did not make him a
Fop because he was a Lord, but made him a Lord, to show a man may have a Title
and not deserve it. The French have done the same, so have the Italians and
Spaniards, who understand Punctilio better than Mr Collier. Racine brings a
Countess on the Stage in his Playdeurs. It Is a character much like Widow
Blackacre's, and I think he ridicules her enough, when he makes her answer to a
Gentleman who asked if her Law Suits were over.

Monsieur tous mes process alloient estre finis
Il ne m'en restoit plus que quatre ou cinq petits
L'un contre mon maris l'autre contre mon pere
Et contre mes Enfans.
They are near being all concluded, and I have only four or five little ones
depending, one against my Husband, another against my Father, a third against
my Children, etc. Racine has not treated her Ladyship very ceremoniously, and
whatever a Marquis is, sure a Count, and consequently a Countess, is as high a
Quality as our Baron.


Bev. His testimony from Rapin does not come up to the French. P. 27.



Sav. Whatever he says of Rapin or the French Authors, will have very little
weight with me, I am pretty well convinced he knows little of their Plays or
their Language, or he would not have printed such blunders as you will find in
what he says on the word Marquis.


Bev. Now notwithstanding Mr Dennis 's Exclamation, P. 27.
a Marquis in France is much less than a Marquis in England, or Baron either.


Sav. Here again, this Gentleman's modesty and ^eading may be called in
question, because he is so positive, you will excuse me if I am the more
particular in vindicating what I say. I took some pains with him in this
matter, and some days since put my thoughts in writing. I Will read it to you,
and so we'll defer considering him any farther till we meet next.


Bev. I shall not have patience to stay longer than till to morrow, and since
you have your Books about you, we'll meet in the same place, and I Will give you
a new trouble.


Sav. I will not think it any, especially if I can satisfy you that Mr Collier
is not what he pretends to be, nor his arguments what some good men have taken
'em for.


Bev. I want to know what you have said about his French Marquis, for he seems
very sure of his being in the right.


Sav. He is always so, and generally as much out as he is now. To excuse
himself for his error of making a Marquis in France, a Quality much less than a
Marquis or Baron in England, he tells you, it is pretty plain from Moliere
himself, who in his l' Impromptu de Veesailles, makes Brecourt say to a
Marquis, Mon pauvre Marquis Je te promet Marquis, which way of speaking Mr
Collier affirms is not manners unless in Equals or Inferiors. Now every one
that reads that Play, will find he is used with such familiarity, to show the
freedoms his Foppery exposed him to. Moliere made him a Coxcomb before he
allowed the Character to be treated so uncivilly; and who thinks himself
obliged to be nice with a Fop. He knew very well how far a man of his quality
might be dealt with so freely, without breaking in on decency. This, I suppose,
will not be disputed. Then for his Authority, to prove the quality of a French
Marquis below our Marquisses or Barons, he says Dorante in another Play treats
one of 'em with terms of Equality, and Climene calls him Monsieur Dorante, is
made a Gentleman of good sense, and the Marquis, like the generality of his
quality, one of an affected taste in Poetry, who thinks Wit and a Title
inseparable, but suffered himself to be imposed on, by persons that Criticiz'd
on every thing without Candor or Judgment. No wonder then that he uses him as
his Equal, in a dispute where he knew Self his superior, and saw the Marquis
led away by Fools; and sure every man of Wit that is a Gentleman, would be as
free in England on the same occasion. The French give the style of Monseigneur
to none below a Duke, unless his Post otherwise demands it. This is frequently
seen in Balzac and Voiture. Balzac writing to the Marquis of Montnasier styles
him Monsieur, but after his advancement to the Government of Alsace, his
address is Monseigneur.. Mr St Evremont in a Letter to the Duke of Buckingham,
Superscribes only a Monsieur de Boquinquam, though the French style all their
Bishops Monseigneur; and 'twas not to make a particular Compliment to the
Bishop of London, that they call him My Lord, for it is no more than they do by
all their Prelates, as well as his beloved Bishop of Arras, which any one may
find in Voiture or Balzac. However, 'twere easy to prove him in an error,
from the French Academies, or Richelet's Dictionary; Richelet says on the word
Marquis.

That formerly this word was taken for a Captain of some Frontier Garrison.
But lately it is a Lord, who takes place next Princes and Dukes.
Besides, what Rapin's sense of Molier's meaning was, is agreeable to ours; for
Rapin, says the Poets, formerly brought only Servants on the Theater for their
Buffoons. But Molier's are Marquisses and men of Condition. They only exposed
the manners of Citizens and Common people. Moliere all Paris and the Court. Mr
Collier very wisely remarks, that Rapin did not say toute la Cour, all the
Court, neither did Moliere ever pretend to expose 'em all, tho he spared none
of 'em as they came in his way. Rapin opposes all Paris and the common people
to the Court and Gentry, and not, as Mr Collier says, the Country Conversation
to the Court: For no body but our Adversary would have understood Un Bourgeois,
P. 29.
for a Countryman, nor Lavie Bourgicose, for Country Conversation. But the
Citizens who live nearest the Court, were like our own, apt to make awkard
imitations of their politeness, which the Poets used then only to ridicule. But
Moliere took his Fools wherever he found 'em, either in Court or City, which
are commonly opposed to one another. P. 29.
Mr Collier concludes, that if after all Rapin has given Moliere more liberty
than he took, it is well he modestly said if he has done so; for none that have
read either one or the other, can charge him with making Moliere speak what he
never intended, which is more than we can say in this case, for the Gentleman
who has so grossly mistaken him.


Bev. Good night, Sir, Mr Collier I find is not always infallible.


Sav. Adieu till to morrow.


The end of the first Dialogue. The Second Dialogue.
Savage, Bevill. Sav. I See you are a man of your word, and punctual to your
appointment.


Bev. I should indeed be to blame if I broke an assignation of this nature: had
it been only to drink a Bottle, I might have had as bad a memory as the rest of
our good Fellows.


Sav. Have you thought of our last Conference, does Mr Collier win or lose in
your opinion?


Bev. If so many excellent persons had not declared for him, I should think
worse of him than I do, but it is hard to oppose ones self to the general
sentiments of mankind.


Sav. You are afraid to be thought singular, and have not courage enough to own
a good cause when it suffers under the censures of a majority,


Bev. However, if you come off this time as well as you did yesterday, I shall
be emboldned by my conviction to think as I please, and not be prejudiced by
the partiality of the public.


Sav. You will get something by the Dispute, if it breaks you of your easiness
in that point, and makes you see with other Eyes than those of the multitude,
or if you will learn from your favor to Mr Collier, not to be kinder to a man
than he deserves from you, because his reputation is general, and fame has done
too much for him.


Bev. We left off at the 30th page of the Defense, if you please I Will read on.


Sav. With all my heart, I have gone once more through the whole Book since I saw
you, but in hopes of satisfying your scruples I Will endure the hearing on it
again.


Bev. That must be a great condescension to one who has so little an opinion of
the Author.


Sav. I should be ready to do Justice to his merit, if he had not been so over
favorable to himself, that he has left no room for moderate praise, and I
think more is not his due.


Bev. Well, let us try that by his writing. I cannot think it any excellence of
good manners, to expose the Nobility in their Robes.


Bev. And when did he ever see a Nobleman brought on in the Figure he makes in
the House of Peers. It Is the Lord in the Chocolate House, or a Visit where he
acts the part of a private man, unless that he distinguishes himself from the
rest by his affectation and folly. Mr Collier stretches every thing beyond the
measure the Poets give it, and uses his old way of confuting those he opposes,
makes 'em mean what they never designed, and then lashes them for their
meaning. I have given you other examples of this trick of his before, and
demonstrated, I suppose, pretty plain, that if a Lord and a Fool grow together,
he must be shown as a Monster; and the rather, since his Quality makes the
figure the more ridiculous.


Bev. I had nothing to do with his Verses.


Sav. Pray let us see what these Verses are he has nothing to do with.

Let secret villainy from hence be warned,
However in private mischiefs are conceived,
Torture and shame attend their open birth:
Like Vipers in the womb base treachery lies,
Still gnawing that whence first it did arise,
No sooner born but the vile Parent dies.
No, no, Mr Collier has nothing to do with such Verses as these. These are very
Moral, and conclude a Play, and what is more a Play, which he has blackened as
much as possible; he has nothing to do with the good things in our Comic
writers, he did not go to the Playhouse to hear any thing but smut, and as
Informers frequented Conventicles, only to impeach 'em, his ears were shut to
such Lines as these, but he listened with attention to what was naught.


Bev. And that I still say is foul in the Image.


Sav. We know Mr Collier too well to expect he should recant his errors.


Bev. What says this Lord Touchwood, which is still censured as foul in Image,
embarrast with trifling Epithetes, and ill suited to the Character.


Sav. We'll see the Amendments. Oh, it is Lord Touchwood's Hail to the
Bridegroom. The Bridal night is a time, when the nicest Tongues speak with less
caution, than at other times, and Mr Collier had said before, that Lord
Touchwood was a Pedantical Character; Be each others comfort, let me join your
hands, unwearied nights and wishing days attend you both, mutual Love, lasting
Health, and circling Joys, tread round each happy Year of your long Lives. The
Phrase is Poetical, and consequently suited to the Character of a starcht
Coxcomb pretending to Politeness, and I fancy Mr Collier would have wished 'em
Joy in some such Language; but where is the Smut? where are the trifling
Epithets? is any thing trifling which marks the Character the better, or is it
not natural for a man to be in some transport on those occasions. P. 30.
With our Adversary's help, this might be struck off into Bawdy, but as
spiteful as he is, it is not in his power to make it Nonsense. It Is very
humorous to hear him talk of trifling Epithets, and embarrast Characters, when
his Language is so full of the one, and his Sentiments of the other. Which puts
me in mind of the Whores Exclamation, Lord, to see the impudence of some women.


Bev. If it be so, I think the Play was not worth the Candle.


Sav. P: 32.
Nobly expressed: he has a great faculty at translating Proverbs. You may see how
this Gentleman spends his time at the Theater, when there is no Smut or
Profaneness in the way, it is doubtless in gaping on the Sconces. Mr Congreve
said in his Amendments, If there be Immodesty in this Play, I must confess my
self incapable of writing any thing with Modesty. It may be so, says Mr
Collier, an ill custom is very hard to conquer with some people. Here he exerts
himself, and shows that he is the very abstract of civility. But he forgot that
Mr Congreve had said the same thing to her Royal Highness the Princess in his
Dedication. To convince your R.H. that a Play may be with industry so composed
(in spite of the licentious practice of the modern Theater) as to become
sometime an innocent and not unprofitable entertainment. This was said in
another presence than Mr Collier's, and the honor her R. H. showed this Play
afterward, is a very good reproof to his insolence: Let any one read the Page
he quotes from the Mourning Bride, and then examine our adversary. Is not the
fury of a disappointed Lover, that on the morrow expects to hear his Rival has
his Mistress in his arms. Is not this enough to transport him to madness?


Bev. Was it worth his while to be thus Crazy?


Sav. This is not the first time Mr Collier has shown his spite to Love, his
Books demonstrate he has been ever a stranger to that passion in any of its
branches: and no wonder if what Osmin says is Jargon to him. Who can see that
Scene, and not be touched with it? Which few men of sense are with the mad
Scenes of Lee and his Imitators, that, to use Mr Collier's words, smell rank of
Bedlam.


Bev. O my Almeria!

What do the damned endure but to despair,
And knowing heaven, to know it lost for ever.

Sav. Lovers in these cases are always allowed to talk extravagantly; our
devout Poets have aimed at it in their writings, and if they have not said
things as wild as this, 'twas because they could not. Mr Norris in a paper of
Verses on some parting Lovers says, Eden is lost, the rest's but commom ground.
And a little after, I envied none below, scarce those above. Which I think as
inexcusable, as what Bellmour says in the Old Batchelour, Could you be content
to go to Heaven.
B. Hum -- not immediately, etc.
Horris Misc.
But ah Hypocrisies no where so common grown,
As in most sacred things, Love and Religion,
You may be sure I don't remember these Couplets for their Poetry, only to show
that some Reverend Authors have had other thoughts of Love than Mr Collier, and
not been so over careful how they compared it to Sacred things, as he is.


Bev. Thus the little success of Love are equaled with the Glories of Heaven,
P. 34
and a Paltry Passion.


Sav. Is not the comparing of a Lover's parting with his Mistress, to our first
Parents losing Paradise, every whit as extraordinary. Here you have another
fling at Love: I Am afraid if the Adversary ever felt it, he was not used very
tenderly; for whatever the matter is, he can by no means give it a good word.


Bev. Better for him to tempt the rage of Heaven. Mourn. Bride.



Sav. The Poets all along in these places, have allusion to the Pagan Theology;
and tho the Scene lies in Christendom, yet the Cant distinguishes what Divinity
they mean to wrench the bolt red hissing, etc. would be Nonsense if 'twas said
of any other Deity than Vulcan and Jupiter. Yet Mr Cowly whose story is Copied
from the Bible, in his Davideis talks worse, Cowly who has been so much admired
by those who do, and those who do not understand him, for his modesty and
virtue.

Davideis 1st Book.
Nay their God too -- for fear he did. And again, he makes Envy say a little
below this, It Is not thy God himself shall save thee, Boy.


Bev. I come now to the vindication of the Poetry.


Sav. 3^.
And here he complains that there is no antithesis in wasting air, I ever thought
Mr Collier fond of that figure. 'Twas easy to be discovered by his manner of
writing: La Bruyere has told us what sort of men make use on it, which suits
exactly with the maturity of his Genius. Les jeunes jens sont eb louis de l'ec
lat de l'antithese and s' en servent. Young men are dazzled with the luster of
an antithesis, and are fond of using it.


Bev. Besides, the word is almost worn out. 37.



Sav. This is not only false but unreasonable; we cannot put a better in its
place, and there is not a polite writer, who has not used it when 'twas proper,
as it is certainly here to express something wonderfully soft.


Bev. Commenting on his own blunder. 37.



Sav. A thing Mr Collier practices perpetually, page the 9th, 24th, and 17th,
and almost every page in his Book.


Bev. On this occasion a little singularity in the Expression was not
unseasonable. 35.



Sav. It Is always unseasonable to be nasty.

This Litter of Epithetes makes the Poem look like a Bitch over-stockt with
Puppies, and sucks the sense almost to skin and bone,

Is indeed a singular expression, but Mr Collier is very particular in every
thing that relates to decency.


Bev. The Epithetes likewise must be smooth.


Sav. He is a great master of Style, and has a fine ear to judge of the cadency
of Periods; in the next page you find in 30 lines 9 Questions and 17 Sentences,
which you know is Ciceronian. Such a sort of Rhetoric becomes the Pulpit well
enough for an ordinary Auditory, and I believe by his dwelling on things so
long, in many places, he forgot he was not near his Cushion.


Bev. This was a shrewd Question, but Questions are easily started.


Sav. So it seems, when we have 9 or 10 in the same paragraph, which ends with
that fine piece of railery.


Bev. That I have quoted him falsely, I deny, his immodesty forced me upon this
method; he is often too offensive to appear; to have shown him to the Reader
had neither been civil nor safe.


Sav. Ay, pray read this again, for his breeding and good nature triumph here.


Bav. Why then does he find fault with this reservedness? is he sorry his
indecencies are concealed, and grown proud of his misbehaviour?


Sav. Here Is manners with a witness, such lines as these must be writ in a
scurvy place; he might have Candle, but I believe the Room was not extremely
illuminated, the Paper would else have appeared too much blotted. If he has not
quoted him falsely, he has misrepresented him, which is every jot as ^ad (...)
Touchwood's case, and (...) there is neither Smut in the (...) ^mut nor any
thing out of the ^^^racter in the other, which he (...) him with, and then
exclaims ag^^n^^ him. We shall have oppor^^^ity to prove more such unfair
(...), before we have done with the Defense.


Bev. He would do a little more good first, 42.
i. e. --


Sav. Away with that i. e. I beseech you, we'll have none of Mr Collier's
Interpretations, who knows but Belmour might mean he would live and grow
better, this is nearest the Original, and if our Adversary had not come in with
his helps, it might not have been hit off into Profaneness. Mr Congreve owns
the expression light, it is so in Mr Collier's mouth, and Belmour certainly
designed that some should take it one way, and others another. We know then
which way Mr Collier's kindness to the Author will understand it, and shall say
no more on this.


Bev. What his disease was, I am not to inquire, but it must be a very ill one.


Sav. 42.
He might have put in his significant P -- and saved himself the trouble of so
delicate a turn. 'Twou'd have been more natural in him: one can see he bit his
lips, and longed to be plain in the matter. Here Is a proof of his decency, for
which Mr Congreve and his Friends ought to own a great obligation to him.


Bev. 44.
I reply in the first place, that my disproof of his second Postulatum cuts off
his retreat to this excuse.


Sav. What he said to it was, that it must fall fall of course. If Comedy is to
correct Vice, it must expose it, and how can a vicious man be exposed but by
his words or actions: now to make him act his wickedness, would be to restore
the Infamy of the Pantomimes, and the Poets have no other way of discovering
him, but to make him talk loosely, suitable to his Character. A man must not be
punished on the Stage for nothing. A lewd Fellow must act his part as far as
decency will permit, that he may suffer for it in the end, and as long as he
keeps to nature with this restriction, the Poet cannot err. Perhaps Mr Collier
would confine the Stage to show nothing but Foppery, I question if so much good
would be done then, as there might be by exposing Vice. A Fop is harder to be
reformed than a Rake. He thinks his affectation a peculiar. Talent given him by
Heaven, and values himself on his singularity, while a Scoundrel blushes at his
own Picture, and consequently is the likelier to be converted.


Bev. 2dly, she is not discovered in her lewdness. 44.



Sav. She is not discovered in a posture that would convict her in a Court of
Justice at least, that would once have convicted her. Mr Collier I see would
have been so much a Gentleman, as to have taken no notice on it, had the thing
gone so far.


Bev. She makes no dishonorable Exit. 44.



Sav. I don't know what notion he has of honor. She was in a fair way of being
found out by her Husband, and if she comes on no more, 'twas because she
thought she had gone too far already, and was ashamed to appear, and any one
but Mr Collier would have thought this Exit very dishonorable.


Bev. No ill in it, that is strange.


Sav. 45.
We ought to take the Gentleman's word for his own meaning, he says he meant no
ill by the Allegory, and if so, the freedom is the more excusable; however,
allusions to Scripture may be better avoided.


Bev. ^d Batch 48.
And Adam sure would with more ease abide
The Bone when broken, than when made a Bride.

Sav. Mr Collier says this is an admirable comment on the Old and New
Testament, but at the same time owns it copied from Absalom and Achitophel; if
so, let those answer for it, who invented it.


Bev. I Will tell him for once.


Sav. If it is any thing material, I Am sure it is the first time, and I fear will
be the last, pray let us have it; why might not Jehu have that as well as any
other Jewish or Christian Name?


Bev. He says he will tell you, if you will have patience to hear him. 'Twas never
the Custom of Jews or Christians to take any Scripture names from exceptionable
Persons.


Sav. We very seldem hear of a name twice in the Old Testament, whether
exceptionable or not, and if the thing required it, I suppose 'twould not be
difficult to prove him in an error here too; it is a trifle, and we shall say
more to him about his Jehu by and by.


Bev. No man I believe ever heard of more than two Jehu's.


Sav. That Is strange indeed, I know a very honest Gentleman, who I Am satisfied
will not be ashamed of writing his name, because Jehu in the Text was a
Charioteer. If he gives himself the trouble of riding to Colebrook, he may be
better informed of this matter, and I know no more reason why Jehu the Hackny
Coachman should relate to Jehu the Charioteer, than Jeremy the Parson to
Jeremiah the Prophet. This dispute is very whimsical, and what is not common,
Mr Collier himself is at last ashamed on it?


Bev. Inspiration without Epithete is always taken in a religious sens^ P. 50



Sav. Not always, it is used (...) ^^ly in a Poetical sense, and tha^ (...)
^bjects not very Christian, (...) impulse from a Deity, which (...) know
nothing of. However we'll not fall out with him about a word: Let him have the
honor of detecting something of this nature, to put that facetious story of
the Lady in the Wheelbarrow in Countenance.


Bev. The little word Still is left out in the Quotation. I grant I have by
chance omitted the word Still.


Sav. Perhaps not by chance.


Bev. And if he had done so too the sense had been perfectly the same, P. 52.
only better expressed.


Sav. I confess Expression is his talent. Let us try if the Sentence can stand
by it self without the little word Still.

Tho Marriage makes man and Wife one Flesh, yet it leaves 'em Still two Fools.

Mr Collier should by Chance have omitted quoting the sentence at all, before
he had so presumptuously said the sense had been the same, only better expressed:
does not this imply with the Still.

That if two Fools join themselves together in Wedlock, there are small hopes
of their growing wiser by it.

And without the Still.

That tho two persons are made one Flesh by marriage, P 52.
yet they are made two Fools for it.


Bev. That Is only when two Fools meet, which is exactly Mr Congreve in his
Amendments:


Sav. And the exact meaning of the words, they will bear no other, unless poor
Still is taken away from 'em. Mr Collier has read those worthy Gentlemen's
delicate railery in their Animadversions on this Still, and to show you that he
is good Company, when he meets with men to his mind, be laughs as loud as they,
and joins in with their plentiful mirth. Such conversation may be proper for
him, when he is writing against the Theater, but I am not so much his Enemy, as
to wish him no better always.


Bev. One would think by his writings he had digested ill Language into a
common place. P. 57.



Sav. I believe our adversary has so good a memory for such things that he
needs no helps to it, the dispute is about Whoreson appetites, in which he
thunders out against Profaneness. I don't know what signification Whoreson has
with appetites. Mr Congreve put the words into the mouth of a Footman, and the
sense of 'em is more exceptionable than their Blasphemy. The fellow intended to
give his wicked Lusts an ill name, and the Author let him hit on that first;
but take it as he pleases, a man sure is not obliged to Compliment his Lusts
with fine Epithetes, if he does otherwise I cannot understand how it is to
Blaspheme the Creation.


Bev. Well, what say you now to his charge about Solomon.


Sav. You know I have protested as well as he against using Phrases which might
be thought to be borrowed from the Bible, whether with or without design, but
this is a fault which our Poets would have been cautious of, if Mr Collier had
not urged it against them, the best of 'em had resolved not to please their
audiences at the Expense of their Testament.


Bev. A shrewd contrivance to put a man out of his wits for Variety. P. 63.



Sav. If he knew any thing of contrivance, he would not have ridiculed this.
Valentine thought this trick would have assisted him in getting his Mistress
and imposing on a cruel Ignorant Father. While he was acting the part of a
Lunatic, he might say those truths which he could not have said so handsomely
in his perfect senses. The variation of the Character had a very pleasant
effect, and if the Adversary is his friend, he will not hereafter condemn a man
for not being always tied up to sense, and confined to his understanding.


Bev. By your own confession you must be against Valentine's saying I am truth.


Sav. Had Mr Congreve used the words he designed at first, it had given less
offense.


Bev. Advanced to my third Chapter concerning the abuse of the Clergy. P. 65.



Sav. If there were ever any such Clergymen in being as Spintext and Prig, I
believe the Poets may make use of 'em without offending the rules of Decency or
Religion. No body would have the worse opinion of a truly pious Divine, if they
saw the late Parson of Croyden lasht for his abusing his office. Neither will
any one have the greater deference for the Gown, because Mr Collier demands it
so haughtily. The same reasons which I gave for bringing Quality into our
Comedies, will serve for those who scandalize the Ministry. If any person makes
himself the Subject of Satyr, let him suffer for it to deter others. And a Poet
must know little of his art if he cannot expose the men without affronting their
office, tho they must be shown to be what they are, that others may the sooner
think themselves concerned in the reproof. It Is plain enough Mr Collier stands
up so much for the Clergy, to make a party among 'em to support his pretenses;
and he designed without doubt to begin the War (which some of those, who
deserve least from the Laity) long to see declared against 'em. The Laity have
encroacht too much on their Learning, and this province has lately been too
much neglected by many of their Gown, by which means it is hardly now to be
recoverd out of the hands of those who have made such large acquisitions in it.
It Is impossible for a man of Letters to respect very much a person, merely
because he wears a Cassock, to which he has no other title than the Bounty of
his Patron. Let Mr Collier think what he will of Mr Congreve and our best
Poets, they honor the memory of the late Archbishop, Dr Tillotson, more than
himself, and some that we might name. They have learnt from him most of the
proficiencies they make in Language, which they are ready gratefully to own. Bp
Stillingfleet, Bp Burnet, Bp Patrick, will ever be esteemed in this and all
ages for their Piety and Learning. And who of our present Bishops are there,
that for their exemplary Piety and Learning, don't demand as much honor, as
for the Seats they hold in the House of Peers. The Sherlocks, the Halleys, the
Birches, the Wakes, the Maninghams, the Atterburys, are names which will be
reverenced by all futurity, as well as in our days, by every one who loves good
sense and true erudition. These are indeed the Glories of our Nation and
Religion, and their Merit and Virtue blazon their Escutcheons better than
Garter or Stones. Such men will be as unwilling to dispute Precedence, as any
man of breeding would be to refuse it 'em. They will never want a Herald to
authorize their claims, and can never appear any where but with Luster. For
their sakes the whole order live in the esteem, which is inseparable from their
function. Yet the Cluers, the Jones, the Hickringils, the Cooks, the Snetts,
and some more we could mention, will always be distinguished from such men as
these; and let 'em protest as much as they think fit against Satyr, they will
perpetually feel it. If their defects or vices are not too scandalous to
appear. Is not a Parson incessantly embroiled in Litigious Suits with his
Parishioners for Tithes? another at All-fours at his Clerks, another shamefully
making unlawful Love to his Neighbors Wife, another plotting against the
Government, and encouraging Sedition, another reeling to his Vicaridge from a
drunken Patron, another starving his family for a spend thrift heir, another
ridiculing the faith he preaches, or profaning the name we adore; another
sullenly setting his Neighborhood at variance or foolishly talking or writing
on things he does not understand, to show his reading? Are not these subjects
for the Poets, or other more important Satyr?


Bev. You are answering Mr Collier before I have read him.


Sav. You Will find nothing in him more than he had said before, till you come to
the 74th page; and I believe unless you have any objection to what I assert,
you will not be pleased with his argument, tho it is notably divided.


Bev. However, I Will read it.


Sav. With all my heart; in the mean time I Will look over Moliere's Preface, to
his l' Imposteur, which we may have occasion for hereafter.


Bev. I think Mr Collier says, the Poets are not to be judges of the failings
of the Clergy. P. 68.



Sav. They may judge those who are arraigned at their Bar, and punish em their
way, as well as others, for Sottishness, Cowardice, Extortion, or any other
Vice which the Law takes cognizance of. A Poet cannot set a man in the Stocks
for being drunk, nor break an Officer for being a Coward, nor fine a man for
Extortion, neither can he pull the Gown over a disorderly Parsons ears; but, if
he can, he may make 'em all ashamed of their faults, by showing their
Characters ridiculous. Let a Clergyman be a Fop or a Rake, a Pedant or
Coxcomb, he is accountable in the Poets Court for his Lewdness and Folly. Their
punishment is to expose him, and in many cases the Law can do no more,
sometimes not so much.


Bev. I am come to the 74th page, and would fain know what you can reply to his
1st, 2d, 3d, and 4th answers to Mr Congreve, who says, that if Kings may be
exposed, why may not Priests. A^end. 72.



Sav. It Is not my way to run divisions on an argument, but I think his answers
are all of 'em sophistical. He says, Kings are willing to be disciplined, but
the Church is brought on the Stage aagainst her consent. I deny that the Church
is brought on the Stage, or that ever a Priest was shown there to affront their
whole Order. The Church is not guilty of Hypocrisy, Drunkenness, Lewdness,
Covetousness, Faction, nor any of the Vices which some of its worst Members are
ridiculed for. Every body distinguishes an idle Vicar, from a pious and awful
Convocation.


Bev. This is the same thing you said a little while ago.


Sav. A man that answers Mr Collier, will be obliged to repeat a great many
things over and over, as he does, or the world may think him in the right in
one place, when they had condemned him in another.


Bev. 2dly, Stage Princes are used agreeably to their station. 75.


3dly, If Princes were used as ill as Priests.


Sav. They would without doubt be very angry, and the Poets are not to be
blamed for being more afraid of a Kings frown than Mr Collier's. Whatever Mr
Congreve is for, his Adversary it is plain, is for levelling. If a Gentleman who
takes Orders does not lose his Place with his Title, I hope that of Clerk is
not equal with Majesty. Gentlemen are used as freely, and much more so than
Priests, guilty of the same disorders, tho the Quality is the same. If a
Justice of Peace is made a Coxcomb or a Blockhead, I hope it is of no
consequence that the Prince who gave him the Commission is affronted, for it is
not possible that a King should know any thing of the person he entrusts, who
perhaps never did, nor never will see the Court, but by information, wherein
Interest and Party may be concerned: neither is the Ordinary abused by showing
one of his Clergy a Fool: Kings and Princes are never brought into Comedy, no
more are Bishops; these being the heads of the Church, and those of the State,
are alike forbidden to be profaned by Comedy; to strike at them would be to
strike at the foundation of both Church and State: but their Subjects and
Inferiors, of all other ranks, when they can be ridiculed without offense to
the State, or Religion have been and may be exposed. Mr Collier perhaps would
be well enough pleased if a Parson was brought on the Stage, provided a Herald
went before with his Coat of Arms, and made room for his appearance in figure,
with a good grace, and a lofty mien, like the Cardinals in Caesar Borgia; he
would not much value how wicked they were made, provided the degree of
Clerkship was maintained; and yet the Poets have managed themselves so warily,
that they never dealt with any of 'em above a Vicar or a Chaplain. The Bar-Gown
has often been played with, and shown in a more despicable figure, yet the
Lawyers don't think it worth their while to cry out against Comedy, as aiming
at the ruin of the Courts in Westminster Hall, and the Judges themselves have
desired Love for Love, with all the faults Mr Collier has laid to its charge,
to be presented 'em, and were extremely well pleased with their entertainment,
tho the Lawyer there makes a trivial appearance.


Bev. His pretense of matter of fact is not true. 76.
Princes have complained of the Theater.


Sav. This is not the first fling he has had at the Theater, in this Book,
which aimed at its entire destruction; he forgets what he said in the 8th page,
or was sorry for his tenderness. Now he tells you, Scipio pulled it down,
Trajan and Antoninus discouraged it, Tiberius banished the Stage, Lewis the
Godly would not endure a Playhouse, Queen Elizabeth often checked it. Now these
were most of them great Princes, and which is more to the purpose, most of them
good ones too. Thus says Mr Collier. And let any one guess if he insinuates any
thing less than the shutting up the Playhouse doors for ever. Mr Congreve's
assertion may be easily vindicated. We never read of any great Prince who
complained of the Theater itself, some may have corrected the Corruption of
some of the Poets and Actors of their times. The greatest Princes that ever
lived have always encouraged the Drama; this is so evident, that History is
full of the Examples we might instance on this occasion. Alexander the Great
was so passionate an admirer of Sophocles and Euripides, that story tells he
learnt their Tragedies by heart, and sung an Episode of the Andromeda of
Euripides at his last Banquet. Pompey was at a prodigious expense to erect a
Theater, and to show that he was not the more soft or more effeminate for his
love of pleasure, 'twas at the same time he was enlarging the Roman Empire, and
perhaps contriving to make himself her Master. His Rival Julius Caesar has
shown what a value he had for Plays by the Tragedies he writ himself, and the
fine encomium he left on Terence: Whom as great a Scipio as he who pulled down
the Stage is said to assist in writing his Comedies. Augustus particularly
favored the Theater, and those who wrote for it; his affection for Mecaenas,
the Patron of the Stage, and one who honored it with his own pieces, and his
intimacy with Varius, is an unquestionable proof of this. If Lewis the Godly,
and some other Christian Princes could not endure Plays, they had betters
reasons for it than Mr Collier imposes on 'em. The Entertainments which in those
days were shown on the Stage, were such stuff as might well offend the ear of a
Prince less bigoted than he was. If our adversary is acquainted, as without
doubt he is, with the wit of those times, he knows their Plays were strange
pieces, and not easily endured. The Holy Father at Rome has often smiled on the
Italian Poets. The honors Petrach, and afterward Tasso received from him,
show that Infallibility could countenance some Wits, whose Muses were not the
Chastest that ever appeared. If those Authors have left few Dramatical pieces,
'twas because the Stage was not quite recovered out of the Gothic ignorance,
which had obscured it for 1400 years. If Queen Elizabeth put down the Booths,
and forbid the Drolls in Grace Church Street, she encouraged those Authors who
writ the regular Plays, and gave Poets and Actors considerable Pensions. It Is
said too, that she translated herself several Tragedies from the Greek, which
is demonstration enough that she was a Friend to the Theater. Mr Collier
himself knows the only Royal Martyr that has honored the Christian Religion
with his sufferings for these thousand years, was very kind to the Stage and
the Poets, who were concerned for it, not to mention his Sons, whose Memories
I Am sure are dear to Mr Collier. His present Majesty, when he has been at
leisure to divert himself from the great Affairs of Europe, has commanded
several of our Comedies to be presented him by his Servants in England, and has
seen Racine's Tragedies in Holland with satisfaction. And all the world knows
her late Majesty of Glorious Memory, was very favorable to the Theater,
honored it often with her Presence, and rewarded bountifully some of our
Comic Writers. Besides, the Drama has been encouraged even by Commonwealths as
well as Monarchs in Athens, let Mr Collier say, what he will of the Sentiments
of that Republic, spent more Money in the decorations of her Theater, and in
rewarding those who succeeded there, than in all her Wars, if we may give
credit to Plutarch, who you will allow as good an authority as the Short
Viewer, etc. Neither did this wise people, as a learned Author comments on
Plutarch, believe their Expense unprofitable, since 'twas to inspire their
people with notions conformable to the public good.


Bev. You needed not have said so much to prove what you design by this
argument; it is most certain, Princes in all ages have been generous to the
Poets, and most to those who have pleased 'em on the Stage. There are very few
exceptions, and those not worth naming, to Mr Congreve's general Assertion,
that Kings never complained of the Theater or the Poets. You say nothing to his
77th and 78th pages.


Sav. I thought you were satisfied with what I replied before, when I
endeavored to demonstrate, that a Clergyman might be made ridiculous in
public if he is so in private. Mr Congreve never intended to take away the
common right of the Clergy; he only quoted Mr Hales to show the difference
between some Clergymen and others. Such as Mr Hales will meet with no occasion
to have their privilege pleaded, but such as our Adversary, who will be sure
to justle themselves into their places, must expect some rubs in their way.


Bev. My meaning is, if it were designed for the Theater. 79.



Sav. He then would have had nothing to object against the Athalia of Racine.
Here again this Gentlemen shows his inveteracy to the Stage. He owns the Play
to be good, religious and solemn. If so, why not proper for an audience to be
entertained with it; or why does he object against so fine a Poem, purely
because Dramatick, unless he thought all sorts of Dramatick Poetry
unsufferable, and nothing to be shown at a Playhouse. Moral and pleasant
things he has already excluded; now he forbids the Poets meddling with solemn
and religious subjects. Neither the one nor the other will please him, he will
allow no Wit out of his own Company, nor Religion out of his Pulpit.


Bev. But that it was designed for the Theater, is more than I know. 79.



Sav. I believe it; we have had several touches of his acquaintance with the
French Tongue, and French Authors.


Bev. And I believe it was not. 79.



Sav. The Preface would have given him good reason to have believed otherwise,
if he had ever read it. I will not say by him as he does by Mr Congreve, with
reference to Pineda, that I suspect he never saw it; for I have good ground to
mistrust, that tho he has perhaps seen it, he has not read it. To answer his
belief at once, Racine tells you himself that it was acted, and there are
thousands living, who saw it on the Stage, which is a good argument against his
insinuations, that it cannot be made useful. The Author of Athalia informs you
in his Preface,

On me trouera peut cestre un peu hardi d'avoir mettre sur la scene un prophet
inspere de Dieu and qui predit l'avenir, Racine Pref. to Ath.
etc.


Bev. Def. p. 79.
I had a glympse of him just now. Best of all, it is more than he has of
himself, sometimes lewd but not little, there is a paradox for ye. Well, I grant
some people are both.


Sav. I desired you to read those excellent Sentences, to remember you of the
Gentleman's breeding, and to excuse the Liberty I take with him. That some
people are both, bears a very civil construction, and is a taste of that
Language which is refined from Billingsgate.


Bev. P. 8^.
He means the pedantical Cant of Aristotle, Horace, Bossu and Corneille.


Sav. Why so positive, I Will assure him that neither Mr Congreve nor any body
who is acquainted with Mr Collier's reading, could never mean so. The
Translation of Father Hedelin's Art of the Stage, is doubtless what he meant;
he may be furnished with pedantical Cant enough there, or in the Essay on
Dramatick Poetry, which he quotes so often. The Candle-Snuffer can talk to you
of the three Unities, and the Scene-keepers judge of one of 'em, better than
our Critic does.


Bev. He would blanch this foul character; but alas! 81.
it is to no purpose to wash and rub, the spots are not dirt but complexion.


Sav. When Mr Collier is fond of a Metaphor, you find he is loath to part with
it; he will then continue it perhaps an whole period; but when the simile is
too strong for him, and he cannot manage it, he changes 7 or 8 times in a
Sentence, this it is plain was borrowed from his Laundress. The blanching of a
pair of Sheets, and washing and rubbing is propriety of Speech, so is, the
spots are not dirt, but complexion is a bold word, and the Washer-women seldom
use it in the phrase of the Tub. If Mr Collier takes his metaphors from the
Mob, he should be faithful to his originals, and not make 'em speak more
nonsense than they are guilty of.


Bev. Let his Language alone, and mind his Reasoning.


Sav. Are you come to that then, you abandon his Style I perceive. Well, I did
not think you would have been weary on it so soon: Some men have preferred him
to the late Archbishop or the Bp of Rochester, and the people to their darling
Sir Roger L' Estrange.


Bev. I think however, his style is not contemptible.


Sav. I should think so too; if he did not himself believe it excellent; I Am
sure it is nearer the first than the last.


Bev. 82.
So much for his honesty.


Sav. And are not the impatience of Creditors, the hardships of a Prison, and
absence from a Mistress, enough to make an honest man sign an obligation, which
he would endeavor after to be relieved from. In civil things of the highest
consequence, agreements under confinement are always void of course; and since
it is not so in matters of Common Law, a man may endeavor to do himself
Justice, when others who imposed on his necessities had wronged him, and yet be
no Cheat. Mr Collier thought his bare saying So much for his honesty would be
sufficient, and that his Readers would take a word from his mouth, instead of
proof. Pray read what Valentine says, which occasions this smart conclusion.


Val. This condition was proposed before, I refused it; Love for Love, p. 8.
but the present Impatience of my Creditors for their Money, and my own
Impatience of Confinement, and absence from Angelica, forced me to consent,

To the cutting off the reversion of his Fathers Estate to him, by a Bond, and
would not you or any man do the same, rather than starve in a Prison, or not
see a Woman you Love, and one whose Fortune would redeem yours. If a Father was
so wicked as to take this opportunity, to oblige his Son to comply with his
unjust demands, would not any Son do all that lay in his power to break such a
Contract, and might he not effect it without being censured for a Rascal.


Bev. I would have acted as Valentine did.


Sav. So would I, and as scrupulous as our adversary shows himself, such a
temptation would go very near with him, yet we should either of us I suppose be
angry with a person that should dispute our honesty.


Bev. p. 83.
The Psalmists authority may be better than Mr Congreve 's.


Sav. This Paragraph is a very great Compliment on all the People of Quality
and Merit who frequent the Playhouse, and divert themselves with the
representations there. I Am sure the using Scripture to back his personal
Quarrel with the Poets is more Profane than the Liberties they are accu'sd of
for Exposing Holy persons which is abominable. There never was a holy person
exposed by the most profligate writers. Every Parson is not what he should be,
a Holy Person, and none but those who are not so were ever ridiculed. They are
the Hypocrites and Cheats, who are discovered in their guilt, and punished with
shame. I beg your pardon for repeating this vindication again and again, 'twas
necessary here to show he is angry for nothing, and concerns the Scripture in
his passion.


Bev. The Fathers censure of the Stage of which I gave many Instances was an
oversight of Zeal. P. 83.



Sav. He thinks he has Mr Congreve now at an advantage, for presuming to say
the zeal of the Fathers was an oversight, tho this is not the only oversight
the Fathers made, their zeal often transported 'em, to do incongruous actions.
Sometimes they condemned the Platonic Philosophy, and then the Aristotelian,
the one was damnable at one time, and the other at another, one encouraged and
recommended by some Fathers, and accused and forbidden by others. Origin and
some more of 'em fell into dangerous errors by their study of Plato, whom
Tertullian styles the Author of the Heresies of those times. St Austin in his
younger years cried up Plato, and Aristotle in his old Age, approving and
disproving both by turns; yet in these days both Plato and Aristotle are read
in our Schools. The Author of the Letter to A. H. Esquire has said enough on this
matter. The Fathers might err, and did err, as much as men do now. Their
Authority with Reason and Scripture on their side is of force, otherwise of
none, their sayings may be reflected on as well as ours, and are as liable to
exception. The citations which Mr Collier has made from 'em, and their weight,
will be examined by a person, who, I hear, has applied himself to study this
matter with care and industry. For my part, I take least notice of his sense of
Antiquity, I look on things as they appear now, and if there is nothing to be
said against 'em at present, and much for them, had the Fathers, without
warrant from Scripture, thundered more against 'em than the most zealous of
them did against the doctrine of the Antipodes, I should not be biased by
their authority.


Bev. P. 88.
'Twill never fix the floating of our humors, nor bring us to the steadiness
of the Continent: to speak more softly, What is more likely to awaken our
passions than these diversions, and to fill us with freaks and fancies, and
extravagant amusements.


Sav. I Will answer, if I can, as softly as he asked the Question. Sowing
Sedition, Inspiring men's minds with the desire of a Revolution, Preaching
against the Government, or for those, who to the utmost of their power have
contrived its ruin. These things are more likely to awaken our passions, and
such passions as are more dangerous than freaks and fancies both to the State
and our selves. If a good man or woman should dream all night of the Ghost in
Hamlet, the murder in Julius Caesar, of the fellow in the Tub in Sir George
Etheridge's Comedy, or the Scowrers in Shadwell's, they may lose the pleasure
of a sound nap, but they need not fear being hanged for it. If trifles make a
slight impression on their minds for the present it soon wears off, and without
such amusements their fancies might have been worse employed.


Bev. To the authority of this Father I shall subjoyn that of Horace. P. 86.



Sav. I slipped over his authority from Horace, not imagining you would value
what that greatest of Poets and Critics said against the Drama. When the Roman
Theater was debauched by the abuse of the Chorus's and Music, especially since
he says it in the same Poem, in which he takes so much care to inform the
Stage-writers, how to succeed, and gives those who had done well such immortal
praises; he is not talking of the Theater as 'twas in its self, but as 'twas
corrupted by the Laziness, Luxury, and Ignorance of those times, when by the
vast numbers of Villagers who had obtained the freedom of the City, and were
made Denizens of Rome, the public taste began to be vitiated. The people, as
they are now, were fond of any thing new and extravagant. The Chorus's that
used to be Lessons of morality, were grown lewd and irregular.

Hor. Poet.
Ille bonis faveatque and concilietur amicis.
Et regat iratos, and amet peccare timentes,
Ille dapes laudet Mensae brevis ille salubrem,
Justitiam, Legesque and apertis otia portis
Ille tegat Commissa: Deosque precetur and oret
Vt redeat miseris, abeat fortuna suporbis.
This was the office of the person who spoke first for the Chorus, and how
dangerous would a Theater be under such discipline. The Verses were simple and
modest, the Music the same, and suited to the smalness of their House, which
was answerable to the numbers of the people, Tibia non, ut nunc, orichalco
vincta, tubaeque
Aemula, sed tenuis simplexque, foramine pauco
Aspirare, and adesse Choris erat utilis, atque
Nondum spissa nimis complere sedilia flatu,
Quo sane populus, etc.


How then does Horace's authority agree with the Fathers. The Father is against
the Stage in general, Horace only against the irregularity of the Music and
Musicians, who were grown infamously rampant in their behavior and dress, and
changed the simplicity and gravity of the first Chorus, to a high and lofty
tone, which might fill the Theater, as it had been enlarged by the magnificence
of the Romans, then masters of the world.

Postquam caepit agros extendere victor, and Vrbem,
Latior amplecti murus vinoque diurno
Placari Genius festis impune diebus,
Accessit numerisque modisque licentia Major
Indoctus quid enim saperet, liberque laborum,
Rusticus Vrbano confusus, turpis honesto?
I am very glad I had my Horace by me, that you might be satisfied what a fair
and powerful Adversary we have to deal with; and this is the authority which he
shall subjoin to St Austin. He mistook Horace's speaking of the corruption of
the Chorus for his censuring the Drama, he was led away by Dacier's Marginal
Notes, and I am apt to suspect Marginal Notes and Indexes the most considerable
part of his reading; for if he had read a page or two farther in Dacier, he
would have found that it is not so remarkable as he thinks in Horace, to commend
the old Romans for not frequenting the Theater; for he commends the modesty of
their Plays, and the virtue of those times, which would not endure the
disorders of the Roman Theater, in the latter days of Augustus. Dacier says
page 246 of the same vol. in his remarks on Vtiliumque sagax rerum and divina
futuri.

That Horace does not in the least talk of Tragedy in general, he speaks only
of the Chorus, and explains how it came to be corrupted from its first
simplicity. Thus it is plain for what Dacier gives his four reasons for the
Romans not frequenting the Theater so much as they did afterward, which
reasons Horace had given before him, for no other end, but to show the virtue
of the first Stage, and the vices of the last, which no body can vindicate; and
yet no sensible man would be for destroying a Theater, because it has not been
always supported with the purity it requires. You see now, that Dacier's
authority is ruined from Dacier himself as well as Horace. The pains he took
with Aristotle's Art Poetica, wherein the Tragic Muse is preferred to the
Heroic, is a sufficient argument that he did not believe the Theater ought to
be condemned as inconsistent with Prudence or Religion.


Bev. Mr Collier says as much. 8^.
As for innocent diversion, I have nothing to say against 'em.


Sav. He has said as much as he could against the Stage in general. His
bringing in the Fathers who were for none at all, and a great many other hints
of its danger, are good proof, that he would have the world at least believe he
is not for innocent diversions, where men are to be made merry with Fools or
Hypocrites. If he is for such entertainments, why all this stir and noise? does
he suppose it is impossible to write an innocent Play? what would he make of
Racine? Esther and Athelia? what of a great part of Corneilles, and Monsieur
Boyer's Tragedies; and if so much cannot be said for our own in this point as
for the French, it is because our Poets erred to please a humorous people, and
never offended against Decency or Religion, but at the same time broke through
their art: those of 'em who are most faulty know least of what they profess;
the little Writers that take for their whimsies will not long please the Town,
when their taste is once refined; then such only as are masters of their art
will be applauded, and then Mr Collier will have no need to complain for
himself or the age; for this is certain, that a good Poet must write like a
good man, because he is to instruct as well as please; and a true Wit will
never descend to buffooning. Rain says all Poetry that is against manners is
against art, and Bossu, that a pernicious art is no art at all, at least not
sufferable; and another great Author that none but little Genius's will descend
to speak indecencies or impurities. Let such Writers be treated as Mr Collier
pleases, I am of his opinion, that they cannot make an innocent diversion.
Their knowledge of the Town, which they boast of, is a Science they dare not
tell how they came by, the spirit of their Dialogue, Impudence, and
Extravagance: A Reformation for these is of absolute necessity, and the only
way to reform 'em is, to silence them. To which all that love their Morals or
Understandings, will consent with joy.


Bev. Mr Congreve goes on with his Panegyric on his Country. P. 88.



Sav. Mr Collier is not satisfied with engaging the Nobility, Clergy, and
Magistracy to his assistance, he complements now the whole Kingdom, and is
setting them against his Animadvertor.


Bev. 16.
I somewhat Question the truth as well as civility of this reflection.


Sav. Who would take Mr Collier for an Englishman, he is so great a Champion
for his Nation, that he will not believe the weekly Bills, nor allow any Felo
de se's to be heard of in England. This controversy is very comical, and the
Parish Clerks, the Searchers, or Coroners Inquests, can only put an end to it,
to them he is referred for satisfaction.


Bev. P. 89.
From whence are all our Plots, etc. Let them come from whence they will, we
had better have them than some peoples Remedies.


Sav. This is not the first fine thing Mr Collier has said of the Dissenters,
he would not have cajoled them so in King Charles the Second's latter days, but
he did not foresee then that he could have been so much a Schismatic, as to
Dissent from the Church, as by Law established.


Bev. But I still crave leave to believe that a mistaken conscience is more
serviceable than none at all.


Sav. He shall have leave to believe what he pleases, for here he speaks
softly. I confess I never studied speculative Divinity, and it is a little bold
in me not to be of the same sentiments with a professed Divine and a M. A. Yet I
am of opinion, he has shown himself not very knowing even in his own way.
Obstinacy is generally the Companion of error in Religion; a man that has a
mistaken Conscience, often firmly believes he is in the right, and dies in that
belief. A wicked man knows his own guilt but has not Grace enough to amend, or
desire to be better. Strong persuasion may inspire him with a fear of
punishment, and convince him of the danger of his ways: Such a one is certainly
more likely to be converted to the true Religion, than one who thinks his is
the true, and will not hearken to any other, whereas a wicked man cannot suppose
he is in the right, whatever he says or practices; and there is more hopes of the
Conversion of a lewd Fellow, than a Quaker to the Orthodox Faith.


Bev. He concludes his Book with an unfair Quotation about Music, P. 90
but I shall pass it over.


Sav. Lest it should not appear so unfair as he affirms it is, he says, he does
not say Music is directly vicious, Short View, P. 278, 279, 280.
but that the art is meanly prostituted, designed to lay thinking and reflection
asleep. It helps a lascivious sentence to slide, drowns the disorders of
Atheism, excites a sportive humor, warms the passions, unlocks the fancy,
makes it open to pleasure, throws a man off his Guard, keeps off the aversions
of Conscience, makes way for an ill impression, is most commodiously planted to
do mischief, refreshes the Ideas of the action of a bad Poem, is true to the
subject and the tunes, are generally airy and gallardizing. He tells out of
Tully that some Music is dangerous and ensnaring, and talks of one Timotheus
that was silenced for having a string too much to his Fiddle. Mr Collier
probably would have expected a Pun here, but I was resolved to disappoint him.
If all these Elegant Allegations are not enough to show his good dispositions
to Music, look over his last pages of his Short View, and you will be
satisfied why he past over answering Mr Congreve s Quotation.


Bev. To come to his criticisms upon some of my expressions. 90.



Sav. Ay, pray let us be attentive here, this is the place where he fancies he
can show himself most, and make the best flourishes.


Bev. The Ladies fancy slip stocking high is an allusion to a Book very well
known. 90.



Sav. Yes, we have seen where he has learnt other things from that Author; his
forcible way of dividing his repetitions, and hammering a thought till he has
beaten it to nothing. If you remember what we read just now out of his Short
View, concerning Music, there are many instances of his Rhetoric in Dr
Eachard.


Bev. The upper end of a Government is a defensible expression.


Sav. Enough, we'll take his word for it; 'twould be hard if we should refuse
him so small a favor, after so many proofs of his Eloquence, tho the upper end
of Table, or an Alley, or a May Pole, would be much more in propriety of Speech.


Bev. The Litter of Epithetes I have answered already.


Sav. You remember how; but with Mr Collier Questions are as easily answered as
started.


Bev. His exception to big alliances is somewhat unfairly transcribed.


Sav. Indeed Mr Congreve has not named a quarter of the places where Big is
very foolishly used. I once was about to make a Collection of that and some
words like it, particularly his affected use of Ceremony in the Defense, but I
thought 'twould be troubling my head with Straws, so I left 'em to his Readers.


Bev. Well, but he attacks Mr Congreve for faults in style too.


Sav. Examine him with the Mourning Bride, and see whether they are not rather
boldnesses of Expression, beautiful in Tragedy, than Errors. Our Adversary is
as likely to mistake one for the other, as most I meet with. Respiring Lips and
noon of Night, I am sure as Mr Congreve has used them, are expressions proper
enough in Poetry, though they had been outrageous in Prose.

And felt the balm of her respiring Lips,
And all was still as at the noon of night.
No body expects that Mr Collier should relish what he does not understand,
but then he ought not to make exceptions.


Bev. Is the best Image of a parcel of Cats running up a wall.


Sav. Mr Collier's Images are ever poor and filthy, a litter of Whelps, a
kennel of Beans, a parcel of Catts and drowned Rats. The man has a very
Gentleman-like manner of thinking, and it is pity he had not treated on some
subject where he had an opportunity to distinguish himself better. I desire you
would be short with his Criticisms, we have seen already, what a Judge he is of
Language and Poetry. He talks ill enough in his own way, but it must be more
wretched when he is out on it, his Raillery is as awkard as his Breeding, he aims
at something in both, but never looks more ridiculous, than when he would
appear most witty or civil, which every one must do, that does not know what is
nature in both, as you will find by his last Paragraph relating to Mr Congreve.


Bev. But this is somewhat unfortunate; one would have thought, if he had
neither modesty to make 'em, nor reason to defend them, he might at least have
had a little conscience to have given them up.


Sav. Here Is Ceremony at parting, a Bully could not have gone out of Company
more abruptly, let him if he pleases think me rude for my Comparison, it is
impossible for a man to read him often, and keep within Temper. What think you
of him now?


Bev. I have not that Glorious Idea of him, which before possessed me, but still
why did the Town cry him up so much if there is nothing in him.


Sav. Mr Collier will rail aloud at me for incivility, should I pretend to
accuse the Town of weakness, and a Town where there are as many men of good
Sense, and true Wit as any in the World. Yet this very Town has always been
extremely whimsical in her favors to men in their reputation. She has all
along set up one Coxcomb or another to sport with, blown him up with her
praises, and at last left him with utmost contempt. Was not the City Laureat
once thought a greater Poet than Mr Dryden? has not Mr D -- had at one time
more admirers than Mr Witcherly? after this did not Sir R. B. carry away the
Laurel from all who pretended to it, and those very Heroic Poems which he
confesses were written in a Hackney Coach, preferred to Milton and Virgil, the
work of half an age, and of the greatest Genius's that ever lived. And are not
those Gentlemen's writings in a fair way to eternal oblivion? The Playhouse
was ripe for correction. The Town approved something that looked like aiming at
it. This made her kind to Mr Collier's attempt, and her kindness to the design
was the reason she overlookt the performance. You may be sure she will know the
man better in a little while, and you need not fear of being single in your
opinion, if you are convinced that there is a better way of viewing the
immorality of the Stage, than he has or can show us.


Bev. Since the Stage is so ripe for reproof, why does not some other more
capable person set about it?


Sav. It Is an ungrateful task to expose the faults of so powerful a Party,
unless the public would encourage it, and hearken to means of bringing the
Theater to reason without endeavoring to destroy it. No man of sense will
think of speaking against it, while people are in so wild an humor; when they
come to themselves, enough would put the Poets in a way to please them, without
endangering their Virtue, and make the Stage-entertainments their most sensible
and useful pleasure.


Bev. We may talk of this hereafter, if you please we'll read that part of the
Defense, which censures the Short Vindication of the Relapse, etc.


Sav. It grows late, and we have had enough of Mr Collier at present; if you
are not otherwise engaged, we'll run over that to morrow: And Claret now will
be much more refreshing, after a tedious conversation about our adversaries
trifles.


Bev. I am not so very eager to part with all my kind sentiments of him at
once, but I can adjourn the dispute for a Bottle. To morrow, if you please,
we'll finish it. I Will be with you at 5.


Sav. You are always welcome. I Will expect you then. Come, Sir, a health to a
regulated Stage and the Muses.


Bev. I Will do you reason.


The End of the Second Dialogue.
The Third Dialogue.
Bevill, Savage. Bev. GOod morrow, Sir, Excellent Wine and a Friend like you
are not soon to be parted with. I little thought to have been so very
troublesome to you, and made a night on it; but when we are set in, and like the
Company, it is hard to promise one's self what time we shall leave it.


Sav. I am glad any thing tempted you to stay with me till morning; we drank
little in comparison of what they take for a dose in Convent-garden. I hope the
Claret agrees with you.


Bev. To a miracle. I am't always so serene next day as you see me now,
drinking suits not at all with my constitution, and I pay for the pleasure of
the night by my qualms and vapors after it. But now my head is as clear as
Nature made it, and you shall find that I can read Mr. Collier anon without
interruption.


Sav. Why not before dinner? for you may be sure I Will not let you stir till
we have dined, since the Wine sits so well with you, we'll make an end with him
out of hand. I shall have less to object against the Scruples in the Reply than
those in the Defense; for, tho I pay all the deference in the world to the
author of the Relapse, for his Wit, and the Moral of that Play, which I think
very instructive, yet I own there are some Liberties in his Comedies,
especially the Provoked Wife, which Mr Collier had reason to censure. However,
we'll see if he does not wrest his meaning sometimes as well as Mr Congreve's
and endeavor to make his errors an argument for putting an end to the Drama.


Bev. One freedom betrays me to another; if you will promise to see the new
Tragedy with me in the evening, I Will accept of your invitation.


Sav. You mean Rinaldo and Armida.


Bev. I have heard of no other.


Sav. With all my heart, I have seen it 3 or 4 times already, but the Music is
so fine, and the Play pleases me so well, that I shall not think it a burden
to keep you on those terms.


Bev. I never saw it since the third day, and was then alone; your judgment
will very much confirm the pleasure I had at that entertainment.


Sav. We'll refer this discourse till we are in the Pit, and now let us sit and
talk with our friend Mr Collier.


Bev. You know the reading him is my task, by agreement, so pray don't break in
on our Articles.


Sav. I can hardly compliment you so far, do as you will.


Bev. The Vindicator and his Brethren have an admirable way of defending
themselves from indecencies, P 98.
if you detect them they tell you it is your own construction.


Sav. Is not his construction of Not a woman kind, and cireling Joys tread
round the happy year, is not that Bawdy only in our Adversarys acceptance, was
there any harm in these words before he had struck 'em off into a light sense.
You don't forget what was said on this before, and how he appeared to you then
to be abominable, in the sense he put on innocent words; and can you read this
affirmation of his without blushng for him?


Bev. You are warm already.


Sav. Is there not reason for this vehemence, to see a man guilty of such
unfair dealing, to find it proved upon him, and yet to meet him endeavoring to
throw off his guilt by such impotent railery, is sufficient to provoke the most
calm Reader that ever saw his Short View, or his Defense. And you see he ambles
on with his brisk sentences, as if he had really nothing to answer for. As if
the knowledge of Good and Evil was Criminal, P. 98.
and to show one fault was to make another: I Am ashamed to repeat such stuff,
the sense of these dapper Periods and their Rhetoric are equally
extraordinary. Criminal and faulty are all one; if there is any difference,
criminal is the stronger word, which he enforces with a weaker. He means as if
the knowledge of Good and Evil was faulty, and to show one fault was to make
another fault. Here are amplification and reasoning. It Is without doubt
criminal to have such an exquisite skill in the knowledge of Evil, as to
extract it out of the most innocent things, as Spiders suck Poison out of
Flowers. To discover a fault where there was none, is to make your self guilty
for your own discovery. That he has done so, has been proved, and that he will
do so again, before we have gone through with the Reply, I don't in the least
question. This Paragraph is a Nonpareil for the pert turn of his Sentences,
unless it be the next where you have almost a Sentence in every line, 17 or 18,
in 5 or 6 and twenty, and every one of 'em the same thing in other words: he is
very lavish of his words, but a niggard of his sense, tho one cannot blame a man
that has but a little stock to be sparing in his expenses.


Bev. I see you are transported; and yet you are not like the greatest part of
Mankind, who lose their reason when they give way to passion.


Sav. It vexes me that I Am obliged to take notice of trifles, yet these very
trifles have been mistaken for Beauties.


Bev. Def. 99.
Sure there is not upon earth so impertinent a thing as a woman's modesty.


Sav. That and Bellinda's answer are the subject on which he harangues his
Reader with those elegant Periods. He says he has proved that no Profaneness is
excusable in any Character, and we have on the contrary disproved him by the
example of Cowly and Milton, and the authority of Pere Bossu. Cowly takes the
whole parable of the Prodigal, and serves himself on it, for an allusion to his
passion in his Mistress. You need only read those Verses, and the other Copies
in that part of his Book, to be informed how he has taken from the most
Religious Stories, to make comparisons for his Love. I Will not vindicate this in
him, nor in the Stage-writers, yet it is an argument that the best of Poets have
made use of serious phrases; and none till now thought 'em so flamingly wicked
for it. If profaneness in any Character ought not to be excused, affectation
certainly may. There Is no ceremony should privilege any person from being
exposed for his weakness. If a woman affects modesty, and has it not, let the
cheat be discovered as handsomely as may be, without making her appear rampant;
and let her be made ashamed of her Hypocrisy; our Adversary is so over civil
to the fair, that he thinks it a piece of rudeness to suppose they can err, and
ill manners to ridicule their faults, tho in order to reform 'em. This is
nicety indeed, and a man of this Conscience ought to struggle hard for decency.


Bev. We don't see Comedy garnished with Parliament House Speeches.


Sav. I keep to my first principals, and when I delivered up Mr Congreve's 4th
Postulate to Mr Collier, I had not the least reserve for it, else I should have
objected against the three or four last pages. I don't stop now to vindicate
the use of Scripture phrases, by saying that Parliament House Speeches have
been a garnish to Comedy. I think 'em none, and that it is impudent to show a
Senator making ridiculous harangues. Whatever opinion a man has of some of the
Speeches made there, or of the ability of many Members to speak in so awful an
Assembly, I Am sure it is prodigious folly for any one to attempt exposing 'em on
the Stage. The Respect due to so venerable an House, has kept the Poets within
bounds, supposing only their fear of Punishment, has been the occasion of their
modesty in this particular; yet they have, as Mr Collier observes, been very
cautious how they have touched on privilege. Tho this has been sometimes done,
and our Adversary is extraordinary tender toward the Poets, to show his own
ignorance to lessen their guilt. The Senator in Venice preserved was copied
from some body that the Court designed then to laugh at, and the Oration he
makes is not the least part of the pleasure which those that will rather laugh
than cry take at that Tragedy. Yet such things should be utterly exploded, and
had not been named, if Mr Collier had not so frankly said we don't see, etc.


Bev. P. 109
The Vindicator complains I will not take his word in the business of Pimping;
under favor he does me wrong, I never questioned his experience in these
matters; I am willing to believe him a good authority, and that he is qualified
to pronounce on the growth and improvement of the mystery.


Sav. This is some of that Language which might easily be translated into
Billingsgate, as well as he can he gives it an air of railery; but would a man
take it kindly to be called Pimp in affected phrase? or will the screwing up of
the mouth make the affront the less? If a Rascal should tell you he believes
your Mother was kind to some other man besides your Father, or else you had
never came into the world, would not you use him as scurvily as if he called
you Son of a Whore; and yet this same Mr Collier imposes himself on us for a
man of breeding, decency, ceremony, and all that; we know not how he came by
them, nor when he will discover his accomplishments, but at present we will not
take his word for 'em.


Bev. He tells you, it is a dull thing not to expect any thing not dull from a
Nurse. And why so, as slender people are entertaining sometimes.


Sav. Is slenderness then a necessary quality of a Nurse, or does their living
on Candles and Chicken-broth, screw their Wastes into the compass of a Span;
good Ale and a lazy life have had bigger effects on some of 'em. If those of Mr
Collier's acquaintance are so extremely well shapt, which perhaps may render
them very entertaining sometimes. Yet as slender people. This expression is
very pleasant, and whoever heard before that a man is of slender quality,
unless he had been two or three years in a Consumption; who that would write
fine will not be acquainted with our Adversaries delicate manner?


Bev. P. 110.
But tho she has not Wit, she might have Humor.


Sav. Then it is plain he thinks a Nurses Humor might be taking without Wit.
I Will say no more on this matter, there are a hundred stories scurrilously told
of the Prue's and the Abigalls, the Chaplains and the Clerks, and a man might
have too great a temptation if he thought much more on it.


Bev. I see you have forgot your passion.


Sav. He that would be out of humor with Mr Collier for this Paragraph, is
certainly not to be pleased on any terms; and when a man does so much to make
one merry, 'twere cruel to disappoint him.


Bev. To play the downright Wife, P. 112.
and Cuckold him.


Sav. Here he endeavors to wheedle the Ladies to his side by his civility,
after he has attempted to ruin their most agreeable pleasure by attacking the
Stage. To serve a loose Husband in his kind is a revenge for a Wife who has not
Honor nor Religion to preserve her, without these vanity and resentment would
prevail over all of them. For who could bear being abused and not seek for
satisfaction? I believe should he without jesting call ever a one of those
Ladies he makes his Addresses to downright Wife, she would not take it for
raillery, whatever Bellinda meant it.


Bev. This Gentleman is known to be a Master of style. P. 115.



Sav. He is known to be so in some cases, particularly that which the French
call La Langage des Hales, no man ever practiced that manner of speaking with
more success; and because he pleased the people, who are charmed with Malice,
however it is presented them, Mr Collier tells you He is known to be a Master of
style; to be sure he thought him so, or he would not have industriously
imitated his Observators and Aesop's Fables. L' Stran. Aesop.
The Moon was one time in a heavy twitter, is a beauty of Speech with which Mr
Collier, I suppose, was extremely pleased, or else why did he go so far out of
the way, to make Sir Roger so whimsical a Compliment. Was there any reason to
quote him, when the late Archbishop, the Bishops of Salisbury and Rochester,
and Dr Burnet of the Charter House, have so often used Providence in his own
sense of the word, which is indeed its true signification; and these are
Gentlemen whose excellence of style, neither the Court nor People ever
disputed, but they were too Loyal for his purpose, he would confine Elegance to
his Party, tho he might as well refer us to his friends in Ireland.


Bev. You are wonderfully disgusted with Sir Roger, or else you would not have
kept your self so long from the Reply.


Sav. I was not sorry at this opportunity to speak my sentiments of the Knight;
I taste for my self, if my relish of his Language agrees not with others, let
those who oppose it, give me better reasons for it than his reputation; I never
could be touched with his rude way of rallying, nor take his buffoonry for wit.


Bev. Have a care, you will offend against decency, to say of a Chevalier, that
his wit is buffoonry, is an error in manners, which the Replier will very much
scruple to forgive you.


Sav. I have said it, and any Knight in Christendom, who talks in the phrase of
his Squire, may expect the same freedoms from me.


Bev. Enough of him, at this rate we shall hardly get over the Reply before
dinner.


Sav. Dispatch it as fast as you please, I am as weary on it as you can be, and
with more reason, for I have read it oftener.


Bev. His lame excuse from Character and Manners, I have disproved already.


Bev. Are you of his opinion against the arguments and authorities I gave you
yesterday.


Bev. I think Satyr ought to have no deference for any one for his Quality,
either in the Church or out on it, unless it touches the heads of either the
Civil or Ecclesiastical Government, which would be to aim at the foundation of
both, but for this passage, ( Bellinda's blessing) I suppose there is no excuse,
because, tho the ridiculousness of some people wearing a Cassock, may be
exposed, yet Religion or Phrases, consecrated by the use she makes of them,
ought not to be meddled with on the Stage.


Sav. I make the same difference as you do, between the persons and the things,
and the Vindicator ought to have been more discreet.


Bev. I perceive the little Justice I endeavored to do that order.

He puts the Clergy in mind of his great services to the Gown, P. 116.
in the pains he took to assert their privileges, and stickle for their
precedence. He was not satisfied with the harangues he troubled us with in his
Short View and the Defense, but we must have their remonstrances rung in our
ears too in the Reply. Would he have an Ambassador travel like a Carrier, with
a Portmanteau behind, tho I seldom see a Carrier with a Portmanteau behind him.
I have seen a very honest Gentleman with a Sack of Corn under him, who was not
at all ashamed of his advancement. I Will quickly have done with this
controversy, let him continue it as long as he pleases. We have seen how far
the Clergy may be laughed at, without concerning their office or order in their
Quarrel, and by this time I suppose you are convinced of his sophistry, and
that the Poets never intended to affront the Clergy in general, by their
treating those who deserved it as scandalously as they lived.


Bev. They had nature at their beck, and carried Omnipotence about them.


Sav. To say the Apostles were Omnipotent, is a boldness which will startle
many good Christians, and which the Church itself would scarce countenance. I
took the liberty to oppose him in his Theology before, when he preferred a bad
Conscience to none at all. I am't so civil to sinners, as to imagine they are
wicked, because they know no better, neither will I give credit to an Atheist,
when he tells me he believes there is no God, nor can I consent to what Mr
Collier has said of the Apostles, at least not as he has expressed it. That they
did Miracles is as certain as that we read they did so, but 'twas not by the
omnipotence they carried about them. 'Twas the Power which the Holy Ghost
committed to 'em in return of their Prayers, for the conviction of the
unbelieving world on extraordinary occasions. They could have defended
themselves from sufferings, and soon have converted both Jews and Gentiles, had
their power been perfect. Theirs had its bounds, which were enlarged at the
pleasure of the only omnipotent. Mr Collier more than once has erred in his
Divinity, he told us the Jews and Christians never took their names from
exceptionable persons. I was sure when you read it, he must be very much out,
and now I remember the great Apostle of the Gentiles St Paul, was before his
conversion called Saul, a name every whit as exceptionable as Jehu. Cowly in
his Davideis says of Saul,

While Saul and Hell, etc. David 1 Book.
A man that is not a Master of Arts without a great deal of reading, might have
confounded the Divine for his being so positive in things which he must not
have studied over carefully to make such errors.


Bev. Let him practice the same liberty on a Judge or a Lord Mayor, 123.
and see how the jest will take.


Sav. There is no equality in the comparison, a Judge as one of the heads of
the Law, the Lord Mayor as the head of the City, ought not to be shown
scandalous, tho Judges and Lord Mayors too have been brought on the Stage, in
King Charles the Second's Reign. But a man with a Bar-Gown and Livery-Gown, has
not the same privilege. There Is no fear of making the Law or the City
contemptible that way, if Citizens and Lawyers take care by their actions not
to give the world other reasons for thinking 'em so. The House of Lords is one
of the States of the Kingdom, and to jest on 'em is certainly the highest
breach of manners, but every Lord in private and out of his Robes has not the
like pretenses to exception from scandal, if he is the subject on it. It Is time
to have done with this dispute, we have had it over and over again in so many
places, that it is as tiresome to vindicate the Poets, as to read Mr Collier's
Charges against 'em, on the affair of ceremony, which the worst of 'em is as
good a Judge of as himself.


Bev. P. 1^
Is it the office of a Comic Poet to imitate Justice, then certainly Rewards
and Punishments ought to be rightly applied.


Sav. If Rewards and Punishments ought to be applied, the Guilt as well as the
Merit ought to be exposed. A man must not be condemned for nothing, nor can the
Audience judge of the Crime without hearing the Indictment. The man must appear
wicked, before he can be punished for his wickedness; and how can he appear so
but by his words and actions. If he is lewd in one, the Adversary says he is not
to be seen for his smut. If in the other, it is breach of Manners and Decency.
It Is very severe usage, if a Poet must bring on a person purely to punish him,
and not let the Audience know how he has deserved it. Mr Collier owns Rewards
and Punishments ought to be applied, and of consequence contradicts all that he
has said about Character and Manners. If the Poet does not correct vicious men,
he errs in the Conduct of his Play, and there is no excuse for him. If he does,
Mr Collier says it is his duty. The main difficulty is, how it must be done not
to offend him. He must be brought on the Stage and some one tell the Audience,
(as the French knock their unfortunate Hero's on the head) That the poor fellow
has been very wicked behind the Scenes, and is brought out to be managed for it,
but not a word of his lewdness; which is much like, as if a Jury should give
their Verdict on a Criminal without hearing the Declaration against him. A
person well enough known had lately been very much obliged, if the Court would
have sentenced him, and not ordered his accusation to be read, but they did not
think fit that Justice should yield to Decency. And perhaps the publication of
that Trial, has been as prejudicial to the age, as the most vicious Play which
ever was acted, ten thousand people having by this means been informed of a
Crime, which till then they had never heard of; and yet Justice thought the ill
consequence of spreading that paper, would not countervail the advantages the
people might reap by being deterred from so infamous a villainy, when they were
acquainted with its punishment.


Bev. P. 126.
For to show a Religious person ridiculous, is the way to mismark the nature of
good and evil.


Sav. It Is granted, but the persons introduced on the Stage, are not those
truly Religious people, whose natures are mismarkt; they are the Hypocrites and
Cheats that abuse their profession, and make Godliness a color to their Vices.
I never knew in the most profligate Comedies, a man ridiculed that was
sincerely religious. The Testimonys, the Smirks, the Spintexts, the Say-graces,
etc. are of a quite different nature, and they are not in the least mismarkt.


Bev. Does a man who argues against Conscience, and talks like an Atheist, P.
126.
never speak his mind.


Sav. If a man who talks like an Atheist speaks his mind, what is he but an
Atheist? Mr Collier has a pretty way with him, as to his similies. Now to
answer the Question as peremptorily as he asked it. A man born in England, who
has had the benefit of Christian Education, cannot speak his mind when he talks
like an Atheist. The truth of our Doctrine is so convincing, that there never
was in our Nation an Atheist, but in affectation, or one whose Debauches made
him desire his Creed might not be true: And this is the reason. Why when a
Liber^ine pleads in his own defense, he must not be supposed to be in earnest.
Monsieur de la Bruyere says in his Chapter of the Wits of the Age; There never
was such a thing as an Atheist. And I should blush for the Adversary when he
asks such impertinent Questions, but that I hope when he reads 'em again, he will
blush for 'em himself. He Is the first Divine that ever made a doubt of the
Libertines believing against their practice, or that indeed 'twas possible for
a man to be born in Christendom, and be an Atheist from his Soul. The Faith of
many may be very skeptical and uncertain; there may be some who have scruples
concerning revelation, tho of those who pretend to argue against it, not one in
a thousand thinks as he talks; but a real Atheist is a monster, which no body
ever met with besides Mr Collier, and I hope he forgot himself when he seemed
to imply that a man may be bred in London, and yet speak his mind when he
denies the being of a God. I Am sure he was was not very Ceremonious to his
species, in suspecting there could be one of them worse than the Devil, who is
said to believe and tremble, as well as curse and revile.


Bev. P 128
This squeamishness it is possible drew down the severity of the Poet.


Sav. And what would Mr Collier get by it, if the Vindicator confessed it. A woman
that affects to seem modest, is whimsically nice in her words and actions to
outward appearance, while in her heart she is as gallant as those who discover
their minds freely; is not such a one more hurtful than the other? does not a
Hypocrite injure Religion more than a Rake, as an Enemy in our bosom is more
dangerous than one that attacks us openly. A Hypocrite cheats himself, and
endeavors to cheat his Maker; a Scoundrel only deceives himself. The man we
deal with has a strange tenderness for Hypocrisy, which is unaccountable in a
person of his pretenses.


Bev. And I suppose the main reason of his saying the Playhouse contributes to
the happiness of the Nation. P. 126.



Sav. If he has read Mr Dennis, he would have found other reasons for his
assertion; and since he confesses that Author was ingenuous, in acknowledging
lewdness promoted by the Stage, he ought to have followed his Example, and
dealt as ingenuously with him. Mr Dennis and all good Judges have blamed the
modern Writers for their licentiousness, but the fault is not in the Stage, the
humor of the Age gave 'em first the temptation to break through their Art to
please it; and Mr Dennis in the same Book has shown us, that the Theater might
be rendered, and has been very useful to Mankind in general, and this Nation in
particular. Mr Collier whenever he thinks fit to fall on the Volunteers, will
find it not very easy to answer what the Gentleman we are speaking of has said
in vindication of the Drama.


Bev. 129.
The Vindicator pretends much to morals and instruction about Loveless and
Amanda.


Sav. At our first meeting you may remember I said something to you on the
Moral of the Relapse, which in my opinion is one of the best I ever met with in
Comedy. The Moral of the Fool in Fashion gave the hint which I suppose the
Relapser was well acquainted with, and he has pursued it admirably in this
other Play.


Bev. I have not forgot what you said on it, I am more reconciled to Virtue in
danger, than I was when I first read the Short View.


Sav. I had not then seen what the Author had replied against his Adversary's
Objections: But I perceive our Sentiments were the same, and I hit his design,
which indeed any one might do that was not resolved to mistake it. Let Us see
now what Mr Collier says for himself. He talks of a Venison Pasty and the Lords
Prayer, P. 129.
wishes heartily that the Relapser might never fall into temptation, and would
throw off the Argument sometimes with a grave look, and sometimes with a smile.
P. 130.



Bev. He would make Loveless and Amanda the chief Character, and to gain this
he breaks through the rules of the Drama.


Sav. I will by no means attempt to answer for the Author of the Relapse; ibid.
that he considered much the Unities of which the Relapser is so fond. His
Plays are extremely irregular in the Conduct, but there is the Spirit of Comedy
in them. The Dialogue is lively, the Humor new and diverting; the Gentleman
has a great deal of Wit, which is more desirable than a great deal of reading.
I cannot allow Mr Collier to be a Judge in these matters. I know how he came by
his Criticisms, and whoever depends on such information, will blunder as he has
done.


Bev. 16.
But let his private design.


Sav. The Title of his Play, the intrigue which gives it its name, the design
of the Author, which every one conversant with the art, saw as soon as the
Comedy made its first appearance, all things publicly marked out what he meant
by it. Why then does the Relapser call it his private design, because he did
not understand it, at that rate there are a great many important parts of
Learning suffering under too much privacy.


Bev. 61.
Young Fashion, Lord Foppington, etc. make the principal figure.


Sav. Because they are the most ridiculous; folly must be very taking with the
Adversary, that he is so nicely civil to it when it is accompanied with Quality. I
thought the men of sense and the fine Gentlemen were always the Principal
Figures of a Play. Lord Plausible, at his way of commenting, is the chief
Character of the Plain Dealer: there is none but himself Rt. Hon. It Is true, some
would be apt to fancy his foppery made him look little, but these are a rude
unthinking sort of people, who don't know the difference that is due to Title,
and the respects they owe a Coxcomb of Quality.


Bev. As for poor Lovelace, P. 130.
he sinks in the fourth Act.


Sav. What then? by.
Why you may go look, Sagely replied, and in fewer words than he generally
makes use of.


Bev. The Vindicator makes a shift to say, ib.
that if the Play had sunk in the fourth Act, it had been better than it is by
just 20 per Cent. etc. Does not this confession prove the truth of my Remarks,
and that Loveless was a Character of Inferior consideration.


Sav. What in saying, that he wished the Play had been concluded, when that
Character appeared no more? You must observe always that when Mr Collier asks a
Question, it is not out of any doubt whether or no he is in the right, he never
leaves the Reader at liberty to deny him, and you must understand him every
where as in this place, where he means, that this confession proves the truth
of his Remarks, when it proves the quite contrary. The Author says, all that
comes after Loveless goes off the Stage, is trivial and insignificant, and he
wishes the Play had ended, as soon as Loveless's part was over.


Bev. 16.
Does the main person use to dye so long before the Epilogue.


Sav. How must we take him here, is he talking of Comedy or Tragedy. The death
of the Hero in a Tragedy, ought sure to be immediately before the Curtain
drops; but I suppose he only changes the expression, to show how he can
flourish with his Eloquence, and this main person dying so long before, is the
same as sinking. If so, there are instances of the main person disappearing in
the fourth Act, but they are vicious according the rules of the Drama, and
ought not to be followed: Tho we have seen one of the best Tragedies of the
last age, where the person who employs the greatest part of the Poem, never
appears at all, and yet he gives the Play its name, I mean the Pompey of
Corneille. Supposing, in short, the Relapser has in Loveless's vanishing, so
early erred in one part of his Conduct, it is not an error in the Chief, which
is the Moral; and his Virtue ought not to be questioned for his being too free
with the principles of his Art.


Bev. And pretends I have ridiculed the Morality. 16.



Sav. To ridicule was not in his power, he has railed at it, and been unfair to
the Author, in imposing a Fable and Moral on him, which he disowns with Reason,
and there is no mist cast before the Readers eyes in this business, but what he
conjured up himself.


Bev. I was not examining the Moral. 16.



Sav. I believe he did know what he was about, and I hope I shall convince you
that I am not too severe with him, for saying so in page 209 of the Short View,
he tells you, he will spend some more thoughts than ordinary on the Relapse, and
examins briefly the Fable, the Moral, and the Characters. The Fable he says, he
takes to be as follows.

Fashion, a lewd young Prodigal younger Brother, etc.

He tells you here, he was not examining the Moral, and in his Short View he
was. He agrees mightily with himself; however, this we ll excuse in him. If
that is the Fable of Virtue in danger, the Moral of the Play must necessarily
rise from it, and be in part what he says it is, how then can he say that he
did not examine the Moral, when he lays down what the Fable is so positively.
They are inseparable, and he could not talk of one without implying the other.
A Play cannot have two Actions and two Morals regularly, but some underplots (as
we call them) are by many inexperienc'd writers spun out to the length of the
main action. This Mr Collier mistook, as I told you at first, wilfully or
ignorantly, and thence very presumptuously affirmed the Play is miscalled. This
he is now ashamed of, and would disown, but he did examine the Moral in
examining the Fable, and to read the Page I have cited, will be enough to
satisfy you farther from his own words.


Bev. I say my remarks in this place are only upon the Manners in a Poetic
sense.


Sav. If 'twas in a Poetic sense, P. 131.
he should have distinguished between the Fable and the Manners. If he had said
the Manners of the Relapse were deficient, few would have contradicted him, but
he pretended to unravel the Fable, and point out the Moral, which in a Poetic
sense differ something from the manners. The Moral of a Play may be good, when
the Manners of part of the Characters are naught.


Bev. Thus it appears the blot he makes so much noise with, lies in his own
Tables.


Sav. You see how it appears so, and who can with patience read him talk
proudly of his Victory, where he is so evidently foiled, a man with common
assurance could not have kept his countenance, when he knows his own guilt, as
Mr Collier must do here, and yet as if there was no harm done, he drops the
argument in haste, and charitably sends the Vindicator away with his blessing,
which for my part I will not much value till I hear he is more cautious in
giving it.


Bev. 132.
These Authors endeavor to justify the Theater from the silence of the
Scriptures.


Sav. He is leaving of his Reply to the Vindicator, and comes to attack the
Stage in general, by answering a passage or two of those who defended it; till
we see something from him more to the purpose, than he has yet writ against
those Gentlemen, tho he threatens what he will do, we shall imagine he can do no
more; and I believe he will be weary of the dispute as soon as he sees the Book
we talked of some time ago, which confutes him in the sense of Antiquity, and
proves his observations on the Plays of the Ancient, false and malicious; but
whatever he does of this nature farther, he may be sure will be answered if
it is worth it; for the argument will still bear much more to be said for it,
than the Poets have yet thought necessary.


Bev. I believe some of those who wrote for the Stage, would have said more if
they could; their malice has appeared in their bitter Language, which was
accompanied, without doubt, with the utmost strength of their reasoning, that
no where appears extraordinary forcible.


Sav. The Prefaces to the Plays (if I may call them so) that have lately been
published, have not, I confess, been over serviceable to the cause, yet there
are enough who can vindicate the Stage when it shall require their service
against Mr Collier, and all opposers.


Bev. For ought I know that may be against the authority of the Nation.


Sav. When that concerns itself in the Controversy, the Vindicators will do
their best to satisfy it how far the Enemies of the Theater are mistaken. But
they cannot imagine the authority of this Kingdom will be imposed on by Faction
and Prejudice; that were to affront the Justice of a People, whose Arms have
brought her in to respect over the whole world, and made those who were her
Enemies, pretend most strictly to support her.


Bev. Shall I read the remaining 3 or 4 Pages of the Defense.


Sav. What you please, tho you and I may have an opportunity to discourse more
of these matters, when I shall endeavor to convince you of the
unreasonableness of our Zealots in their attempts against the Stage. If you
ever observed who were most warm against it, you found they were those who knew
nothing of the Theater; and it may be never saw any thing on a Stage, above the
Drolls in Smith-field, or the pranks of a Merry-Andrew, which to be sure they
reckon a better Entertainment, than a well-wrought Scene of a Comedy or
Tragedy, being indeed more suitable to their capacities. I could tell you of
some Gentlemen, who at the expense of their domestic Peace and Interest, would
make a Figure in the world, the meanness of whose Education added to their
Native ignorance, hardly qualifye 'em to judge of a Mountebanks Bill, and yet
these are disgusted with the Drama, which is too sensible a pleasure for their
narrow understandings; and people are always angry with what they cannot
understand. These are the Enemies of our most reasonable diversion; and
Religion is in this, as in all other popular cases, made the Instrument of
their Resentment, while to speak truth, their Intellects are more injured than
their Consciences. Fools and Coxcombs were ever at War with Wit; it is their
mortal Enemy, and they attack it in its most tender part, when they assault the
Theater. I am loath to look into future things, but I beg you to mind this,
that whenever the Controversy with the Stage shall grow universal, the division
will not be between the Godly and the Ungodly, but between the men of Sense,
and the Fools and Fops. If you resolve to go quite through with the Defense, let us
hasten to put it out of our way.


Bev. I am impatient to converse with you on this subject, for I fancy there is
a great deal to be said for reforming the Stage, and if that is impracticable
for silencing the Actors.


Sav. If there could be no reformation I should agree with you, but I suppose
you are not of that opinion: if you are, I ll do what I can to convert you, and
I believe I have studied this Affair more than you have.


Bev. Come, now for the Defense, I Will be as short as possible; and what think
you of the silence of the Scriptures, is this a warrant for the continuance of
Comedy.


Sav. This puts the Theater on an equal foot with other indifferent things,
which are not hurtful in themselves, such as Bowling, moderate Gaming and
Drinking, Music, and other Diversions, which are not injurious to a man's
Fortune or Conscience, but by the circumstances that may attend them.


Bev. P. 132.
Every Foreign sentence is not recommended by the bare mention.


Sav. And why all this Sophistry, if he contradicts his meaning so soon after?
Every sentence is not recommended, and who said it was? This is recommended, he
owns it himself, this Verse of Menander 's is moral and sententious, and
without doubt St Paul cited it to put the Christians upon their Guard. No body
infers from St Paul's use of one Verse, that he approved all that Menander
writ; but it is natural to infer from the Apostles consecrating this Verse, by
giving it a place in the Gospel, he approved of some things of Menander's, and
countenanced the Comic Writer, by serving himself of his words in the Law he
was to deliver to Christians. This is an argument that a Stage may be allowed
in a Christian Country, without offense to their Religion, when it is under the
regulation that the Roman Stage was at first, and ours ought to be at present.


Bev. I affirm that Plays are plainly condemned in Scripture, etc. P. 133.



Sav. They are no more condemned, than the immoderate use of any lawful
pleasure, or the abuse of the liberties of Conversation. When Plays are guilty
of Blasphemy or Lewdness they are forbidden, because Blasphemy and Smut (as
he is resolved to call it) are condemned in general; and if a man cannot talk
without talking lewdly, he is not allowed to talk at all; however, 'twould be
extravagant enough to infer from thence, that talking is a sin. You must
remember he said before, he was for Innocent Diversions, (speaking of the
Stage) and elsewhere, that singularity, cowardice, etc. might do; and yet here
he affirms, that Plays are plainly condemned in Scripture. If so, those
Diversions cannot be innocent, neither can Cowardice, Singularity, Covetousness,
etc. do on the Theater; and thus he is for Diversions which Scripture condemns.
Those parts of Comedy which Holy Writ condemns, are things which are every
where unlawful, and their coming from the Stage would not make 'em so, if they
had not been so before. He is not long in the same humor, sometimes for a
Drama, sometimes for none, but I hope in a little while no body will much
matter what he is for, since men of the best sense and best Morals that have
writ this age, allow and commend these Entertainments. La Bruyere, whom we
cannot quote too often, being a much more valuable Author than Mr Collier, or
the Bp of Meaux, has frequently spoke well of a regulated Stage, and seems to
wonder how it is possible that so fine a recreation should be made so useless,
as 'thas been in the hands of the Modern Poets.


Bev. This is plain enough, Plays are not priviledg'd to speak what is a crime
to be spoken elsewhere.


Sav. But when they are innocent, as most of Corneille's and Racine's Tragedies
are, and some of Moliere's Comedies, they are as warrantable from the silence
of the Scriptures as all other diversions. Innocence and Decency should be the
standard of Comedy and Tragedy, and since there are instances of Tragedies and
Comedies, which have been discreet and innocent none should argue for their
being unlawful, because there are many more which have not kept within those
bounds: after this rate there would be nothing in the world which ought not to
be condemned, since the most sacred things have been abused as often as the
Theater. Mr Collier has said as much to the purpose as the Bp of Meaux, whose
authority I take to be little better than his own. Moliere's Preface to his L'
Imposteur is so good an answer to that Prelate, that nothing can be said after
it on the subject.


Bev. You looked it over yesterday, pray read it in English, I am not so perfect
a Master of the French, that I will venture to hear it in the Original, lest I
should not understand it thoroughly.


Sav. I Will translate it as well as I can, at least I will give you his meaning.
Some scrupulous Sparks had got the Archbishop of Paris to forbid his Comedy the
Stage. Tartuff being a Hypocrite, who, to answer the Character, spoke abundance
of good things, at the same time that the audience knew him to be a Rascal.
This Moliere thought allowable, and that he erred in t no more against his
Religion than his Art, but the Colliers of those days were not of his opinion,
they cried aloud against the wickedness of the Author, and prevailed with the
Good Bishop to command, that it should not be represented. The case is the same
with ours, and the Preface one of the best I ever saw.

I know very well what these Gentlemen say in answer to this, they insinuate
that the Theater ought not to meddle with such matters. I ask under favor,
where they learnt this fine proposition, which they only suppose, and can in no
wise prove. On the contrary, it may without question be demonstrated, that the
Drama had its rise from Religion, and was a part of its Mysteries. The
Spaniards our neighbors, seldom celebrate a Festival without some Theatrical
representation, and even amongst us we derive its Birth from a Brotherhood, to
whom the Hotel of Burgundy at present belongs. This place was set a part for
representing the important Mysteries of our Faith; and there are Dramatical
pieces now extant, in Gothic Characters, written by a Dr of the Sorbonne. What
need have we to go so far, are not at this time Monsieur de Corneille's
Religious Pieces shown there with universal applause.

If the business of Comedy is to correct the Vices of Mankind, I know no reason
why any one should plead privilege. This Vice (Hypocrisy) is much more
dangerous in its consequences than any other, and we have seen the Theater very
successful in reformation. The most excellent treatises of Morality, are often
less powerful than the strokes of Satyr. Nothing reproves the greatest part of
Mankind more than painting their defects. It Is a great mortification to Vice to
be exposed to the laughter of the world. One can easily enough bear with
reproof, but cannot endure raillery, and most men had rather be thought wicked
than ridiculous. I am accused of putting Phrases of Piety into the mouth of my
Impostor, and how could I have drawn the Character of a Hypocrite without it.
It Is enough, I think, that I let the Audience know the guilty motives which
induced him to speak such things; and I have forborne other consecrated terms
which I thought every body would not care to hear put to an ill use. But in the
Fourth Act he delivers a pernicious Moral. Has not the world heard it often
repeated? Is there any thing new in my Comedy? And is there any reason to fear
that a thing so universally abhorred, should make an impression on their minds?
Have I made it dangerous by bringing it on the Theater, or given it an
authority by putting it in the mouth of a Villain. Sure there is no likelihood
of that, and the Age ought either to approve the Comedy of Tartuff, or condemn
all Comedies. This is what some persons lately have furiously aimed at, and the
Theater was never before so violently attackt: I cannot deny but several Fathers
of the Church have condemned the Stage; however, it must not be denied too that
many of them have handled this subject more tenderly. By which means their
authority is divided, and ruined by the division. All that can be drawn from
this diversity of opinion in persons enlightened by the the same Revelation is,
that they have judged differently of the Drama. The one considered it in its
purity, the other in its corruption, confounded with those filthy shows, which
were indeed beastly representations. In short, since we should discourse of
things, and not of words, and the greatest part of the opposition proceeds from
misunderstanding, we need only draw the Curtain, and behold the Stage as it is
in itself, to see whether it is really condemnable. Without doubt, every one
knows that Comedy is only an ingenious Poem, which by pleasant Lessons would
correct men's faults. How then can it be censured but with injustice; besides,
if we should hear what Antiquity says on this subject, we shall find the most
famous Philosophers have spoke in praise of the Theater, even those who profess
the severest wisdom, and were incessantly crying out against the Vices of the
age they lived in. We shall find Aristotle employed a great deal of time about
the Drama, and took care to reduce the method of writing Plays into precepts of
Art. We shall find that the greatest Heroes, and men of the highest Dignity,
have thought it glorious to write them, and some who have not disdained to act
in public what they composed in private. That Greece made the Esteem she had
for this Art illustrious, by the vast expense and the Superb Theaters she
honored it with, and that the same Art received afterward in Rome
extraordinary encouragement. I don't mean in Rome, debaucht under the liberty
of her Emperors, but Rome when strict in discipline under the wisdom of her
Consuls, and when the Roman Virtue was in its vigor. I own there has been a
time when the Drama was corrupted. And what is there in the world free from
Corruption? There Is nothing, be it never so innocent, which men have not made
Criminal. No art so wholesome, whose good intentions they have not reversed.
Nothing so good in its self, which they have not abused by putting it to an ill
use. Physic is an useful Science, and every body reveres it as one of the most
excellent things we have among us. However, there was a time when 'twas odious,
and has often been made use of in the Art of poisoning. Philosophy is a gift of
Heaven: 'Twas given us to raise our Souls to the knowledge of a God, by
contemplating what is wonderful in nature. Yet we are not ignorant that it has
frequently been put to other uses, and publicly employed in supporting
Impiety, even the most holy things have not escapt humane corruption. We see
Villains every day abusing Piety, and making it a means to bring about their
wicked designs; but we can distinguish as we ought the men from their
Profession. We don't mingle in a false consequence, the goodness of the thing
corrupted, with the malice of the Corrupter. We separate always the ill use
from the intentions of an Art, and as we don't think fit to forbid Physic,
because 'twas once banished from Rome nor Philosophy, for being publicly
condemned in Athens, so we should not condemn the Stage, bebecause 'twas
censured at a certain time; there were reasons for that censure, which have no
foundation now. I know there are some men of sense, (continues he a little
farther) who are so nice, that they cannot suffer any Plays whatever, who say,
that those which are most honest are most dangerous, that the passions the
Poets paint are the more hurtful, the more virtuous they appear, and that the
Soul is too much softened by such Representations. I don't see where is the harm,
if a man is softened at the sight of an honest passion. I own the degree of
Virtue to which they would mount us by their extraordinary insensibility, is
very exalted, but I question if Humane Nature in her own strength is capable of
such perfection; and if it is not better to endeavor to rectify and sweeten
humane passions, than quite extirpate them. I allow there are places which
persons should choose rather to frequent than the Theater; and if every thing
is blameable which does not directly relate to God and our Salvation, Plays
certainly ought not to be suffered, nor would we be sorry to see them condemned
with the rest. But supposing (what is certainly true) that Religious Exercises
should have some intervals, and men want recreation, I maintain none can be
made more innocent than Comedy.


Bev. What says he afterward?


Sav. Only a jest of the Prince of Conde's to the King on his Play.


Bev. Let us have it.


Sav. Eight days after his L' Imposteur was forbidden, a Piece was presented
the Court called Scaramouch the Hermit. The King going out, said to the Prince,
I would fain know why the men who are so scandalized at Moliere's Comedy, have
not a word to say against this of Scaramouch. The Prince replied, the reason is
the Comedy of Scaramouch plays with Heaven and Religion, for which these
Gentlemen are little concerned, but Moliere's plays on themselves, and that
they can by no means allow.


Bev. Monsieur de Meaux should have had this Preface before him when he set
himself to write against the Stage. He has business enough on his hands with
the Bishop of Cambray, perhaps that Controversy exhausted all his fine
reasoning, it is well for the Theater he was not at leisure to deal with it more
severely.


Sav. I never could have an extraordinary opinion of men, who are so extremely
charitable to Hypocrisy, as Mr Collier is, and the French Devotee's were in
Moliere's time. I am apt to suspect they speak in their own cause, and are not
so favorable to Hypocrites, but for the resemblance there is between them.


Sav. He tells us he has at present some business, or he would go on with Mr
Dennis.


Sav. I would be glad to know if this Gentleman did not leave it to others to
answer Mr Dennis, who he thinks has it more in their power to hurt him, I
should suspect he has been busy about Westminster Hall and given in his
Informations, but that I know he has an aversion to our Courts of Justice. The
adversary must excuse me for putting him in mind so frequently of a public
misfortune which once befell him: It does not at first sight look generous to
play upon a man's unhappiness; but while he seems to value himself on his error,
and insults the Age as if he had nothing to answer for; while he exclaims so
much against those who have always defended the Government to the utmost of
their power, and whose Wit has been ever severe with its enemies, one may
lawfully remember the World who this man is. I Am sure he has not made himself
an enemy, by affronting the Theater, who would not serve the King and Kingdom
with every thing which depends on him; and it is hard that a man who is the
Poets enemy because they are friends to the Government, should be suffered to
triumph over them, as he does in all places where his merit is not known. And
now we'll dismiss Mr Collier, where he does his Reader; I shall be glad if you
think he has as much reason to rejoice that he has done with us, as we have
that we have done with him.


Bev. I find there are a great many errors in his Books, and you have shown me
several places where his style is not so beautiful as I once thought it


Sav. I always hated to cavil about words, and could have objected against them
oftener than I have, if I was not ashamed of fighting with the wind. You might
have been more merry with his affectation and pretenses to Politeness, but that
I am not of the opinion he says the Poets are, Short View, P. 159.
that laughing and pleasure has an unlimited prerogative; which for the Grammar
of the Sentence I thought fit to make use of, and yet this fault is so obvious,
that a Schoolboy would not have slipped it in three Editions of a Book. Other
such mistakes I could have troubled you with, had not we found greater in this
argument.


Bev. Yet to do both of you Justice, I think still the man has Wit, and you
have Right of your side, what startled me most was, to find you were so close
on him in those things which one would have thought he must have understood,
and that you had the best of the Argument in matters of Religion.


Sav. You need not be surpised at this, it is easy to perceive how Mr Collier
spends his time in his Closet. His Language, as bad as it is, is copied from our
Plays; he imitates the brisk turn of their Repartees in his Sentences, and
their Wit in his Similies, but imitates them so awkardly, that at first sight
it is impossible to guess his Originals. I believe he has read as many Plays as
Sermons, and has studied Father Hedelin, Rimer's, Aristotle, and his Views of
Tragedy, Mr Dryden's Prefaces, and his Essay on Dramatick Poetry, as much as
the Fathers or their Successors. But no more of Mr Collier. I see it is near
Twelve, and I fancy you are prepared for your Dinner, if the Defense has not
spoilt your Stomach.


Bev. No fear of that, Sir, you will find I don't take the matter so much to
heart, tho I would indeed never live long in an error.


Sav. If so, you must not long be governed by Report; Fame is as whimsical as
Fortune, in the favors she bestows on her Votaries. Our Adversary is an
Example of this; but she serves them generally as Fortune serves her
favorites; she sets them down where she takes 'em up, which must certainly be
very pleasant to those that know what the men were, and what they deserved in
their intervals of reputation.


Bev. You go with me to the Play?


Sav. I have past my word, and I expect a friend after Dinner, who I Will engage
shall give us his Company, you will be pleased with his humor and worth. I Will
assure you he has no opinion of Mr Collier, for either of those Qualities, tho
he is the best natured man, and a man of as good sense as any I know.


Bev. His name.


Sav. You shall see him, and you will then be of of the same mind. Come, Sir,
we are expected.


Bev. I see we had not a minute to spare.


Sav. I show you the way.


The end of the third Dialogue.
The Fourth Dialogue.
Bevill, Savage, and Beaumont, Sav. It Is but three by my Watch, we shall be
early enough for the Play two hours hence, after a run of eight days we need
not fear being too much crowded.


Bev. You shall direct me; and I am the more willing to sit with you till then,
that we may make an end of the argument we engaged in.


Sav. The Stage, I warrant ye, 'that been the subject of most of the
Conversation of the Town for this last six months. The sage people in the City
Coffee-Houses have laid by their Politics, to consider how to pull down the
Theaters, and the very News-mongers have taken up the dispute.


Bev. How so, Sir, I hear of nothing published against the Playhouse lately,
but Mr Collier's Books, and the Stage Condemned.


Sav. Which they say was done by the Writer of the Flying-Post, and by the
resemblance there is in the style of that Paper, and the Book we mentioned, I
am am apt to believe it.


Sav. Have you read it?


Beau. I should not have asked you such a Question; if you have seen it you may
satisfy your self, I am not so over inquisitive, as to give my self the fatigue
of reading so many impertinent Sheets, especially after I had been informed who
wrote them. I knew the Character of the Spark before, and was sure it is not in
his power to do any thing useful or agreeable.


Sav. I know him, and tho I never heard till now that 'twas he who gave us the
Stage Condemned, yet I can almost be positive you are in the right. I read 20
or 30 pages of his Book, but his wretched Arguments, pitiful Style, and ill
Manners, tired me before I got half over 'em. His affronting the Church of
England in her Ministers, and abusing the Education of our Universities,
discover plain enough that this Author must be some Fellow or another born on
the other side of the Tweed.


Bev. You are very free with him; however, there are a great many who think
well of the Book, let who will write it.


Sav. I have not met with one so intolerably in the wrong, as to have the least
favor for this Republic an Letter Writer, and if you expect I should answer
what he has said, or any part on it, you must excuse me for disappointing you.


Bev. No, Sir, I never expected it from you, we can spend our time better, I
despise his performance, as much as you can, and could my self confound him.


Beau. Hold there, a person of his Forehead is not easily confounded.


Sav. That Is to be seen by his Writings.


Bev. Well Gentlemen, to have done with the News-monger, what think you after
all that Mr Collier has said, is there no necessity of a Reformation in the
Stage, must the Play-wrights be suffered to go on with their abuse of
Magistracy, Morals and Religion, and tho Mr Collier may have erred in several
things, is he not in the right in the main?


Beau. I cannot tell that, and am loath to give my opinion of reforming the
Drama, till I am sure the world will be satify'd with that: Whatever errors our
Comic Writers have been guilty of, their Enemies have not yet hit on 'em, at
least on any of the most material. It Is not in their power to ruin 'em but by
noise and force, and those who love their pleasure as well as I, are in the
wrong to give their Enemies any advantages over 'em, or put weapons in their
hands to hurt them. If the Stage ought to be corrected, the men of sense can
only put us in a way, and they will not set about it while there are such
powerful Parties declaring for no Plays at all.


Bev. I am not one of 'em, and should be glad to see some method proposed to
keep up both Houses, without endangering the virtue of their Audiences, and I
love their Entertainments too well to be willing to part with 'em, if they can
be maintained without offense to Manners or Conscience.


Beau. Which certainly they may, none ever doubted the contrary, that was able
to judge in this Affair, and those who attack this sort of Poetry, will
afterward find exceptions against the Muses in general. Music will next
offend 'em, and every one that has not a good ear or a tolerable judgment in
the art, will cry out against the danger of Fiddles and Hautboys.


Bev. That will be severe indeed.


Beau. I think the other is much more so. Music affords all its admirers a
wonderful delight, when they are truly touched with it; yet this delight goes
no farther than an amusement for the present. Whereas at a Dramatical
Representation the passions are wrought up so forcibly, and the Images appear
so lively, that the Impressions stick on the Audience, and may be advantageous
to them in their Conduct in the world. It Is strange, the Sages are so angry
with the Theater; are not there an hundred other Diversions more prejudicial to
a man's health and fortune? No body attempts to shut up our Tavern doors, and
yet without all manner of dispute, they give occasion to much more
Extravagance, Immorality, and Debauchery, than the Play Houses are charged
with. The Stage aims at bringing men to their sense, the Taverns assist them to
lose the little Reason they have; and yet they are so necessary in Commerce and
Society, that 'twould be monstrous to talk of prohibiting Wine, because some
Scowrers have been hanged for their drunken frolicks. Besides, a Bottle is a
leveller, a Blockhead can drink as much as a man of Wit, and in most of those
conversations, if there is any more respect paid to one than another, he that
carries off most Claret is the greatest man. The Wife and Great are sometimes
refreshed, and can debauch in the Taverns without scandal, but at the Theater
they would be soon discovered, and when they are there, they are not treated so
tenderly as to engage their good word. Gaming, which has ruined a thousand
Families of the best Extraction, made great numbers of Gentlemen Beggars, and
tempted so many of the fair to very odd excesses to support themselves under
their ill fortune, is a Vice which every one rails at, but no body attempts to
get rid on it.


Sav. The Gamesters are an easy, complaisant sort of people, they reflect on
the understandings of no man, and let others Intellects alone as long as their
own are spared. But your Wits are a malicious Generation, they will not forgive a
man his foppery, nor let a Fool impose himself any where for a Wit. They attack
the Coxcombs wherever they meet them, and fall foul on the Capacities of
some, who are thought extraordinary men in the Companies they frequent. The
Fools, and Knaves, Fops, and Hypocrites are by much the majority, no wonder
then if men of sense and honor find a multitude to oppose them.


Bev. But they are the honest men and men of Conscience, who set themselves
against the Playhouse; who are of the opinion that Plays are the great
instruments of Debauching youth. Mr Collier has awakened their zeal, and the
dispute is now whether they have reason.


Beau. I don't think that an honest and a sensible man can imagine so ridiculous
a thing, as that the Theaters are the Nurseries of Immorality, any more than
other Houses set apart for pleasure. All our pleasures have been of late
corrupted, even those that were designed to cure us of our Vices and Follies.
This proceeds from the licentiousness of the Age, and whence that proceeded,
any who are acquainted with the Liberty of the Restoration can inform you.


Bev. Well, since you own all our pleasures are corrupted, you allow the
Theater to be guilty with the rest: why then should it not be put down. You
will not pretend to have it kept up, because there are other places of
Recreation as dangerous, nor plead the looseness of our other diversions to
vindicate this.


Beau. No, Sir, but I must observe thence, that it is very odd for men to fall
on a pleasure which may be made useful, and at the same time let others remain
unattackt, which can never be rendered any thing more than agreeable to put a
profitable and pleasant thing quite down, because that done some mischief,
argues want of thought in those who pretend to it. As if there was no way of
preventing the ill consequence of the Stage, but by forbiding all Theatrical
representations.


Sav. I don't question but the very wise, and very zealous people, who declare
against the Drama, have those sentiments, and believe the only way to reform
'em is to silence the Poets.


Beau. They may believe what they will, zeal more than once has carried those
very wise people to judge of things above their reach. I have known a bigoted
Cavalier ridiculed by a Father of the Church, for his forwardness to correct
the Age, by ways that would destroy it. If men's Reason and Religion don't go
together, I shall not value what they pretend to in either.


Sav. It Is pleasant to hear some grave Sparks rail at the Stage, and condemn
all that speak for it, when if you ask them seriously, they shall own, they
never read the arguments on either side, nor saw a Play in their lives.


Bev. Granting the men who oppose the Theater are as great Blockheads as their
Adversaries would make 'em, Fools have sometimes been in the right, and it is no
matter if their fear of Satyr, or their Charity to the Age is the cause of
their aversion, provided their pretenses are well grounded.


Beau. This Gentleman sticks very close to us, he will not have the argument
thrown off; he brings us to our Text, when we have a mind to ramble. It Is not
that we cannot defend the proposition we laid down, that a Stage is useful, but
for my part I am't extremely fond to answer objections, which rather deserve to
be despised, and to take notice of them is to do 'em too much honor. I would
not that you should fancy, Sir, I reflect on what you have said, I Am sure you
speak other men's sentiments, and not your own.


Sav. My friend is of our opinion, but his acquaintance are all against him; he
does not study these things very often, and talks of 'em now that he may know
the better how to vindicate the Stage in the Company he keeps.


Beau. I shall be ready to give him all the satisfaction I can, but the
Gentleman's own reason will save us the trouble of a long argument, which I
should be loath to enter upon more for his own sake than ours.


Bev. You Will excuse me that, I desire you to continue this discourse. You have
heard what makes me so curious in this Affair, and I may by your assistance
save myself from a great deal of impertinence for the future.


Sav. Tho I am convinced that a Drama is or may be rendered profitable as well
as pleasant, and that ours, as faulty as it is, has not been instrumental in
debauching the Age, as much as Gaming-Houses and Taverns, yet I confess it
wants a reformation; however, I have not seen any thing offered toward it,
either reasonable or practicable. Some are for settling Supervisors over the
Theater, and in this they have not been over judicious in their choice. If a
man of no relish in Poetry has a power given him to cut and mangle the Plays
that are brought to him at his pleasure, this might do the Gentlemen's business
who are for no Theatrical Representations; for the Audience would be soon
disgusted with such dismembered pieces, and the Poets ashamed to own 'em. Such a
Critic would be most severe on what he least understood, and the Beauties of a
Play might suffer through his ignorance.


Bev. He should take cognizance of nothing but Profaneness, Immorality and
Indecency.


Beau. There are many persons to be found, who would be severe enough with the
appearance of Evil, if there was a good Pension settled on 'em to encourage
their Virtue: But I Am afraid our new Officer would in time be less important in
this case, than the person, who by his place is to examine all Comedies and
Tragedies, and leave out of any of 'em what he finds Profane, Immoral or
Indecent.


Bev. Has any one at present that power?


Beau. There Is never a Play acted, which is not licensed by his Majestys
Commission; and the same Commission regulated as it ought, is as sufficient to
bring the Stage to order, as a new one would be; and every Poet will much
rather submit to the decision of the Master of the Revels, than the humor of
an Author, who, because he can Rhyme an Ode or an Elegy, shall think himself
qualified to Govern the Drama, and judge arbitrarily of things above his
capacity. Besides, such a Director would soon be weary of his Post, he must
deal with a people who will not part with a tittle of their Writings without
very good reason, which you will imagine when you hear that one of them has
offered a Finger for half a Page, and a Limb for a whole one, and a man may not
be willing or able at all times to give a reason for his Criticism. He would
then be exposed to the malice of those who know how to revenge themselves on
all, that through ignorance or obstinacy oppress them.


Bev. I am told, one of considerable rank in Parnassus has offered his service.


Beau. Any one who has suffered from the Theater, and every one suffers that
has not succeeded there when he has attempted it, is not a proper person to be
set over it. He comes to his Government, resolved to treat it as a thing which
has affronted him, and 'twill be hard for the Poets to have their Enemy for
their Judge. Let those be Masters of the Stage, whose right it always was to
command it, and to whom it is natural for the Authors to submit. If they have
spared 'em too much, their own Masters may caution 'em to the contrary, who,
with a little care, may reform our dramatical representations, easier and
sooner than any new managers.


Bev. They take no notice of the ill things in our Comedies, since Mr Collier
came out. We have seen as lewd a a Farce as ever was acted at the Playhouse
suffered to be represented there.


Sav. I know what you mean; 'twas lewd and silly enough of conscience, but I
have been informed by some of the House, that 'twas Clandestinely brought on,
and the Character of the Play little known, even to those who took it; however,
the mischief it did, was not great, and it had much ado to keep up 3 or 4 days.


Beau. I hope all such pieces will meet with such treatment. The fault is more
in the Poets understanding than their Morals, and their Audiences are more
defective in their taste of Wit, than their approbation of Vice. When the Town
shall not be pleased with extravagant thoughts, irregular scenes, incoherent
metaphors, wild rants, monstrous characters, unnatural images, insipid as well
as brutal humors, Vice, Immorality, and Profaneness, will appear no more at
the Theater. When the senseless Ballads of one Writer, the impertinent brisk
Dialogues of another, the insufferable Fustian of a third, the Alsatian
Conversation, and mean rakelly sentiments of a fourth, the confused independent
scenes of this author, the grimace and postures of that shall be hist off the
Stage, Mr Collier's smut, ill manners, and irreligion, will vanish: Then good
Sense, true Wit, fine Humor, delicate Raillery, and polite Conversation, will
supply their place: Then Fools will be exposed to be laughed at, and not to be
imitated: Hypocrites will appear in odious colors, to adorn the Character of
truly Religious, and sincere Christians, and Knaves will make on the Stage no
better figure than they do at the Bar. It Is a difficult task for the Poets to
take their pictures from nature, and yet to give 'em a turn that may at once
delight and in struct. The Writers of Farce could never reach this: they have
all along been clapped for their wry mouths and apish Gestures. Their Audiences
have laughed at their folly, they mistook it for liking their Characters, and
this they have called pleasing and taking. Perhaps the upper Gallery has liked
their pictures, for Hemskirk's with the Mob, are preferable to Raphaels or
Titians, but it is preposterous for the people of sense and condition to be
directed by the crowd in their taste of Wit, or their favors on the Stage
Writers. The multitude may at first not agree with the men of sense, but tho
the majority be for a time against them, it is their prerogative to rule, and
their superior reason gives them a privilege to direct the public relish in
these matters, with whom the Multitude will in the end certainly fall in. If
the best part of the Town would no longer encourge illiterate Writers, but take
some care that they may be silenced and not starved, the men of Wit would then
be proud to please them. Emulation, the Mother of the most excellent
productions, would bring forth many more pleasant and instructive things than
we can expect, while Whim and Ribaldry are applauded, and those who write for
the Theater keep such bad Company. This is certain, no Poet ever erred against
Manners or Religion, but 'twas at the expense of his Art; those who know
nothing of it cannot help erring, for which reason they are not to be endured.
But the Masters of the Science will observe its precepts which them confine,
never to please, but in order to instruct. A Reformation in this is necessary,
which time only must accomplish, for men's understandings are not like their
actions, subject to Laws, nor any other discipline than Reproof and Satyr. The
Farce-makers are in a fair way to impose on the Town no longer. There are more
good Judges in Poetry and Music now than there ever were in England. Wit
declines in all the Southern Nations of Europe, where it flourished long before
it came to any perfection with us. The Dramatical pieces which are represented
on Foreign Theaters, will hardly even at Paris get credit with the Press. And
'twould be Northern policy to forbid an Art which we possess almost in
perfection, at least in a wonderful degree above our Neighbors, tho they are
by their Climates born to excel us. I have told you what I think of the Stage,
and if Mr Collier can help to correct its errors on these accounts, I Will answer
for t, that he shall have no reason to complain on any other.


Sav. I had an opportunity to speak something on this yesterday, and I was
absolutely of your opinion, that it is only those whose Wit is as scandalous to
the Stage as their Manners, who promote the disorders we find in our Drama.
It Is true, some men of better sense have descended to follow them in many
things, which the madness of Pit, Box, and Gallery has given success to. But
these Gentlemen have blushed at their own good Fortune, and been ashamed to be
applauded on those terms; applause is yet so charming, that there are few who
would not please on any. The Rants and things which have been out of nature in
our best Plays, are those places which are most clapped, the caprice of the
Audience has put the Poets on seeking for variety to the disadvantage of their
Art, and taking a liberty unknown to Aristotle or Horace their Masters. Good
Wits will be glad to find the Town inclinable to be diverted regularly, it is as
easy for them to give their Audience an inoffensive Entertainment as the
contrary. My Lord Ruscommon has laid it down for a Maxim in Poetry, that Want
of decency is want of sense. And none will presume to affirm that any thing
spoken against Religion is not indecent. The burlesquing Scripture and
ridiculing sacred things, swearing, wanton actions and expressions; and most of
Mr Collier's exceptions against our Plays, fall under this Charge. They are all
the height of indecency where the objections are just, and when the evil is
wrapped up in a double meaning, the hurt is the more dangerous; wherefore
Montaign is for being plain in all cases, the finess of the turn, makes the
Ladies sometimes listen to a passage, which had otherwise frighted 'em, and
they had startled at its being named; but a Pill is nevertheless nauseous for
being gilded, it only qualifies its appearance, and makes it the easier to be
swallowed. I don't say thus much to insinuate my self into the favor of Mr
Collier or his Advocates. I am not the first that made this discovery, neither
is the honor of finding out the liberty of the Stage Writers, to be attributed
to the Author of the Short View. Many hundreds had in common conversation said
more to the purpose before he broke silence, only they had not given themselves
the trouble to put their thoughts into such pert Sentences, and divided 'em
into Chapters; neitheir did they think it necessary to accuse the Stage or its
authors, of Crimes which they are not guilty of, as he has done. They charged
some things on the folly of the Poets, and some things on the licentiousness of
the Age. The Poets ever followed the humor of the times. In this they have
been too faulty. They ought to observe in what that humor is irregular, and
correct it, wherein our Comedies, as bad as they are, have in some measure been
serviceable. The Age was running mad after the foppery of the French Court,
which made abundance of young Fellows study how to ontvieone another in tawdry
and vanity Fops have been the continual sport of the Theater, and the name of
Bean, which was once used as a Title of honor, is enough now to draw the
Sparks Sword out of its Scabbard, as willing as it may be to stay there.
Manners have been much bettered in this point, by the tricks those Monkeys in
the form of men have played on the Stage. Affectation, the ruin of the best
endowments, has grown out of fashion, and nature been made the standard of our
words and actions. There is nothing more scandalous, than to stand out against
this reproof, and we can hardly meet with a Coxcomb daring enough to play his
fools part in public, since his Coat has been so plentifully colored by the
Poets red and yellow. The Grave Sages who are wedded to their Bands and
Trunk-breeches, are as little obliged to 'em as the Beaus, but they think a
Reformation in Clothes of no great consequence, and so perhaps will most who
shall hear this argument. It will seem trivial at first, but when we consider
of what importance the most wise and most potent States have thought
irregularity in dress, what Edicts were published by the Spartan and Roman
Commonwealths, how many Judgments have been denounced in Scripture against
wanton or superfluous habits; and how many Sermons in all Languages have been
preached on this subject, we shall not have so little opinion of the good our
Comedies do in this particular, as some men may fancy; they have brought us to
a decency in apparel, which, without it, I believe could have hardly been
accomplished by the severity of a Law: For this has made us willing to appear
like men. We have seen, and been convinced, of the weakness of the French in
valuing themselves on their Ribbonds and Feathers, and by common consent are
reduced to the most modest habit in the world; so much might be said, and a
great deal more for the present Stage. But since it is requisite, it should be
regulated, and easy to effect it, we'll not think of pretending to keep it on
its present establishment, unless it could not be brought into better order,
which is both feasible and convenient. I must confess I had rather have this
Stage than none at all; for I am in hopes that ill Plays and ill Writers will
be put out of countenance more and more every day, especially if the Author of
Love for Love, who is giving the world a new Comedy, shall continue to write,
or some other great Genius take up the Quarrel with Vice and Folly.


Bev. I preceive you lay the stress of the argument on the ignorance of the the
Writers, and not the lewdness of the Stage.


Beau. Most certainly. So much has been said by the best Pens, in vindicating
this kind of Poetry, which Aristotle prefers to Heroicks, that 'twould be
infamous to question whether Comedy or Tragedy are hurtful in themselves. I can
remember the definition of a great Critic of both Tragedy and Comedy. Tragedy,
he says, rectifies the use of the passions, by moderating Terror and Pity,
which are obstacles to Virtue. It teaches mankind that Vice never goes
unpunished; in representing a wicked man, such as Egistheus in the Electra of
Sophocles, punished for his Crimes, after he had for several years gloried in
his wickedness. It shows us, that the favors of Fortune, and worldly Grandeur,
are not real blessings, when we see an unfortunate Queen, like the Hecuba of
Euripides, lamenting her Condition in the most mournful accents. Comedy, which
is the image of common Conversation, corrects public defects, by showing the
ridiculousness of private. Aristophanes in his Harranguers, was merry with the
foolish vanity of Praxagora, only to cure other women of their vanity; and
Plautus had no other design in exposing the false bravery of a Braggo-docio, in
his Glorious Soldier, but to let the Roman Soldiers see in what true Valor
consisted. Thus says our Author, and let any one judge then if the Drama is
dangerous in it self: There can be no pretense that the Plays of the Ancients
were more instructive than ours, at least I Am sure their Comedies were not; and
the best of 'em to be represented on our Stage, would make but an insipid
entertainment. The Ancients, particularly Aristotle, have left very few
reflections on Comedy, either they did not admire that sort of writing so much
as we do, or else the Ridiculous was not brought to such perfection as the
Modern Italians, Spaniards, and French have given it, and the English much more
than either of 'em, or the Latin Comic Poets. If our Authors are excelled by
Plautus and Terence in some things, they have the advantage of 'em in more
Humor which was in a great degree unknown to the Roman Writers, is the
peculiar Talent of the English, and this is the most agreeable, and perhaps the
most useful part of Comedy. Yet tho the Latins were unacquainted with this
their notion of Comedy was quite different from the wise men of these times.
Comaedia multum profuit civitati: cum caveret unusquisque Culpam, ne spectaculo
caeteris esset, and demestico prob^o, says Donatus, who had never seen any
thing comparable to our Plain Dealer, a much better Play than was ever
presented to the people of Rome; and whoever reads it, and understands what he
reads, must confess that there are more good sense, useful Satyr, and
pleasantry in that Comedy, than in any of the Ancients, or perhaps in any one
Book that has been published in Europe since the restoration of Wit and
Learning, Rapin in his Reflections on Poetry owns, that Tragedy seems to be our
Talent, but gives those reasons for it, that discover plainly, he knew little of
our Language or Genius, which one may venture to affirm, are much more adapted
to the sublime than the French, and the Pathetick of our Tragedies, where the
passions have been well moved, is much above what they can boast of. Yet it is
not Terror only in which we excel 'em, and we are not too hard for them there,
because, as he insinuates, we are Insularies, and a people fond of Slaughter
and Cruelty, but from the greatness of our Minds and excellence of our Reason;
and this I hope I may say without being accused of complementing my Nation when
we don't deserve it. All that are conversant with Mr Dryden's All for Love, and
Oedipus. Shakespeare's Hamlet and Mackbeth, and part of Lee's Lucius Junius
Brutus, know that I am not guilty of the least flattery, and that they cannot
give an instance of one Play in French even of Corneille's, where the passion
of Terror is better touched, than in these Authors. The French fancy they are
particularly happy in moving Pity in their Tragedies, yet this passion has
appeared on our Stage as lively, as ever Racine brought it on theirs. Otway's
Venice Preserved, and Orphan, part of Lee's Brutus, some scenes of Mr
Southern's Fatal Marriage, and part of the Mourning Bride, are examples of as
penetrating tenderness as any we can find in the Berenice or Bajazet, or, in
short, in the best of Racine's pieces, who is most excellent when he is
touching that passion. You will not think this vindication of our Poets,
against the malice or ignorance of our Enemies foreign to our subject, 'twill
in some degree give weight to the argument. For if we have the advantage of our
Neighbors in things on which they value themselves most, 'twould be great
weakness to disencourage an Art, which may in time contribute to an Glory.


Bev. If the Art is not dangerous, as you have gone a great way in proving, I
should be sorry to see the Poets baulkt, or their Science suffer under scandal,
when it may enlarge our Reputation for Wit, which we have not till now been
much renowned for.


Beau. The Author of the Letter to Mr Congreve, who, if it is not Mr Collier, is
to be sure Mr Collier's bosom friend, and one of his own Coat, allows, that if
the Stage would have nothing to say to the Clergy, and their Cause, he would
think it no unjustifiable diversion, And adds, that a celebrated Female has
lately convinced the world in her Fatal Friendship, that 'iis possible to
entertain with all the judgment, wit and beauty of Poetry, without shocking our
senses with intolerable profaneness and obscenity. This from the mouth of an
Adversary is great condescension; for whoever wrote that Letter, 'twas done by
the approbation of the Short Viewer, as without doubt he recommended it to his
Bookseller, no that any one need value themselvest on the honor of being the
Author on it, and his approving such a Writer, is another proof of his Judgment
in polite Learning. This Gentleman tells Mr Congreve, 'twas not generous to
insult on his Adversaries misfortune, at the same time that in two or three
pages he shows his good will to do as much by him in his impotent raillery on
the presentment of the Quarter Sessions; however, no body takes his reflections
to touch any ones reputation so much as the Presenters, which I hope may be
said without danger of a praemunire. He adds, that tho Mr Collier might have
been liberal of his Absolutions, the Stage and those who write for it are like
to go without them. He should not have denied the Poets that favor till they
had asked it, and might very well have spared himself that opportunity of
showing his ill nature.


Sav. I never saw this pamphlet, but I perceive it is a merry one: Pray is there
nothing more in it as extraodinary?


Beau. Yes, he says, he could never meet with a Dramatick Poet that could write
good Prose.


Sav. That Is extremely new and surprising, I thought every one allowed the
Stage to be always a promoter of Eloquence.


Beau. You must excuse him, Language is out of his way, and Mr Collier wants
help too much himself to be able to assist another in his Style. What thinks
this Gentleman of Mr Dryden, Mr Waller, Mr Otway, Mr Tate, Mr Dennis, or indeed
of most that have written for the Stage. Those who have not succeeded for their
wit and humor, have yet been happier in their Language, than the best of other
Writers, whose profession requires them to be Eloquent (three or four
excepted.) The Play-writers have published very few things in Prose besides
their Plays, and I hope Dialogism is not a fault there. What they have done has
not been excelled by the most famous Essays, written by Mr Collier, or his
admirers, and I might drive this argument farther, but they will tell me it is
designed to affront the whole Clergy, whom I shall not reverence the less,
because the greatest part of 'em are not eminent for the Beauties of their
Style.


Bev. Have you seen the Bishop of Meaux's Book against the Stage?


Beau. I read it almost through lately, and the Prelate has shown more Piety than
Reason in his controversy. A man that shall condemn Marriage because it is the
end of an obscene passion, must be very nice in all things which relate to
Love: And 'twould be in vain to attempt vindicating the most innocent pleasures
with persons so over-scrupulous as this Bishop, or those whose zeal is as
celestial as Tertullian's: Who says we ought not to go to the Theater, because
the same hands are lifted up there to applaud an Actor, which we lift up to
Heaven in our Devotion. These are extraordinary examples of Virtue; they think
their abstinence will be serviceable to 'em hereafter, and make their good
works the ground of their hopes. I shall not give my self the trouble to
convert any persons whose Consciences are so squeamish, 'twill be best for all
that dare not think of Matrimony without blushing, nor clap what they like in
an Actor, or any other public performance of Music and Dancing, for fear of
profaining their Fingers, to avoid the least temptation of coming within the
Playhouse doors.


Bev. There Is not much in these objections. If the Bishop and the Father have
none more to the purpose I think the Stage justifiable against either of 'em.


Beau. You cannot expect any thing from persons who reason so odly. This is some
of the zeal which is without foundation, and which is more dangerous than the
liberty of the Theater, as it ought to be improved. There are several other
exceptions in the Father and the Bishop, but I did not think 'em weighty enough
to remember 'em, and you have them almost all in Mr Collier's Books.


Bev. Where we have found 'em of very little consequence, perhaps 'twas because
they were set with his; a good thing as well as a good man, may be spoilt by
ill Company.


Beau. Mr Collier has said nothing of his own, but what is more forcible than
either the Bishop of Meaux or Tertullian, and if you are convinced that what he
has alleged has been answered by those who have examined him, you need not be
at any pains to read either the one or the other, for their names are the most
powerful things you will meet with.


Bev. You would not leave the Theater on its present foot, without any
amendments.


Beau. I am very willing it should be amended, provided the Alterations will
not shake its foundation. I believe it may be put into a good method by those
who have the care on it. If their Masters observe them more curiously for the
future. Any other project for their regulation will be as fatal to 'em, as
projects are generally to the Affairs of the public, good for nothing but to
put things into confusion. I am told the men ought to sit in one place and the
women in another, that no woman should dare to appear at the Playhouse with a
Mask on, that a part of their profits should go to the poor, and that a Box
should be set up there as in the French Churches. The Actors should live like
Monks under the discipline of a Governor, and the Actresses talk through Grates
like so many Sisters, and that it should be criminal in them to speak to any
out of their Cue. These are fair notions, and become the sanctity of those
Reformers who can find faulst, but make more in amending 'em. When our Plays
are better writ, the people of both Sexes will find little time for their
intrigues. Ill women will not have patience to do penance three hours, for the
sake of picking up a Cully. They Will not endure to see themseves represented as
odious as their Characters are in themselves, nor suffer the lash of true Satyr
for a Supper and Coach-hire. The Theater will be as terrible to 'em as a House
of Correction. The Ladies will then come oftener to the Houses, and there will
be no need of complementing the Masks to get a full Pit. Those who make their
Dialogues with those Creatures, their Entertainment at the Theater, will
abandon it. When the temptation they had to come there ceases, and their places
will be filled by men of sense and honor, that cannot now with pleasure see the
brutality of such Blockheads treated so tenderly, as the Poets have used 'em
lately, to engage Company, and draw an Audience together. This change will come
of course when the writers for the Stage shall keep up to their Art, and
remember that they are not to please but in order to instruct. Religious
Assemblies will be then as fair an opportunity for the disorderly assignations
of ill women, as the Pit or Gallery, especially if Churches and Meeting Houses
are frequented by 'em now for those ends, which I suppose is too well known to
be questioned. If women will after this wear their Vizards at the Playhouse,
why may not they be allowed to do so there as well as elsewhere, and to take
away that liberty from 'em, would be a point of Reformation, which has nothing
in it but the form of Godliness. You Will pardon me for being so tedious on so
trivial an objection, which, if you will have it, I had rather relinquish than
make more words about it.


Sav. Well, what say you to the Poor, and the Actors and Actresses?


Beau. I know no more reason why the Actors should thrash and sweat for the
poor, than any other profession. Leave 'em at their choice, to be as charitable
as they please, and this I will venture to say for them, that they give more
away to their Brethren and their Families in want, and other good uses, than
any other profession whatever of their number. Those who would have 'em obliged
to dispose of part of their profits to the poor, ground their argument on a
supposition, that they live a lazy sort of a life, and their business only
contributes to our pleasures. By the way, you may be sure they know nothing of
their business when they think it is a lazy Employment. I question if a Thresher
in a Barn wastes himself more than it is necessary for a good Actor, or that any
employ is more laborious than that which takes up the thought so much as it
must do to learn, rehearse, and act their parts, especially such long ones, so
humorous or heroic as some of them are. If it is because their business
contributes only to our pleasure, why is there not here as in Holland, a Box
set up in every Ordinary, to receive the alms of the good fellows who carouse
there. The heat of the Wine often warms their Charity, and they hope to
compound for their debauches by their generosity to the poor. This is a very
whimsical piece of Devotion. How many other professions are there, and perhaps
manufactures, which are designed for nothing but our pleasures, where there is
not the least pretense of use unless for the bread they afford his Majestys
Subjects. And why are not the Ribbond-weavers, Feather-shops, Perfumers, and a
hundred more trades I could name, ordered to set aside a portion of their
gains, to make the Church Wardens and Overseers merry, and buy some new Gowns
and Badges for the neighboring Hospitals?


Sav. Well, Sir, since I see you are not weary of the dispute, let us hear what
you would have done with the Actors and Actresses. There are abundance will
tell you, they are an insufferable Generation, and will quote you Statutes
which has called 'em as many names as they do one another in a scuffle.


Beau. I am not one of those that set up for reforming the Age, I find it
difficult enough to keep my own actions free from censure, and if every body
would be careful how they give offense to Religion or Manners, we might save a
great many honest, well-meaning Gentlemen much trouble, and some select
Societies a vast charge to little purpose. Those who are paid for the good they
do, may study ways and means to reform the Players, and restore the Sobriety
and Chastity of Oliver's Soldiers among the Army; for my part, I consider I am
only accountable for my own errors. Those that suppose they are to answer for
the errors of other men, ought to take care that the Age is as innocent as may
be. Actors, as well as their Fellow Subjects, are liable to the Laws made
against Immorality and Profaneness. If the Statutes were decently and
impartially put in execution, the Players would be found as Governable as their
Neighbors. This is certain, their business is not of its self unlawful. We
have seen it proved, that the Drama is not only lawful but useful, of course
then the Actors are no otherwise guilty than for the Crimes which their folly
and looseness draw them into. And what Society of men is there who can plead
perfect innocence? Their temptations are not more extraordinary than other
men's, unless that their men and women converse behind the Scenes promiscuously,
which may tempt 'em to too much liberty: This may be easily provided against by
those who have the charge of the Theater. I believe Dancing-Schools and Balls
have debaucht more women, and women of much more importance as to their
families, tho the concern of every Soul is equal, than all the Play Houses in
Europe. The favors which the fair Sex have thrown away on some of the Actors,
and the countenance men of Quality have put on the Function, by allowing 'em to
be familiar with 'em, have been the occasion of the boldness of the men. They
have taken up notions of honor from their company and books, which not being
born with 'em, they could not well manage, and have occasioned several Riots,
that may be easily prevented; If Gentlemen were more cautious how they make an
acquaintance with 'em, not but that there are some of 'em even now (when I
believe the Companies are not the most innocent which ever were) who know very
well how to keep within their Character, and make themselves agreeable
wherever they come. The women are ruined by the fondness of some Fops to be
first in their good graces, and fancying it a high honor to have the smile of
a Roxana or Statira. Let the Scene keepers be charged as strictly as they can
to suffer no body to come among their Players. Let the Conversation of the
Stage be as narrowly watched as possible; and think on what ways you will to
make their men modest and their women chaste: but if this is not presently to
be effected, let us not lose a profitable and pleasant diversion, because there
are inconveniences attending it. You may by the same rule put down the Wells,
and make Tunbridge and Bath a Desert, if you would keep up no places where it is
probable men and women will intreague. Who is there that has any knowledge of
Bath, Tunbridge or Epsom, that has not heard of many unaccountable things done
there, and as long as the liberty of Conversation is general at the Wells or
elsewhere, there will be Amors, till the Age is of its self grown purer. We
might name he meetings at Islington, Lambeth, etc. but they are so infamous,
that they ought to be treated like the Consorts at Stepney or Moorfields. On
the whole, if I were to give my sentiments of the Stage, I should not make any
alteration in the form of its management as it is at present. I should be for
laying a mulct, or some other punishment, on those who are faulty in their
offices relating to it. The person who presides over the examining all Plays
should be answerable for the errors in them, as much as the Licencers of Books
were for what was offensive to Religion or the State, while the Press was under
their Jurisdiction. But as the ill consequences of things brought on the Stage,
which are injurious to Conscience or Government, are more dangerous than such
as are printed in the Books or Pamphlets which are published, so the punishment
should be severer than what has been laid on those offenders. And the Officer
in whose power it is to License or forbid any Play the Stage, ought to have some
consideration from the Poet for the risque he runs on his account. For let a
man be never so exact, something may escape him in the passions of a Tragedy,
or freedom of Comic conversation, which may not every where agree with our
duty to Heaven and our Neighbor. 'Twill be difficult for our Farce-makers to
do any thing which this person will think tolerable, when he is himself
narrowly observed. And I believe those that know better are so much ashamed of
the weakness they gave way to, that there will be no complaint against 'em for
the future. I must do Mr Collier the Justice to confess, I believe his Books
have been the occasion that the Town looked nicely into the Theater, and have
thence been disgusted with what they thought too vicious, which has deterred
many from venturing there lately and set the Poets on their guard how they run
into their former extravagance, or make sallies from their art any more to
please a herd of Fops and Scoundrels, whose company can neither support 'em,
nor their applause give 'em the least hopes of an eternal name. Their praise
will change with their humors, tho they will be constant to one character of
folly and lewdness, which will never get those who endeavor to please 'em any
lasting Credit, for nothing but true merit is immortal.


Bev. You have convinced me Gentlemen, of the unreasonableness of those people,
who are perpetually declaring against the Stage, and I must own my self of your
opinion, that its present Directors may be as serviceable toward freeing it
from Immorality and Profaneness, as any new person some would have set over it.
I have quite another notion of the art than I had a week ago, tho I was always
inclined to believe my self in the wrong, being extremely pleased with
Dramatical Representattons. We have had a drug of 'em lately, Women and Boys
have attempted to divert the Town. They have sometimes succeeded, which
encourages every little Rhimer to strut in Buskins. I am as much a Servant to
the fair, as the most complaisant, but they have never yet charmed me on the
Stage, unless with their Action. I could never compliment 'em at the expense of
my understanding, and love the Stage too well to flatter any one to write
for it, that I think cannot support it.


Sav. Then you would have no body write who is not fortunate?


Beau. Hold, I must answer for the Gentleman. A man may not be fortunate at one
time, and yet succeed at another. An Audience may be in an ill humor one day,
and in too good a one the next. How many things have taken and been damned out
of a whim. Where an author keeps to nature he must first or last please, and
instruction will always accompany the pleasure.


Bev. You forgot where we were to adjourn, it is near Five, and I am loath to
miss the opportunity of having your company at the Play.


Sav. I am engaged to go with you, and I would not have us part now, till we
have seen it together.


Beau. When I come out 'twas to spend the evening with you, and I think we
cannot do it better.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
P 5. l. 18. r prodesse volunt: p. 21. l 8. r. delectare Poetae p. 29. l 5.
deie on: p. 30 l. 27. r. Lavinia: p. 40. l. 7. r. lived: p. 43. l. 8. r. at a
visit: p. 50. l. 8. r. wafting: p. 59. l 24. r. pitiful mirth: p. 62. l. 12. r.
his own: p. 73. l. 6. dele in: p. 121. l. 22. r. if he had: p. 127. l. 15. add
not: p. 137. l. 10. r. decent and innocent: p. 142. l. 6. r. professed: p. 159.
l. 3. r. thas done: p. 163. l. 1. r. or obstinacy: p. 173. l. 14. r. Heroic:
p. 175. l. 18. r. more.

There are some other Print-faults, which the Reader will easily correct.


