ARTICLES OF HIGH MISDEMEANOUR Humbly Offered and Presented to the
Consideration of His SACRED MAJESTY, and the Right Honorable the LORDS and
others of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, against Sir WILLIAM
SCROGGS, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench,
Westminster, as follows:
By Dr. TITUS OATS, etc.
I. THat the said Lord Chief Justice, contrary to his Oath, the Duty of his
place, and in contempt of the King, his Crown and Dignity, did set at liberty
several persons accused upon Oath before him of High Treason, without their
being Tried, or otherwise Legally acquitted, as namely, the Lord Brudnel, etc.

II. That at the Trial of Sir George Wakeman and others, in the Sessions House
in the Old Baily, for High Treason, the said Lord Chief Justice (according to
the Dignity of his place) managing the said Trial, did Brow-beat and curb
Doctor Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlowe, two of the principal Witnesses for
the King in that Case, and did encourage the Jury Impannelled and Sworn to try
the said Malefactors, against the said Witnesses, by his public speaking
slightly and abusively of them and their Evidence, and in the misrepeating and
omitting most material parts of their Evidence; whereby the said parties
indicted, were by the said Jury acquitted of the Fact charged then against
them, and fully proved by the said Witnesses.

III. That the said Lord Chief Justice, after the said Trial of the said Sir
George Wakeman and others, for High Treason as aforesaid, in the further abuse
of the said Doctor Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlowe, and in their great
disparagement, speaking of them, (said) That before the Trial of Sir George
Wakeman (meaning the aforesaid Trial) the Witnesses, (meaning the said Doctor
Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlowe) were to be believed; But that at and after
the said Trial they were not to be believed by him, nor should not be believed
by him; or to that very Effect.

IV. That the said Lord Chief Justice, by color of his Office has taken upon
him the power to Oppress by Imprisoning his Majesty's Loyal Subjects; namely,
Henry Care, for the writing and causing to be printed diverse Single-sheet Books
in English, called The Packet of Advice from Rome, for the Information and
discovering of the Idolatries, Errors and Impieties of the Romish Church, to
his Majesty's Loyal and Obedient Protestant Subjects, (in this Juncture of
Affairs very useful) although the said Lord Chief Justice neither did nor
could allege or charge the said Care with any thing contained in the said
Book, that was any way Criminal, or derogatory to his Majesty, his Laws, Crown
and Dignity, and refused to take very good Bail for him, though offered, and
afterward less Bail taken for him upon his Habeas Corpus in Court, but by the
said Lord Chief Justice his means he was continued bound all the Term, and to
his Good Behavior, and at the end thereof until the next Term, although no
particular Crime was or could be proved against him, or laid to his charge.

V. That to the great Oppression of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, he the said
Lord Chief Justice, contrary to Law, and manifest breach of his Oath, has
without any reasonable cause imprisoned a Feme Covert, and also diverse other
his Majesty's said Subjects, and refused to take Bail though tendered, and the
matter Bailable, as in the Case of Mrs. Jane Curtis, Mr. Francis Smith, etc.

VI. That the said Lord Chief Justice is very much addicted to Swearing and
Cursing in his common Discourse, and to Drink to Excess, to the great
disparagement of the Dignity and Gravity of his said place: He did in his
common Discourse at Dinner, at a Gentleman's house of Quality, publicly and
openly use and utter many Oaths and Curses, and there drank to Excess.

VII. That Charles Price being accused upon Oath before him the said Lord Chief
Justice, to be a Popish Priest and Jesuit, and imprisoned for the same, and
also diverse other persons accused upon Oath for High Treason, he the said Lord
Chief Justice upon Bail delivered, without consulting his Majesty's Council or
his Witnesses, and against their consents, diverse of which said persons have
not since appeared, but have forfeited their Recognizances, and the persons not
to be found.

VIII. That the said Lord Chief Justice, to the great discouragement of his
Majesty's Loyal Protestant Subjects, and to the manifest encouragement of the
Roman Catholic Subjects, when Informations have been duly and legally given
to him, of the Abode or Person of any Popish Priest or Jesuit, he has in a
slighting and scornful manner refused the same, and bid the Informer go to Sir
William Waller who busied himself in such matters mainly.

IX. That at the Trial of Knox and Lane at the Bar of the Kings Bench Court,
for their Misdemeanour in endeavoring to take away the Credit of Doctor Titus
Oats and Mr. William Bedlowe, two of the principal Witnesses for his Majesty,
in the proving of the Conspiracy and Conspirators against his Majesty's Life,
the Government of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, the
Destruction of the Protestants and the Protestant Religion, and introducing and
settling of Popery there; although the Evidence was so full and clear against
them, that the Jury found them Guilty without going from the Bar, yet the said
Lord Chief Justice in further disparagement and disparaging of the Evidence of
the said Doctor Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlowe, would not nor did not give
any Charge to the said Jury therein, but rose up suddenly after the Evidence
closed by the Council, and left the said Court abruptly, before the said Jury
had given in the same.

X That the said Lord Chief Justice knowing that one William Osborn was in the
Conspiracy and contrivance with the said Knox and Lane (in the last Article
mentioned) to take away the Credit of the said Doctor Titus Oats and Mr.
William Bedlow; And knowing the said Doctor Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlowe
to be material Witnesses for his Majesty in proving of the Conspiracy and
Conspirators in the said last Article mentioned; And had been so against
several of the said Conspirators that had been tried, and were to be so against
several others of the said Conspirators that were impeached or accused for the
said high Treason, and were to be tried for the same; and knowing the said
William Osburn had been detected before the Lords in Parliament assembled for
his said Conspiracy and contrivance with the said Knox and Lane, and that by
his own Oath thereupon denying the fact in their said Conspiracy and
Contrivance to be true; Yet out of his Malice to the said Doctor Titus Oats
and Mr. William Bedlowe, and in as much as in him lay, to endeavor the
disparagement if not the suppressing of the further discovery of that hellish
and damnable Plot, he the said Lord Chief Justice without the knowledge consent
or approbation of his Majesty or any of his Learned Council in the Law, or the
said Doctor Titus Oats or Mr. William Bedlowe, did voluntarily give the said
William Osborn liberty to make an Affidavit before him upon Oath of the truth
of the said Fact he had before as aforesaid denied upon his Oath, with intent
that the same might be made use of against the said Doctor Titus Oats and Mr.
William Bedlowe, to their disparagement, and the apparent prejudice of his
Majesty against the said Conspirators in the said High Treason.

That the said Lord Chief Justice to manifest his slighting Opinion of the
Evidence of the said Doctor Titus Oats and Mr. Bedlowe, in the presence of his
Sacred Majesty and the Right Honorable the Lords and others of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, did dare to say, That he had thought Doctor
Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlowe always had an Accusation ready against any
Body.

That at the last Assize holden at Monmouth, the said Lord Chief Justice in the
presence of several Justices of the Peace for the said County, did say to Mr.
William Bedlowe, that he did believe in his Conscience that Richard Langhorn
whom he condemned, died wrongfully, to the great disparagement of his Majestyes
Crown and Dignity, the Justice of the Court, the Jury and Evidence.

That the said Lord Chief Justice, contrary to the Dignity of his Place, did
make Merchandise of the Trials of certain Priests to be tried in
Staffordshire, and took Twenty Guinnies in Earnest, and then sold the said
Trials to other persons, refusing to return the said Twenty Guinnies to those
from whom he received them: And furthermore, before the Trial of Sir George
Wakeman, he the said Lord Chief Justice did bargain with two Booksellers for
one hundred and fifty Guinnies for them to print the Trials, and in case they
would not lay down the Money before he went into the Court, he would not go
into the Court, but would go into the Country: And if the said Trial by reason
of its length could not be finished in one day, he would have one hundred
Guinnies more; or words to that very Effect.

London, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1680.


