ARTICLES OF High Misdemeanors, Humbly offered and Presented to the
Consideration of His Most Sacred Majesty, AND HIS Most Honorable Privy
COUNCIL, AGAINST Sir William Scrogs Lord Chief Justice of the KINGS BENCH,
Exhibited by Dr, Oats, and Captain Bedlow, Together with his Lordships Answer
thereunto.
I.
THat the said Lord Chief Justice, contrary to his Oath, the Duty of his Place,
in contempt of the King, his Crown and Dignity, did set at Liberty several
persons accused upon Oath before him of High Treason, without their being ever
Tried, or otherwise acquitted; as namely the Lord Brudenell, etc.

II.
That at the Trial of Sir George Wakeman and others, at the Sessions House in
the Old Bailey, for High Treason, the said Lord Chief Justice (according to the
Dignity of his place) managing the said Trial, did brow-beat and curb Dr. Titus
Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, two of the principal Witnesses for the King in
that Case, and encourage the Jury impanelled and sworn to try the Malefactors,
against the said Witnesses, by his public speaking slightly and abusively
against them and their Evidence, and the mis-repeating and omitting of material
parts of their Evidence, whereby the parties Indicted were by the said Jury
acquitted of the Fact then charged against them, and fully proved by the said
Witnesses.

III.
That the said Lord Chief Justice, after the Trial of the said Sir George
Wakeman and others for High Treason as aforesaid, in the further abuse of the
said Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, and in their great disparagement
speaking of them, said, That before the Trial of Sir George Wakemen (meaning
the aforesaid Trial) the Witnesses (meaning the aforesaid Dr. Titus Oats and
the said Mr. William Bedlow) were to be believed, but that at and after the
said Trial, they were not to be believed by him, nor should not be believed by
him; or to that very effect.

IV.
That the said Lord Chief Justice, by reason of his Office, has taken upon him
the power to oppress by Imprisonment his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, namely Henry
Care, for writing and causing to be printed diverse single-sheet Books in
English, called The Packet of Advice from Rome, for the information and
discovery of the Idolatrous Errors and Impieties of the Romish Church, to his
Majesty's Loyal and obedient Protestant Subjects, (in this conjucture of time
very useful) although the said Lord Chief Justice neither did, not could
allege or charge the said Care with any thing contained in the said Book, that
was any ways criminal or derogatory to his Majesty's Laws, Crown or Dignity;
and refuses to take very good Bail for him, though offered, and afterward less
Bail taken for him upon his Habeas Corpus in Court: But by the said Lord Chief
Justice's means, he was continued bound all the Term to his good behavior, and
at the end thereof until the next Term, although no particular Crime was or
could be proved against him, or laid to his charge.

V.
That to the great oppression of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, the said Lord
Chief Justice, contrary to Law, and in manifest breach of his Oath, has
without any reasonable cause imprisoned a Feme Covert, and also diverse other
his Majesty's said Subjects, and refused to take Bail, though tendered, and the
Matter Bailable, as in the case of Mrs. Jane Curtis, Mr. Francis Smith, etc.

VI.
That the said Lord Chief Justice is very much addicted to Swearing and Cursing
in his common discourse, and to drink to excess, to the great disparagement of
the Dignity and Gravity of his said place. He did in his common discourse at
Dinner at a Gentleman's house of Quality, publicly and openly use and utter
many Oaths and Curses, and there drink to excess.

VII.
That Charles Price being accused upon Oath, before the said Lord Chief Justice
to be a Popish Priest and Jesuit, and Imprisoned for the same, and also diverse
other Persons accused upon Oath for High Treason, as namely Sir Francis
Mannock, Richard Vaughan Esquire and Daniel Arther Merchant, the said Lord Chief
Justice set at large upon Bail, without consulting his Majesty's Council, or
his witnesses, and against their consent, diverse of which Persons have not
since appeared, but have forfeited their Recognizances, and the persons not to
be found.

VIII.
That the said Lord Chief Justice, to the great discouragement of his Majesty's
Loyal Protestant Subjects, to the manifest Encouragement of the Roman Catholic
Subjects, when Information has been duly and legally given to him of the
abode, or person of a Popish Priest or Jesuit, and a Warrant desired from him
to take or search for such Priests or Jesuits; he has in a slighting and
scornful manner refused the same, and bid the Informer go to Sir William
Waller, who busied himself in such matters mainly.

IX.
That at the Trial of Knox and Lane, at the Bar of the Kings-Bench-Court, for
their misdemeanors, in endeavoring to take away the Credit of Dr. Titus Oats,
and Mr. William Bedlow, two of the principal Witnesses for his Majesty, in the
proving of the Conspiracy and Conspirators against his Majesty's Life, and
Government of these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the destruction
of the Protestants and Protestant Religion, and introducing and settling of
Popery there, although the Evidence was so full and clear against them, that
the Jury found them guilty without going from the Bar; yet the said Lord Chief
Justice, in further discouragement and disparaging the Evidence of the said Dr.
Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, would not, nor did not give any Charge to
the Jury therein, but rose up suddenly, after the Evidence closed by the
Council, and left the said Court abruptly, before the said Jury had given in
their Verdict.

X.
That the said Lord Chief Justice, knowing that one Will. Osborn was in the
Conspiracy and Contrivance with the said Knox and Lane, in the last Article
mentioned, to take away the Credit of the said Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William
Bedlow, and knowing the said Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow to be
material Witnesses for his Majesty, in proving of the Conspiracy and
Conspirators in the said last Article mentioned, and had been so against
several of the said Conspirators that had been tried, and were to be so against
several others of the said Conspirators that were impeached or accused for the
said High Treason, and were to be tried for the same; and knowing the said
Will. Osborn had been detected before the Lords in Parliament assembled, for
his said Conspiracy and Contrivance with the said Knox and Lane; and that upon
his own Oath, thereupon denying the Fact in their said Conspiracy and
Contrivance to be true, yet out of his malice to the said Dr. Titus Oats. and
Mr. William Bedlow, and in as much as in him lay to endeavor the
disparagement, if not the suppressing of the further discovery of that Hellish
and damnable Plot, the said Lord Chief Justice, without the knowledge, consent,
or approbation of his Majesty, or any of his Learned Council in the Law, or the
said Dr. Titus Oats, or Mr. William Bedlow, did voluntarily give the said
Osborn liberty to make an Affidavit before him upon Oath, of the truth of the
said Fact, he had before as aforesaid denied upon his Oath, with intent that
the same might be made use of against the said Dr. Titus Oats, and Mr. William
Bedlow, to their disparagement, and the apparent prejudice of his Majesty,
against the said Conspirators, in the said High Treason.

XI.
That he the said Lord Chief Justice, to manifest his slighting opinion of the
Evidence of the said Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, in the presence of
his most Sacred Majesty, and the Right Honorable the Lords and others of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, did dare to say, That he had thought
that Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow always had an accusation ready
against any body.

XII.
That at the Assize holden at Monmouth last, the said Lord Chief Justice, in
the presence of several Justices of the Peace for the said County, did say to
Mr. William Bedlow, that he did believe in his Conscience, that Richard
Langhorn, whom he condemned, died wrongfully, to the great disparagement of his
Majesty's Crown and Dignity, the Justice of the Court, the Jury and Evidence.

XIII.
That the said Lord Chief Justice, contrary to the Dignity of his Place, did
make Merchandise of the Trials of certain Priests to be tried in Staffordshire,
and took twenty Guinneys in earnest; then sold the said Trials to other
persons, refusing to return the said twenty Guinneys to those from whom he had
received them. And furthermore, before the Trial of Sir George Wakeman, he the
said Lord Chief Justice did bargain with two Booksellers for one hundred and
fifty Guinneys for them to Print the Trials, and in case they would not lay
down the Money before he went into the Court, he would not go into the Court,
but would go into the Country; and if the said Trial, by reason of its length,
could not be finished in one day, he would have a hundred Guinneys more, or to
that very effect.

THE ANSWER OF Sr William Scroggs Knight LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE King's Bench, TO
THE ARTICLES OF Mr. TITUS OATS AND Mr. WILLIAM BEDLOE.
1. TO the first he says, That the Lord Brudnell was Bailed by the Court of
the King's Bench in open Court, and afterward by the Court discharged; with
this, See the Rules of Court.
That William Bedloe did importune the Lord Westmoreland to get the said Lord
Brudnell discharged, for that he had nothing to say against him, as he said to
the Lord Westmoreland.

2. To the second he says, That as to his omitting or misrepeating the
Evidence at Sir George Wakeman's Trial, it is a reflection upon the whole
Court, to suppose it true, and that they should let it pass. But he says, that
Mr. Oats being asked at that Trial why he did not charge Sir George Wakeman at
the Council Table with a Letter under his own hand concerning the Death of the
King, he answered, He did not know but that he did: To which it was replied, It
is plain he did not; for then the Council would have committed him. To which
Mr. Oats replied, That that Council would commit no body for the Plot; which
might be the cause of the misdemeanour of frowning in the Articles mentioned.

3. To the third he says, He does not remember that ever he expressed much
concerning their Credit before their Trial; but that there were some passages
at that Trial which gave him great cause of doubt; which he hopes he might do,
without making it an Article of Mismeanour.

4. and 5. To the fourth and fifth he says, That the Persons in the Articles
mentioned, were committed by him for publishing several Libellous and
Scandalous Papers, which were proved against them upon Oath; which Commitments,
even of a Feme Covert also, notwithstanding Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe's Skill,
were according to Law: though there is no Law for these persons to call me to
account for Judicial acts done upon other men.

6. To the sixth, which is an insolent Scandal, he refers himself to the
testimony of that Gentleman of Quality, whoever he be.

7. To the seventh he says, That the persons in this Article were Bayled and
discharged by the Court, where the Attorney General was first called; but
indeed Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe's Consent was not asked.

8. To the eighth, he says, He conceives himself not obliged to do all the
business that Justices of the Peace may do; and though without an offense he
might have given such an answer as is mentioned, yet he did not, but a servant
of his did.

9. To the ninth he says, That when the Cause was tried, he told the Jury the
matter was plain, and so did the rest of the Court; upon which he went away,
without any Complement to Mr. Oats, to try Causes in London.

10. To the tenth he says, that Osbourne made only two Affidavits before him,
the substance of one was, That one Bowring a servant to Mr. Oats had said,
that he had heard Mr. Oats say, That the Kingdom of England would never
flourish, until it became Elective, and the Kings chosen by the People. The
other Affidavit was, when he was sent to him by an Order of Council to be
Examined, wherein amongst other things he Swears, That though at the Trial of
Knox and Lane, it was asked where Osborne was, and Mr. Oats his Counsel
answered that he was fled, yet Osborne swears, that he at that time was at his
Fathers House in the Country, and that Mr. Oats knew it; That he took his
leave of him the day before he went, and told whither he went, and saw a Letter
wrote by Mr. Oats to his Father to send for him; notwithstanding it was carred
at the Trial as if he had been fled no man knew whither; so that the Affidavit
which the Article charge me for permitting to be made, was not Sworn before
me.

11. He says, it is more to be wondered how Mr. Oats should dare to Charge
that as an Article of Misdeameanour, which was said in the Kings presence, and
yet repeated falfe too.

12. That at Monmouth Assizes he did tell Mr. Bedloe, that he was more
unsatisfied about Mr. Langhorns Trial than all the rest; and the rather, for
that he was credibly informed since the Trial, that Mr. Langhorns Study was so
situated, that he that walked in his Chamber could not see Mr. Langhorne write
in his Study: which was Mr. Bedloes Evidence.

13. He says, the matter complained of is a mere Contract with other Men, of
which he thinks himself not bound to give Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe any other
Account, but that by the taking of Twenty Guinies he lost forty; and that his
backwardness to go into Court to Wakemans Trial, makes it look as if he had not
had Ten thousand pound to favor Wakeman in this Trial.

If these Articles shall appear to your Majesty to be Frivolous, or Scandalous,
or not true; I humbly pray your Majesty's just Resentment thereon, in HONOR TO
YOUR COURTS AND GOVERNMENT.

And that such an unknown Attempt may not go unpunished; That the Promoters may
be left to be proceeded against according to Law.

The Articles of Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedloe, against the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, were heard this 21th of January, 1679. before the King and
Council; and upon the hearing of both sides, Dr. Oats and Captain Bedloe are
left to be proceeded against according to Law.

FINIS.

