ARTICLES OF High Misdemeanors Humbly Offered and Presented to the
Consideration of His Sacred Majesty, and the Right Honorable the Lords, and
others of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, AGAINST Sir William
Scroggs Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of King's Bench
Westminster, as follows;
I. THat the said Lord Chief Justice, contrary to his Oath, the duty of his
Place, and in contempt of the King his Crown and Dignity, did set at Liberty
several persons accused upon Oath before him of High Treason, without their
being Tried or otherwise Legally acquitted, as namely the Lord Brudnell, etc.

II. That at the Trial of Sir George Wakeman, and others, in the Sessions House
in the Old Baily for High Treason, the said Lord Chief Justice (according to
the Dignity of his Place) managing the said Trial, did Browbeat and Curb Doctor
Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, two of the principal Witnesses for the King
in that Case, and did encourage the Jury impannelled, and sworn to try the said
Malefactors against the said Witnesses by his public speaking slightly and
abusively of them, and their Evidence, and in the misrepeating and omitting
most material parts of their Evidences, whereby the said parties indicted were
by the said Jury acquitted of the Fact charged then against them, and fully
proved by the said Witnesses.

III. That the said Lord Chief Justice after the said Trial of the said Sir
George Wakeman and others for High Treason, as aforesaid, in the further abuse
of the said Doctor Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, and in their great
disparagement, speaking of them, said, That before the Trial of Sir George
Wakeman (meaning the aforesaid Trial) the Witnesses (meaning the said Doctor
Titus Oats and the said Mr. William Bedlow) were to be believed, But that at
and after the said Trial they were not to be believed by him, nor should not be
believed by him, or to that very effect.

IV. That the said Lord Chief Justice, by color of his Office, has taken upon
him the Power to oppress, by imprisoning his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, namely
Henry Care, for the Writing and causing to be Printed diverse single sheet-Books
in English, called The Packet of Advice from Rome, for the Information and
discovery of the Idolatries, Errors and Impieties of the Romish Church, to his
Majesty's Loyal* and Obedient Protestant Subjects (in this juncture of Affairs
very useful) although the said Lord Chief Justice neither did, nor could
allege or charge the said Care with any thing contained in the said Book that
was any way criminal or deregatory to his Majesty, his Laws, Crown or Dignity,
and refused to take very good Bail for him, though offered, and afterward less
Bail taken for him upon his Habeas Corpus in Court. But by the Lord Chief
Justice his means he was continued bound all the Term, and to his good
behavior, and at the end thereof until the next Term* although no particular
Crime was or could be proved against him, or laid to his Charge.

V. That to the great Oppression of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, he the said
Lord Chief Justice contrary to Law, and manifest breach of his Oath, has
without any reasonable Cause imprisoned a Feme Covert, and also diverse other
his Majesty's said Subjects, and refused to take Bail though tendered, and the
matter Bailable; as in the Case of Mrs. Jane Curtis, Mr. Francis Smith, and
others.

VI. That the said Lord Chief Justice is very much addicted to Swearing and
Cursing in his common Discourse, and to Drink to Excess, to the great
disparagement of the Dignity and Gravity of his said Place; he did in his
common Discourse at Dinner, at a Gentleman's House of Quality, publicly and
openly use and utter many Curses, and there Drink to Excess.

VII. That Charles Price being accused upon Oath* before him the said Lord
Chief Justice, to be a Popish Priest and Jesuit, and Imprisoned for the same:
and also diverse other Persons accused upon Oath for High Treason, as namely Sir
Francis Mannock, Richard Vaughan Esquire Daniel Arthur Merchant; he the said Lord
Chief Justice set at large upon Bail, without consulting his Majesty's Council
or his Witnesses, and against their Consents, diverse of which said Persons have
not since appeared, but have forfeited their Recognizances and the Persons not
to be found.

VIII. That the said Lord Chief Justice, to the great discouragement of his
Majesty's Royal Protestant Subjects, and to the manifest encouragement of the
Roman Catholic Subjects, when Information has been Duly and Legally given to
him of the Abode or Person of any Popish Priest or Jesuit, and a Warrant
desired from him to take or search for such Priest or Jesuit, he has in a
sleighting and scornful manner refused the same, and and the Informer go to Sir
William Waller who busied himself in such matters, as namely --

IX. That at the Trial of Knox and Lane, at the Bar of the Kings Bench-Court,
for their Misdemeanor in endeavoring to take away the Credit of Dr. Titus
Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, two of the Principal Witnesses for His Majesty in
the proving of the Conspiracy and Conspirators against His Majesty's Life, the
Government of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the Destruction
of the Protestants, and the Protestant Religion and Introducing and Settling of
Popery there, although the Evidence was so full and clear against them, that
the Jury found them Guilty without going from the Bar; yet the said Lord Chief
Justice, in further disparagement and disparaging of the Evidence of the said
Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow, would not, nor did not give any Charge to the said
Jury therein; but rose up suddenly after the Evidence was closed by the
Council, and left the said Court abruptly before the said Jury had given in
their Verdict.

X. That the said Lord Chief Justice knowing that one William Osborne was in
the Conspiracy and Contrivance with the said Knox and Lane, (in the last
Article mentioned) to take away the Credit of the said, Dr. T. Oats and Mr.
William Bedlow; and knowing that the said Dr. T. Oats and Mr. Bedlow to be
material Witnesses for His Majesty in proving of the Conspiracy and
Conspirators that had been tried, and were to be so, against several others of
the said Conspirators that were imeached or accused for the said High Treason,
and were to be Tried for the same, and knowing the said William Osborne had
been detected before the Lords in Parliamen-Assembled, for his said Conspiracy
and Contrivance with the said Knox and Lane, and that by his own Oath
thereupon, denying the Fact in their said Conspiracy and Contrivance to be true
yet out of his Malice to the said Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, and
in as much as in him lay to endeavor the disparagement, if not the suppressing
of the further Discovery of that Hellish and damnable Plot, he the said Lord
Chief Justice, without the knowledge, consent, or appobation of His Majesty, or
any of His Learned Council in the Law; or the said Doctor Titus Oats or Mr.
William Bedlow, did volnntarily give the said William Osborne liberty to make
an Affidavit before him upon Oath, of the truth of the said Fact he had before
as aforesaid denied upon his Oath, with intent that the same might be made use
of against the said Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, to their
Disparagement, and the apparent prejudice of His Majesty against the said
Conspirators in the said High Treason.

XI. That the said Lord Chief Justice to manifest his slighting Opinion of the
Evidence of the said Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, in the presence of
His Sacred Majesty, and the Right Honorable the Lords, and others of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, did dare to say, That he had thonght
Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow always had an Accusation ready against any body.

XII. That at the last Assize holden at Monmouth, the said Lord Chief Justice
in the presence of several Justice of the Peace for the said County, did say to
Mr. William Bedlow, That he did believe in his Conscience that Richard
Langhorne whom he Condemned, died wrongfully, to the great disparagement of His
Majesty's Crown and Dignity, the Justice of the Court, the Jury and Evidence.

XIII. That he the said Lord Chief Justice, contrary to the Dignity of his
Place, did make Merchandise of the Trials of certain Priests to be Tried in
Staffordshire, and took Twenty Guineys in Earnest; and then sold the said
Trials to other persons, refusing to return the said Twenty Guineys to those
from whom he had received them. And furthermore, before the Trial of Sir George
Wakeman, he the said Lord Chief Justice did Bargain with Two Booksellers for a
hundred and fifty Guineys for them to Print the Trials; and in case they would
not lay down the Money before he went into the Court, he would not go into the
Court, but would go into the Country; and if the said Trial, by reason of its
length, could not be finished in one day, he would have a hundred Guineys more,
or a Word to that very effect.

FINIS.

