AN EPISTLE OF INFORMATION, EXHORTATION, AND CONSOLATION.

To all such as are distinguished by Names of Reproach and Ignominy;
Nevertheless, retaining the Testimony of a good Conscience toward God and all
men.

Containing also, A Sober REBUKE for former Sloathfulness.

By John Onley, a Servant of Jesus Christ.

London, Printed for Francis Smith, at Sign of the Elephant and Castle, without
Temple Bar, 1661.

An EPISTLE of Information, Exhortation, and Consolation to all such as are
distinguished by Names of Reproach, etc.
TO all the Children of God, through Faith and Obedience of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, of what Sect, and by what Name soever, disgraced, dignified, or
distinguished; Grace, Mercy and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus;
With all Spiritual Wisdom, Strength, Valor, Stability, Patience, Selfdenyal,
etc. to you be continued, multiplied and increased; that as on the one hand the
Nobleness of our Extraction, and most Magnificent Possession, and yet greater
and far more admirable Right in Reversion, may make us elevate our Minds in the
highest Region, above that gross and earthly Body, that the black Monarchy of
the Prince of Darkness is erected in, and the poor blind World is benighted
with, and captivated by, scorning and utterly contemning those earthly
Pleasures and faint Conceptions the Earthly Mind is forming to it self, to take
Comfort from, that shall shortly be ingloriously dashed and precipited, being
Expiring Glories; whilst we, moving in our own Sphere, beyond and above their
Region, may be without fear of being Let by their faint Opposition, go safely
on from strength to strength, till we all appear before our God in Sion.

Yet on the other hand, Considering, how unworthily we have walked of this
Vocation, and unsuitable to this Profession, and unbeseeming the Children of so
high a Father, and Heirs of such a Glory, though we were taken from Prison,
Death and Condemnation, and raised undeservedly to such an Eternal weight of
Glory, yet have we grieved the Spirit of our God, by our estrayings from him;
from the sight of which (which I shall in a few words present to my self and
you) shame, sorrow and confusion of face lies before us; yet through a right
use of it, we may be bettered by it, when we have seen it, and have smarted for
it.

1. What a deal of Rust, Dross, and Corrupted matter has contracted it self to
us, by our Motion through various Dispensations, even to the provoking of the
Lord to arise, and show his Displeasure against us, by the Symptoms of some
straits approaching near us, that are the best and only Remedies for us, as of
old, when Israel was in a waste howling Wilderness, in a Land of Deserts and
Pits, and the shadow of Death, she was then Holiness to the Lord; but when to
crown all their Sufferings with signal Mercies, the Lord brought them into
Houses that they did not build, and Vineyards that they did not plant, how
quickly was those occasions of Praise, turned into a dreadful Apostasy from the
Father of those Mercies? Shall we need to parallel our Conditions, our former
Egyptian slavery, with God's eminent Deliverance, by the outstretched Arm of
his Power and Providence, with our yearnings of Spirit then after him is yet
memorable? and for our after-declinations, we may it is probable, have it so
legible, that we may run and read our Sin in our Punishment: There is a
Judgment begun, and it will go round; the Furnace is preparing, and that Fire
therein will be that Proving, that will manifest the Verity of each man's
building, only the Refined Gold will remain, and it is the Dross alone we shall
lose, and by that Loss become Rich; though the Sinners in Sion be afraid, and
fearfulness surprising the hearts of the Hypocrites; our number being thereby
lessened, and much of that bulk we made a show of in our selves being consumed,
yet shall we be not thereby weakened; But Oh how mighty! Oh how great! Oh how
strong shall we be by that Loss, that Little, and those Few that will be left,
standing by it self, will exceed even it self as it stood in common with the
rest? why then should we stand afraid of that Poverty by which we become rich,
or that Loss by which we get gain?

2. What a Stir and Commotion, and Hurli-burly has been raised in our Souls?
partly by false and contrary Interests we had espoused to our selves, partly by
our various Expectations, Helps and Reliefs, to secure them to us (having
plodded on in a heartless, lifeless Profession, in conjunction with a vigorous
pursuit after, overtaking of, and being possessed with Rest, as we thought, in
the World) running in the way of Egypt, after Asher and Jareb, putting
Confidence in an Aim of Flesh, saying to the work of our hands, Ye are our
gods, when in Returning and in Rest we should have been saved, Quietness and
Confidence should have been our Strength, but we would not, etc. Therefore are
we like to be left as a Beacon on the top of the Mountain, our way hedged up
with Thorns that we may no more find those Paths, but reduced into the
Wilderness, a place of Deserts, Pits, Drought, and shadow of Death; that
necessity and want of what we would have enjoyed, might we had our wills, may
enforce us with the proud Prodigal, to return to our Father, thankfully
accepting what we formerly lightly esteemed, which his ever-to-be-magnified
Grace still holds forth to us, which now we begin to experience the worth of,
the Commotions in our Souls being stilled, and our prodigal Expectations come
to naught, that formerly so clamored in our Souls, that the Voice of the Lord
could not be heard. Oh how attentive, watchful and diligent are we now, for
which formerly we took little notice of, how home, direct and facile is its
entrance! Now, speak Lord, says the Soul, and I will hear; appear, and I am
ready; lead, and I will follow; command, and I will obey: we will never say more
to the works of our hands, Ye are our gods; for in Thee alone the Fatherless
finds Mercy.

3. What a large measure of Light, Time, Peace and Liberty have we had from the
Lord, beyond what former Times, and, it may be, latter shall enjoy, whereby
through the faithful Improvement of which, what manner of Persons might we have
been, not only in our own inward Enjoyments and Fellowships, but also to the
poor, blind World, captivated by the Devil; as also to those who hang in the
Birth betwixt Heaven and Hell, that see but like the half-cured Blind-man, Men
like Trees, that fain would move toward Sion, but through the weakness of their
sight, the false Representations of the Devil, together with the Dust we by our
Contentions have raised, and darkened the way with, that he knows not how hardly
to set one foot forward, in order thereto.

And yet, Oh how too truly may we behold how we have hid our Talent in a
Napkin, put our Light under a Bushel, whilst we industriously employed our Wit
and earthly Mind in making provision for the Flesh, merchandising with the
Commodities of this Life, or else either exercising them in such a cold frozen,
heartless, lifeless, customary manner, that we have neither felt, tasted, nor
experienced that Strength, Life, Health and Nourishment we might have done, nor
by Example, Doctrine and Conversation, etc. have we set others so much as we
might have done in the way thereto; or, which is worse, than if we had been
born dumb, We have by our time, Light, Knowledge, etc. but for the most part
got such an opinionative Profession, centring in certain external Institutions
(being by Christ appointed not for Rest but Motion) which, although some of
which was perspicuous enough in the word, yet others being of doubtful
Interpretation, have (in the way that some have practiced them) found strong
opposition; We have so studied and employed our Abilities thereabouts, that our
participation of the Knowledge of Christ has got from our hearts into our
heads, that instead of sweetning our Souls therewith, and refreshing,
enlivening and uniting our Souls to every one in whom the Image of the Lord
Jesus does appear, thereby upholding that admirable and ever blessed Communion
of the Saints in the Unity of the Spirit and the Bond of Peace, we have (as
naturally consequent thereof) so rent the seamless Coat of Christ; so broken
and divided the Saints in pieces; so wounded and tortured the Consciences of
the Tender; so obstructed the Gospels Propagation; so rejoiced the World,
making the Wicked to triumph, erected such Trophies to the Devil's praise, that
many have been even Factors for Satan, Fewellers for Hell, laboring to bring
in more matter for the Everlasting Burning, under pretense of beating down
Babylon, etc. Christ's Life has been stifled, and Sion crucified. Oh what a
potent deadly Engine of the Devil have we managed, insensibly and by unobserved
degrees promoted to many-headed Babel, by such as would ascend into Heaven
alone, the language of whose Workmen the Lord is now confounding, reducing them
into one Common Calamity in order to their Re-unity: The Lord give all his
people a Sight, a Sorrow, a Repentance to Amendment, with Pardon for this thing.

4. How have we took up our abode in the Wilderness, saying in our hearts, It Is
good for us to be here! Or, upon the distrust of this Security, removed but to
the Suburbs of Sion, from whence we might either with ease, Retire at pleasure
to the old Residence, or enjoy them in Common together; resting in those
things, as the End, that by Institution was appointed but as a Mean thereto.
How violent has been our motion after Air and Emptiness, whilst the Eternal
Pearl has stood as a thing not worth the laying out our time, strength and
industry for the obtaining of? How comfortable has the Intelligence of our
likelihood of enjoying the Worlds Felicity been unto our Souls, whilst those
Eternal Enrichments of the Kingdom of Glory have in their most powerful and
lively Delineations, made upon us such faint Impressions, esteeming and rather
choosing to abide in these dirty houses of Clay, enslaved to the World, our
Souls imprisoned from God, and in our earthly dark mind, which is too much
predominant; pore up and down with the poor blind World after Rest and Felicity
in those uncertain things, that have it not in themselves, Rather than with
Noble, Saint-like Resolutions, contemn those childish Gew gaws (that please but
the sensitive and most ignoble part) and raise up our Souls into the
apprehension of, and pursuit after, and restless motion, till we are possessed
with those heavenly Treasures, those durable Riches that give full, comfortable
and perpetual Satisfaction; which, till the Soul light upon, and center in, as
its End of Motion, Oh how sad and lamentable (by accident) how deceitful and
damnable is every sublunary thing that we give our minds to, that we might gain
Rest and Comfort from!

5. How little did we hearken after, or take delight in the Appearance of the
Harbingers and forerunners of our Lord's Presence? how little have we been
affected with the approach of the Year and Day of our Deliverance, with the
Apprehensions and fore-thoughts of our purchased Possession, and Eternal Unity
and Communion with Christ and all Saints in Light; yea, when the Lord has by
the mighty Power of his Spirit in the Mouths of some of his Servants brought
these Things sweetly to our Ears, with the danger of Negligence, Key-coldness,
Formality, and the love of this present World, that so interposeth, eclipseth
and hinders the Influences of these things from our Souls, that they can take
neither Life, Strength nor Refreshment therefrom: How formally, sleepily and
forgetfully have we given them Entertainment, as things we were not concerned
in, or had no need as yet to trouble our selves about; yea, even in that very
Institution by which Christ in what he has done, is a doing and will speedily
do for his Saints, is exhibited and represented? How little have we been
refreshed, strengthened, and made watchful to the Day of his Appearance, many
rather eating and drinking Condemnation to themselves? first, obstructing and
shutting out its Operation from their Souls by their own Unpreparedness, and
then go away and report that God was not there to be found, etc.

6. How seldom have we come with hungry and thirsty Souls to, and after the
Bread of Life, whereby we might have experienced the Word of the Lord to have
been more reviving and delightful to our taste than Honey and the Honeycomb,
or any temporal Food to the outward man; and more satisfactory, enriching and
desirable than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold? Oh how oftener rather have we so
filled and glutted our Appetites and Affections with Fleshly Provisions, being
rich, full and satisfied beforehand with the World, that the Word of the Lord
has been but as an empty sound, which we have only lent our Ears to, going
away, poor, empty, miserable, blind and naked, though we see and knew it not!

7. How common has it been with us to spend much of our time in discourse of
the World, our Employments therein, and trading therewith, our Gains and Loss
thereby; which, after News from Heaven, our Title thereto, and Interest
therein, our thriving or losing in and about those Means of Grace that are
Assistants thereabout, in breathing forth our Experience of God's Love, in
praising the Lord for his admirable Love to usward, when we were in our Blood,
in the estate of Wrath, Death and Condemnation, shut out from the Presence of
God into Prison, Captivity, etc. that then by the precious Blood of the Son of
his Love, He should not only ransom and redeem us therefrom, but by the Power
of his Word and Spirit, call us into the insight thereof, and Everlasting Rest,
Peace and Comfort thereby; being brought into the Arms and Bosom of himself,
and made Heirs of Eternal Glory; also, in magnifying his Mercy to usward, in
restraining the Power of Unreasonable men, from exercising their Cruelty upon
us, who would have devoured us quick, whom yet the Lord would not suffer, but
was a brazen Wall round about us, that we might have gone freely about the work
of our God without molestation; to have enlightened the eyes of the poor blind
World, enlivened, warmed and strengthened the weak Saints, confirmed the
Feeble, and rejoiced in and with the Strong; in laying in all strength
together, with one heart and one shoulder, to bear up, increase and strengthen
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus; rejoicing with the Strong and Honorable, and
weeping with the Poor and Miserable, etc. beating with the Weak and Feeble;
and, as Members of one Body, joined together, and compacted by that which every
Joint supplyeth, according to the Effectual working in the measure of every
part, making increase in the Body unto the Edifying of it self in Love. Oh! how
negligent have we been in these necessary heavenly Duties, bearing the name of
Churches, Saints and Christians, when to the Life of Christ we have been almost
strangers!

8. How little have our hearts been rent, our souls grieved, and we sighed and
cried, pouring out our souls before the Lord for the Abominations committed in
these Nations, not being inferior, if not exceeding the Wickedness of Sodom,
for, and on which God rained down from Heaven Fire and Brimstone, and made an
utter desolation thereof! How is the Name of our God every day blasphemed, his
Laws and gracious Precepts derided, and his People shamefully entreated; and,
as Mr. Baxter said of the Times some late years past, That it was as much as a
Man's Estate at least was worth to hear, Saints Rest, page 251. Part 2.
a Sermon abroad, when he had none, or worse, at home; to meet for Prayer, or
any godly Exercise; and that it was a matter of Credit, and way to Preferment,
to revile at, and be enemies to those that are most Conscientious; and every
where safer to be a Drunkard, or an Adulterer, than a painful Christian; and
that multitude of humane Ceremonies took place, when the Worship of Christ's
Institutions was cast out!

So, by reason of the abuse of the King's Indulgence, of about Thirty Persons,
whom in that we had no compliance with, nor knowledge of, together with the
over-violent activity of his Majesty's subordinate Ministers in executing of
his Proclamation against us (though we believe they know in their own
Consciences we are free from the first, and consequently not concerned in the
last) with their negligence, in not executing his Proclamation against
Debauchery and Profaneness; such into many places having free liberty to act
Villainy: It Is come to that pass, that if a few sincere Christians meet
together in the fear of God, to build up one another in their most holy Faith;
to exhort, comfort, confirm and strengthen each other in the Ways of God,
according to the Command of Christ, and the Example of the Primitive Saints; to
which Work the Lord having promised, and God's People sweetly experiencing his
Presence; We must be presently apprehended, and carried to a Justice, and so to
the Jayl; yea, some of us threatened for reading the Scriptures in our Families;
when if we would swear, game, be drunk, and lie at an Alehouse, Twenty together
day after day, or stand in a Market an hour or two together, to hear the
Apostles of the Devil and Factors of Hell, about and on the Market-Cross, with
their Ungodly Songs and Speeches, and idle, shameful Deeds and Gestures, to
provoke to vanity, both Hearers, Speakers and Singers, shall have free Liberty;
when if in the same place, (as some with grief of heart can witness) one does
but say, [Repent of this Folly, and turn to the Lord, His Day is at hand] he
shall have company about him presently to lag him forth of Town, as not
sufferable therein; Which had it been amongst Pagans and gross Heathens, we
might have the less marvelled; but to see it amongst those, that profess in
words to be Christians: Oh! what Lamentations, bitter Cries, Sighs and Tears,
and heart-rendings does this call for! what Humiliations, Watchings, Fastings,
Prayings, Speakings often one to another, and to the Lord, to forgive, to
strengthen, uphold and comfort his People in this day; and to Inform, counsel
and direct the King, with the Magistrates of this Nation, in the performance of
that which may bring down a Blessing therewith, and a Settlement of Peace with
Truth thereby, and that they may see in what the Strength and Safety of a
Nation stands in; In the performance of Righteousness, Justice and Equity;
breaking every heavy Yoke, and letting the Oppressed go free; in setting free
the Gospel and the Word of the Lord, the Profession and Professors thereof,
(that has so long been confined within the narrow limits of some men's
particular Apprehensions) that it may run and be glorified, and prevail and
prosper in its own single Evidence; and that the Lord would cause them to see
the Hamon-like Designs that some purpose against all the Sons of Sion, that
refuse to bow to the Pride of their Hearts; and that the Innocence and
Righteousness of the Lords People may be brought to light, in despite of those
wicked Ones, who seek to impeach and darken it; that so their Covering may not
prove like that of Judah's, In looking to their Armor, and making up the
Breaches, and fortifying of the Walls, staying on Horses, and trusting in
Chariots, because they are many, and in Horsemen, because they are very strong;
and then joy and be glad, slay Oxen, and kill Sheep, eat Flesh and drink Wine,
thinking all secure; when they should rather call to Mourning, to Weeping, to
Baldness, and to girding with Sackcloath, if the Glory of the Lord and the
saving strength of himself, be not the Foundation thereof, Isa. 22.8. --
14.31.1.

Oh! how little have we been sensible of, affected with, and employed about
these things? though the Lord has neither been a Wilderness nor a Land of
Darkness to us, but planting us a Noble Vine, a holy, a right Seed, walling us
about, suffering no man to do us harm; yet have we degenerated into a strange
Plant; our Silver become Dross, our Wine mixed with Water, etc. Therefore the
Day of Visitation is come, it is come, we shall know it: We have dealt
treacherously with the Lord, we have begotten strange Children: now shall a
Moth devour them with their Portions; for, the Lord is arisen in the fury of
his Jealousy, being provoked through the abuse of his Mercy, to lash us to
himself, and correct us for our outgoings from his Grace, and has prepared
his Furnace in Jerusalem, and his Refining Pot in Sion; in which two parts may
be consumed, and a third brought through the fire; being thereby made meet for
our Masters praise, we may serve him with one consent.

Wherefore, dearly beloved Brethren, you who Fellow-Citizens, and of the
Household of God, Members one of another, One Body, of which Christ is the Head;
Children and Heirs, Heirs of God, yea Joynt-heirs with Christ; and all
Strangers and Pilgrims here on Earth, having no continuing City, but are
looking after one that has a foundation, whose maker and builder is God, etc.
Let Us lay aside our dividing Principles, and formal, lazy, key-cold Profession,
and Unchristian-like Employments, and with one Consent make exact and speedy
search into those things in which we have grievously offended, and pour forth
our souls before the Lord, Repenting and humbling our selves, and that with all
speed; Peradventure we may prevail to a diversion of God's intended Judgments
against us; if not, that then they may be of excellent use to us: for when we
have once seen the want of that, which when we had, we saw not the worth of,
nor had no hearts to use; It will then be more precious in our eyes, more
desirable and delightful to our souls; Should the Lord scatter us abroad into
other Nations, to wander up and down amongst Mountains, Deserts, Dens, Caves,
and Desolate places of the Earth, destitute, afflicted and tormented; yea, from
Sea to Sea, from North to South, running to and fro to seck the Word of the
Lord, and shall not find it; Oh how precious would the Communion, the Company,
the Fellowship of those be then, notwithstanding circumstantial difference,
with whom now we have been at Irreconciliable Variance! how delightful that
Presence of the Lord that once we enjoyed in his Sanctuary! how piercing and
lively would the fence of those former neglected Mercies come fresh and
bleeding in our memories! how satisfactory would the Word of the Lord be to our
hungry, starved, empty Souls then! how vivifying and comfortable to our Hearts,
though now being full, we loath the Honey and the Honeycomb! how little should
we value a weeks time then, in the performance of that, which a days time now
has wearied us in! how near would our Hearts be brought to God, our Affections
to Heaven, and from the World! how un-interrupted the course of our Faith, and
dead and crucified to the Pleasures of this Life! how desirous to be dissolved,
how pained to be delivered! how watchful for our Redemption, and Day of our
Lord's Appearance! how attentive to our main work, preparing our wedding
Garment! how quick in our motion, and steady in our expectation, looking right
on, moving regular in our Journey, turning neither to the right hand, nor to
the left! etc. Should we then be, when the Lord with a Witness has discovered,
and uncovered our Covering, which He is now about, and hunted us out of our
Rests, that were polluted, and would have destroyed us with a sore destruction,
and scorched us with the fire of our own kindling, and made those sparks we
encompassed our selves about with, and walked in the light of, like those Oaks
we have desired, of which we are now ashamed, going away from them, the Lord
having rejected that Confidence which we put in them.

How admirably lovely and desirable will Christ, his Truth and Kingdom be, when
it stands in competition with Goods, Liberty, Wife, Children, and it may be our
own Life also, when we shall be brought to that parting-point, to receive Him
singly, or reject Him wholly, Then will be the time to see the worth of that,
which whilst other things stood betwixt, we saw not the full glory of! Oh then
let us not fear, nor be dismayed at that which, if rightly used, we shall be
such gainers by, but rejoice, and leap for Joy, in that Day when men shall hate
us, imprison us, separate us from their Company, and speak all manner of evil
of us falsely, and take away our Goods, our Houses and Lands, and Liberties from
us, etc. For if we stoop under the Cross, and deny our selves, and forsake
Houses, Brethren, Sisters, Fathers or Mothers, Wife or Children, or Lands for
the Name sake of Christ, we shall receive un hundred fold, and shall inherit
Everlasting Life, Matthew. 19.29. Only let us be careful to suffer as Christians,
not as Thieves, Murderers, busy bodies in others matters, self-revengers, etc.
for which we shall have a double punishment; but if as Christians, let us not be
ashamed, but glorify God on this behalf, and commit the keeping of our souls
in well-doing as to a faithful Creator; Considering Him that could have called
for the Host of Heaven to have rescued Him, and avenged Him of his Enemies; yet
endured the Cross, despised the shame, and the Contradiction of Sinners against
Himself, and is set down at the right hand of God, expecting till his Enemies
be made his Footstool: And let us not envy the Prosperity of them that know not
God, that laugh whilst we weep, and sing whilst we mourn; for they have
received their Consolation, and are in the flower of their Kingdom; but ours is
in Reversion, which when we come to the possession of, out Sorrow shall be
turned into Joy, our Tears to Praise, our Poverty to Plenty, and we shall come
to Sion with Songs, and Everlasting Joy upon our heads; Sorrow and sighing
shall flee away, when we shall be made an Eternal Excellency, the Joy of many
Generations: For, behold, the Lord will take out of our hand the Cup of
Trembling, even the Dregs of the Cup of Fury we shall no more drink, but it
shall be put into the hand of them that afflict us, that have said to our
souls, Bow down, that we may go over; And we have laid our body as the ground,
and as the street to them that went over; when he has purged away our Dross,
and performed his whole work upon us, He will extend Peace to us like a River,
and Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the
fruitful Field; and the work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of
Righteousness Quietness and Assurance for ever: Which when we see, our hearts
shall rejoice, and our bones flourish, and we shall discern the difference
betwixt them that serve God, and them that serve Him not; though now the Proud
are called Happy, etc. The hand of the Lord will be known toward his Servants,
and his Indignation toward his Enemies, when he shall render his Anger with
Fury, and his Rebukes with flames of fire. For, behold, the day comes that
shall burn as an Oven, and all the Proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall
be as Stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of
Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch; (...) in flaming Fire
will He take Vengeance on all that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of
Jesus Christ: For, behold, He comes with Ten Thousand of his Saints, to
execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst them,
of all their ungodly deeds, they have ungodlily committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

Wherefore let us enter into our Chamber, and shut to the doors, till the
Indignation of the Lord lie over-past, and bear it with patience, for we have
sinned; and gird up the loins of our mind and be sober, and hope to the end;
and take up the Cross and walk on with patience, lifting up our hands that hang
down, and making strait paths for our feet; lest that which is lame be turned
out of the way, and run with patience the Race set before us, not being mindful
of that Country from whence we came out, though we may have opportunity to
return, [Remember Lots Wife] but desire a better, that is, an heavenly; And God
will not be ashamed to be called our God, for he has provided for us a City:
and let us not draw back, lest the Lord take no pleasure in us: for, he that
seeks to save his life, shall lose it, whilst he that seeks to lose it shall
find. Let Us not then cast away our Confidence, that has great Recompense of
Reward; for we have need of Patience, that after we have done the Will of God,
we may receive the Promise: For yet a little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry: whose Reward is with him, and his Work before
him, to give to every one as his deeds shall be. In the Expectation of which,
and waiting therefore, I am, and remain

Your Brother in the Faith, Patience, and Tribulation of the Gospel, John Onley.
3d day of the 3d Month, 1661.

