A DISPLAY OF Tyranny; OR REMARKS, UPON The Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings,
in the Courts of Westminster, and Guild Hall London. From the Year, 1678. To
the Abdication of the late King James, in the Year 1688. In which time, the
Rule was, Quod
Principi placuit, Lexesto.


First Part.

London, Printed, Anno Angliae Salutis, primo, 1689. Sold by Booksellers in
London and Westminster.

TO The Eminently Deserving and Highly Honored, Sr Samuel Barnardiston Baronet.
Sir,
THat I do inscribe these my summary Collections of some few of the
Exorbitancies, and of the arbitrary, illegal and pernicious Practices of the
late unhappy Reigns, to your Name; will, as I hope, be forgiven; when you
reflect upon your own dear bought share, in the melancholy and tragical
Transactions, upon which I have spent my thoughts.

The Names of the late Earl of Shaftesbury; and of my Lord Russel and Col.
Sidney and other great Men (who were run upon, and destroyed by a Race of Men,
who were raised to the Bench, from being the Scandal of the Bar; and by
ignorant, corrupt and partial Jurymen) will be remembered with eternal honor.
And by consequence it must be yours, that you were my Lord Russel's endeared
Friend; That you served as Foreman of that great Jury which guarded the Earl of
Shaftesbury's Life, and that you expressed your self with some transport of
Joy, at the hopes of the brave Colonel Sidney's deliverance; and that the sham
Protestant Plot was confounded.

That from hence immediately your late Troubles sprung, is fresh in every
Bodies remembrance; but it is not so well known, that you had the guilt of
Original Sin upon you; you were a Barnardiston, descended of a Family well
known, and highly esteemed in Suffolk and Lincolnshire for many hundreds of
years past, and which no History remembers to have been clouded, but in times,
when the Laws of England have suffered an Eclipse.

Your never to be forgotten Father Sr Nathaniel Barnardiston, was in the worst
of times ( those in which we have lived, excepted) a Champion, and a Resolute
Assertor of the English Liberties; He, in the year 1626, when King Charles the
first, in a most arbitrary way, required money by way of Loan; ( with many
other good Patriots) refused to subscribe and lend; and was thereupon, as a
refractory Person (as was the Language of the Privy Council of that day)
confined ( far enough from home) in the County of Sussex; however, he stiffly
adhered to his honest resolution against that arbitrary attempt; and continued
under confinement, till the beginning of the year 1628, when that King's
straits necessitating a Parliament, the Gentlemen imprisoned for refusing the
Loane-Money, were then released, and generally throughout the Kingdom, elected
to present the Grievances, and assert the Liberties of the People, in that
Parliament; as was Sr Nathaniel Barnardiston, for his County of Suffolk.

Sir! The Remembrance of this, when you were first invited by that County, to
represent them in Parliament, upon the death of Sr Henry North, might in (all
propability) provoke a great Minister of State to say, that there was reason of
State, why you must not be Knight of your Shire; and therefore he would appoint
an easy Gentleman (whom he could manage) Sheriff, to keep you out; and so he
did as long as he could; at a time, when that Parliament was corrupted, to such
a degree, that the Fate of the Nation seemed almost to depend upon the Vote of
one or two good Members; your Country, had upon that occasion, a manifest
demonstration of your Fidelity and Zeal, in their Service; you did worthily
assert the right of that Election (than which there never was any more clearly
made) and after a tedious and very expensive attendance, in prosecuting your
Complaint of that abuse; your Election was affirmed in the House of Commons;
though opposed by the united power, of Tories, Pensioners and Papists; you then
came into Parliament at a most Critical Juncture, When the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws were eminently beset, and dangerously threatened; you did most
faithfully and unweariedly labor there for some years, against very great
Discouragements; It being in that day a mighty conquest, if the true English
Gentlemen of that House, could, for the saving of the Kingdom, carry a Question
by five or six Voices, against the numerous Pensioners, who were there listed;
and fed, and paid, to betray their Countries Liberties.

Your demeanor and great desert in that day of England's Distress, merited a
Title to the Hearts of your Countrymen; who with very little opposition, if
not with an unanimous Voice, Elected you, for one of their Representatives to
the three succeeding Parliaments; in which, your avowed Opposition to Popery,
and undaunted Adhesion to the Bill of Exclusion; as the only expedient for
securing the Protestant Religion, marked you out to the Popish Rage.

These ( Sir.) were in truth your heinous actual transgressions; These provoked
Jefferies ( whose Talent lay in facing all things down with Noise and
Impudence) to discharge a load of Slime and Choler at you; your Crimes were
complicated; and they lie under a very great mistake, who think, that your
Imprisonment and Fine of 10000 l. were only for writing to a Friend, what you
believed, and all good Men passionately desired.

Having thus mentioned your great Oppression, I shall take leave (not for your
own, but) for the Reader's Information, to insert the Reasons upon which the
House of Lords, did lately reverse, that unjust and wicked Judgment upon you.

1st. The Information in this Case, being grounded upon Letters, which in
themselves were not material, but made so by Innuendo's, their Lordships
declared, that Innuendo's, or supposed or forced Constructions, ought not to be
allowed; for all Accusations should be plain, and the Crimes ascertained.

2dly. That the Fine of 10000 l. is exorbitant and excessive; not warranted by
legal Precedent in former Ages; for all Fines ought to be with a Salvo
Contenemento; and not to the Parties Ruin.

3 d. That the demanding Sureties for the good Behavior, during Life; except
in very great, and very often repeated Crimes; wherein the Public Peace of the
Realm is very much concerned; is contrary to the Liberty of the Subject.

Sir! to detain you no longer upon a subject so well known, as is that of your
own Sufferings and Desert, I know not whether I ought to apologize, for my
frequent using the name of Tory; I am conscious, that Names of Discrimination
and Reproach, are offensive to the Ears of good Men; therefore to explain my
self; I intend not thereby to expose the well-deserving and pious Members of
the Church of England; but I mean the Men, who, (being forsaken of common Sense
and Honesty) seemed ready to renounce the name of Protestant; and gloried in
Ranting, Damning, Swearing Loyalty; The Men, who encouraged and triumphed, in
the Murders of late committed amongst us; and who, to this hour, go on to
palliat and excuse, if not to justify them; The Men, who cried up a Popish
Successor, as the only means to preserve the Church of England, and who are now
for calling him back.

These were Men, who would have finished the Ruin of the Nation, in the
Dissolution of its ancient and well Established Government; and in the Blood of
its best Patriots; They gloryed in calling themselves Tories; their Guide and
Patron, did, in their name, thrust out and stigmatize all the sober and
moderate Men of the Church of England, with the Name of Trimmers, and bestowed
upon them this Apothegme, That a Trimmer is worse than a Rebel. Whoever recurs
to the Original of that Name, in the Observators; will find that it pointed at
first, at two honorable and never to be forgotten Protestants, of your
Neighbor County, the late Lord Townshend and Sr John Hobart, of Norfolk; and
quickly after, Dr Fowler, Mr Smithee, and many other Reverend Divines of the
Church of England, fell under that Denomination: Now surely it is not a Crime,
to call such Men as these by the name which they appropriated to themselves;
and 'twere Foolish, to esteem Men of their practices, to be of any Religion.

In some cases a Man ought not to be over-patient; and it must move any one, to
hear a Learned Lawyer at the Bar, at the time when Popery had actually ascended
the Throne, in this manner, to caress a Tory-Jury; Gentlemen! I cannot but with
much Sorrow remember to you, and I know you all remember it too well, that
there was a time when the City of London, was so far corrupted, that it was
become a Refuge and Sanctuary for high Treason; when there was no Justice to be
had for the King there; when Men lodged themselves within, those Walls, as a
Protection for their Conspiracies; We all remember the time, when Indictments
were perferred, and a plain Evidence given to a Grand Jury; even to the public
satisfaction of all that heard it; and yet they have refused to find the Bill;
and not only so, but were so abetted by the Rabble; that it was scarce safe for
the Judges to sit upon the Bench; These are things none of us can forget, but
must be perpetually remembered; to the shame of the Authors and Contrivers, of
them.

And must it not provoke a Man, to hear the following Doctrine from the Pulpit,
upon the sad occasion of the good Lord Russell's death (of whom one of the best
Divines now living, did truly say, that an Age would not repair that loss to
the Nation) viz.

Cuting of Throats would have been counted only a Scotch way of Triming, and
the destruction of Princes, to be no more but a perfecting the History of the
Reformation.

They who cannot rise up to all the heights of Conformity; can yet strain a
point upon occasion, and rise up to all the heights of Rebellion and Barbarity;
and had not God marvelously interposed; these squeamish Conscience Traitors,
would have showed the truth of this.

Is it not astonishing (at this day, when the Parliament has declared, that my
Lord Russell, Colonel Sidney and Sr Thomas Armstrong, were murdered) to hear
an Irish Archdeacon ( who fled hither upon the score of Religion, and is a
Principal Manager of our Charity, to the Irish Protestants) publicly ridicule,
the death of the first two; ( by telling us in an upbraiding way, these are
your Martyrs) and affirm, that the last dyed justly and according to Law? Would
such men as these, satisfy the World, of their Ingenuity and Repentance, these
extravagancies undoubtedly, ought to be put into utter Oblivion; now, that
Heaven has wrought for us, a most signal and miraculous deliverance; but, which
is to be lamented, those very Men, who carried us to the very brinck of
destruction; are not only remorseless, but many of them do make it their
business, (by drinking Popish Healths; wishing success to their Arms; and
spreading false News) to infect and debauch the Kingdom (especially the City)
and to traduce, malign and undermine the Government, under which, the divine
Providence, has so mercifully placed us: and therefore, they who have given
such high provocations and done so much mischief; and do still remain
impenitent: ought not to esteem themselves unkindly used, by some tart
expressions.

Sr! That I may be just^ied with you, who I am sure would believe the best of
every Man, and make the best of all things; I have said much more then I did
intend upon this occasion, and hope you will forgive it.

You have very signally, and heartily lent and laid out your self in your
Countries service; that service was not only difficult and hazardous, but it
had proved fatal, had not Heaven interposed for your deliverance; and
therefore, all true Lovers of old England's welfare, must wish, that no false
Insinuations may lessen you in the esteem of Good Men; you have been a public
Good, and that obliges me to be,

Sir! Your Honourer and Most Obedient Servant.
February 10. 1689.
The CONTENTS.
REmarks upon Dr Otes his Trial, page 1. Upon the Trial of Reading, p. 38. Upon
the Trial of Knox and Lane, p. 45. Upon the Trial of Tasborough and Price, p.
53. Upon the Proceedings against the Earl of Shaftesbury, p. 64. Upon the Trial
of Stephen College, p. 92. Upon the Trial of Thompson (the Printer) Pain and
Farewell, p. 117. Upon the Trial of the pretended Guildhall Riot, p. 127. Upon
the Trial of my Lord Russell, p. 155. Upon the Trial of Colonel Sidney, p. 185.
Upon the Trial of Sr Samuel Barnardiston, p. 207. Upon the Proceedings against
Sr Thomas Armstrong, p. 215. Upon Mr Papillon's Trial with Sr William
Pritchard, p. 228. Upon the Trial of Alderman Cornish, p. 245.
REMARKS upon the Trial of Dr Titus Otes, upon an Indictment for Perjury; at
the King's Bench Bar at Westminster before Sr George Jeffryes, (Baron of Wem)
Lord Chief Justice; (Whom the House of Commons had recommended to the King, by
this Vote, and an Address thereupon, November the 13th, 1680. Resolved,

That Sr George Jeffryes Recorder of London, by traducing and obstructing
Petitioning for the sitting of this Parliament, has betrayed the Rights of the
Subject.

Ordered, That an humble Address be made to his Majesty to remove Sr George
Jeffryes out of all public Offices.

) Mr Justice Wythens, (Who was advanced to a Seat upon that Bench, by the
following Vote of the House of Commons, October 29. 1680. Resolved,

That Sr Francis Wythens, by promoting and presenting to his Majesty, an
Address, expressing an Abhorrence to Petition his Majesty for the calling and
sitting of Parliaments, has betrayed the undoubted Rights of the Subjects of
England.



And this Order thereupon: Ordered, That Sr Francis Wythens be expelled this
House for this high Crime; and that he receive his Sentence, at the Bar of this
House upon his Knees from Mr Speaker. (Which he received accordingly.)

Mr Justice Holloway, (late Recorder of Oxford, whose part in the dispatching
Stephen College advanced him to this station.) And Mr Justice Walcot, (the
best of all the four, but as poor as Sr R. Wright, and by consequence a fit
Tool to serve the purposes of that Juncture.)

THat the Conspiracy to introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government in England,
took life in the Year 1660. and was from that time carried on, is now little
doubted by any Englishman, who was not a well-wisher to it. We are not to
question the late King Charles the second's dying a Papist, and it is as true
that he so lived; but upon his Restoration, that the Duke's turn might be
served, he must not then declare. An Act of Parliament was made to forbid our
talking of it, under most severe Penalties: Then another Act put the Sword into
his Hands, by Vesting the Militia solely in him: The Pulpits of the Kingdom (
generally speaking) were filled with Gentlemen who had imbibed the Doctrine of
passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance; An Oath was imposed, That it was not
lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King, or
against any commissionated by him; About two thousand sober and pious Ministers
were thrust from the Churches and Corporations ( and many of them into
loathsome Goals) for Nonconformity to that Oath, and to a few slight, and as
they judged unwarranted Ceremonies; and the best Members were thrown out of all
the Corporations of England by a pretended Regulation, much more early then
that of the late King James. Matters being thus ripened, and the Nation
sufficiently dehauched by the Court-Example, what was wanting but an actual
execution? This the Conspirators well knowing, as they did that the famous City
of London, was the chief, if not the only obstacle to their Hellish design, a
Resolution was taken to destroy it, which they effectually accomplished;
discovery of this horrid Villainy being made, (not to mention anything of the
worthy Sr Robert Brooks, Chairman of the Committee of Inspection into the
firing of London.) Hubert a poor French Papist, being thereof Convict, the
House of Commons, knowing that such a contemptible Varlet was not alone in that
Fact, resolved to take him the next day into Examination, for discovery of his
Accomplices and Directors; but to prevent it, that Wretches Mouth was stopped at
Tyburn, in the Morning before the House met.

I am conscious that there are Persons now in being, who do not only pretend to
doubt of this part of the Popish Plot (the burning of London) but of the Plot
it self, I shall therefore here subjoyn the Sense of one of the best Houses of
Commons which ever met at Westminster

January the 10th, 1680. Resolved,

That it is the Opinion of this House, that the City of London was burnt in the
Year 1660, by the Papists, designing thereby to introduce Arbitrary Power and
Popery into this Kingdom.



It may also be here observed, that at this, as at every other juncture, when
any Popish Plot was near the point of Execution, The Papists had constantly the
Fanatics at hand to answer for their Villainies, without doubt the Burning this
Nest of Heretics, had been concerted both at Paris and at Rome, and the time
for putting it in execution approaching; In April 1666 a Fanatic plot is
brought upon the Stage, and seven or eight were Condemned at the Old-Bayly for
Ploting to kill the King, and to Burn the City upon the 3 d day of September
then following. ( For a more full account of this, the Reader is referred to
the London Gazette, of April the ^0 th 1666. Numb. 48.)

The whole Kingdom bring alarmed and put into a serment by this accursed
Enterprise, the Plot was post-poned; however it was kept alive, and the
unwearied Conspirators carried it on, and in the Year 1678 the blow was ready
to be given; but then, by the Providence of the Almighty Dr Otes detected their
Machinations; He gave his first Information thereof to that worthy and never to
be forgotten Justice of the Peace, Sr Edmundbury Godfrey, of which the
Conspirators having notice, for the stifling so fatal a discovery, they, in a
most barbarous manner, hurried him out of the World, and did, with effronted
Impudence attempt to persuade the World to believe, that that Gentleman was
Felo de se, but Heaven bringing that matter to light, and his Murderers to
justice; The Plot (maugre all oppositions and discouragements) began to be
searched into, and was made out beyond contradiction, by some loose Letters and
Papers found in the House of Colman (the Duke of York's Secretary) who had
early notice of the discovery, and thereupon had carried his most material (and
as it may be reasonably concluded he thought all) Papers which might endanger
him, or his Master's Cause, to the Chamber of Mr Wright a Profligate Lawyer of
Lincoln's End, where they were burnt, for which assistance and good service,
Wright was afterward preferred to sit by turns in every of the Courts of
Westminster, and at length to the place of Lord Chief Justice of England, then
whom a Person more scandalous and ignorant, was never in any Age placed there.

Well, Colman was indicted, the Plot proved by Dr Otes and other Witnesses, and
thereby and by his own Papers he was convicted and executed, as were by degrees
several others: but for the sake of the Duke, and of the Roman Catholic Cause,
the game must be retrived; in order thereto fit Engines were employed, some of
the Clergy (who had long asserted, that Popery was more tolerable than
Presbytery) with their guide the Observator, made it their business to decry
the Evidence of the Plot, impudently affirming (as in particular did one
Scotred a grand Jury-Man in the Isle of Ely, who at the time of the Assizes
there, began the Pope's health to his Brethren of the Grand Jury) That there
was no Popish, but a Presbyterian Plot.

A great part of the unwary, and loose Church of England Men throughout the
Kingdom, appeared to be infected with this mad Doctrine, so that to offer
Instances thereof may seem impertinent: however, I shall take the liberty to
inform the Reader, that upon complaint to the Judge sitting in Court (in
September 1679.) of the abovenamed Scotred's discourse, and drinking the
Pope's health; a Justice of the Peace, then upon the Bench, fell upon the
Person who made that complaint, with great rage, and swore By the Name of God,
there is a Presbyterian Plot.

To this I shall only subjoyn that which will be a more authentic Evidence of
what is above asserted ( viz.) October the 28th, 1680. (In the House of
Commons;)

Resolved, That it does appear by the evidence this day given to this House,
that Sr Robert Can is guilty of publicly declaring in the City of Bristol, in
October 1679. That there was no Popish Plot, but a Presbyterian Plot.

Ordered, That Sr Robert Can, a Member of this House, be committed to the
Prison of the Tower, and that he be expelled this House.

Ordered, That Sr Robert Yeomans be sent for in Custody to answer for publicly
declaring in Bristol, That there was no Popish Plot, but a Presbyterian Plot.



These easy mis-guided Gentlemen were Disciples of famous Parson Thompson of
Bristol, whose Breath infected that great City, and upon whom the following
Vote passed in the House of Commons.

December the 24th, 1680. Resolved,

Nemine contradicente, That Richard Thompson Clerk, has publicly defamed his
Sacred Majesty, preached Sedition, Vilified the Reformation, promoted Popery,
by asserting Popish Principles, denying the Popish Plot, and turning the same
upon the Protestants, and endeavored to subvert the Liberty and Property of
the Subject, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and that he is a
Scandal and Reproach to his Function.

Resolved, That the said Richard Thompson be Impeached thereupon.



Men of this Kidney having made way for its belief, We were from this time
entertained with a Succession of sham Presbyterian-Plots; the first thereof,
known by the name of the Meal-tub-Plot, being happily discovered by Mr
Dangerfield; both Lords and Commons taking the Alarm, did set themselves with
double diligence to the Prosecution of the Popish-Plot, and to find out ways
for the Uniting Protestants, and for Easing Dissenters; so little had the
opinion of a Presbyterian-Plot prevailed within their Walls; and the Commons
seeing a Dissolution at hand, passed these Votes.

December the 15 th 1680. Resolved,

Nemine contradicente, That a Bill be brought in for an Association of all his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, for the safety of his Majesty's Person, the
defense of the Protestant Religion, and the preservation of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, against all Invasions and Oppositions whatsoever, and for
reventing the Duke of York, or any Papist, from succeeding to the Crown.



January the 7 th 1680. Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that
there is no security or safety for the Protestant Religion, the King's Life, or
the well Constituted and Established Government of this Kingdom, without
passing a Bill for disabling James Duke of York to inherit the Imperial Crown
of England and Ireland; and to rely upon any other means or remedies without
such a Bill, is not only insufficient, b^ dangerous.



January the 10 th 1680. Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that
the Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time
grievous to the Subjects, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, and
encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.



The next Moment after the passing this Vote, the Parliament was prorogued for
ten days, and quickly after dissolved.

A new Parliament was forthwith Summoned to meet at Oxford the 21 st of March
following; but though the place was changed, the Conspirators found there, most
of the Zealous Protestant Members of the Westminister Parliament, who came
thither animated to prosecute the Popish Plot, the Exclusion of the Duke, and
the Uniting of Protestants; by Addresses from those whom they represented,
whereof take an Instance.

To the Honorable Sr Samuel Barnardiston, and Sr William Spring Baronets,
Knights of the Shire for the County of Suffolk.
Gentlemen,
WE the Freeholders of this County having chosen you our Representatives in the
last Parliament, in which We had satisfactory demonstration of your Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, of your Loyalty to his Majesty's Person and
Government, and of your faithful Endeavors for the preservation of the Laws,
our Rights and Properties; We now return you our most hearty Thanks, and have
Unanimously chosen you to Represent this County at the Parliament to be holden
at Oxford the 21 th of March next, and though We have not the least distrust of
your Wisdom to understand, or of your Integrity and Resolution to maintain and
promote our common Interest now in so great hazard, yet We think it meet (at
this time of eminent danger to the King and Kingdom) to recommend some things
to your Care, and particularly We do desire.

First, That, as hitherto you have, so you will vigorously prosecute the
execrable Popish Plot, now more fully discovered and proved, by the Trial of
William late Viscount Stafford.

Secondly, That you will promote a Bill for Excluding James Duke of York, and
all Popish Successors from the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as that which
under God may probably be a present and effectual means for the preservation of
his Majesty's Life, (which God preserve) the Protestant Religion, an the well
Established Government of this Kingdom.

Thirdly, That you will endeavor the frequent Meeting of Parliaments, and
their sitting so long as it shall be requisite for the dispatch of those great
Affairs for which they are convened, as that which is our only Bulwark against
Arbitrary Power.

Fourthly, That you will endeavor an happy and necessary Union amongst all his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, by promoting those several good Bills which were
to that end before the last Parliament.

And that till these things be obtained, which We conceive necessary, even to
the Being of this Nation, you will not consent to bring any Charge upon our
Estates: And We do assure you that We will stand by you with our Lives and
Fortunes, in prosec^ion of the good Ends before recited.

This Parliament beginning where the former left, and being found to adhere
unalterably, to the Resolution of rooting out the Plot, and of Excluding the
Duke, as the only adequate remedy for all the threatening Evils to the Kingdom;
they were, after a very few days Sitting, upon the sudden Dissolved, and
followed into their own Countries with a Declaration, (bearing date April the 8
th 1681) pretending to set forth the ^ses and Reas^ that moved the ^ng to
Dissolve that and the preceed^ Parliament, b^cally designed to expose and
blacken those worthy Patriots; and to that end it was ordered to be read in all
Churches and Chapels throughout the Kingdom, which was readily obeyed.

To wheedle the Nation, till it might be noosed, that Declaration, according to
the mode of that Reign, spoke and promised fare, tho the train, was then laid
to blow up our Religion, Laws and Liberties: It exhorted us that the restless
malice of Ill Men who were laboring to poison the People, might not persuade
us that the King did intend to lay aside the use of Parliaments; and declared
that no Irregularities in Parliaments, should ever make him out of love with
Parliaments. And that he resolved by the Blessing of God, to have frequent
Parliaments, and both in and out of Parliament to use his utmost Endeavors to
extirpate (he means Establish,) Popery, Note, this was after his Fathers Copy,
who by a Declaration in the year 1626. to justify his Arbitrary way of Leveing
Money by way of Loan, said that his Occasions would not give leave for the
calling a Parliament, but assured his People, that he intended not to serve
himself by such ways to the abolishing of Parliaments, and yet the Nation saw
not a Parliament from the 3 d to the 16 th year of that Reign, vide Rushworth's
Collections first Part page 418.


This Royal Grace, ( or rather Slander upon one of the three Estates,) was not
only proclaimed from the Readers Desks, but was promulgated from both Pulpit
and Press; five days after the emiting this Declaration ( viz.) April the 13 th
1681. The virulent and envenomed Pen of L'estrange was set to work upon it, and
to vilify the Evidence of the Plot, Parliaments, nay, the Protestant Religion
it self. Addresses with thanks for the violation of our Rights in the
Dissolution, and likewise abhorring Parliaments ( our Bulwark against Tyrany)
were obtained and most graciously received, The Presenters thereof being
usually honored with Knighthood, and rewarded with Perferment to places of
Trust and Profit; By this art the common Cry of a profligate party in every
corner of England was; Popery is better then Presbytery, at least the Papists
and Dissenters are equally dangerous, if not all one; it is therefore more then
time, that a College be hanged against a Pickering; And the Nation was almost
put besides it self, by the doleful Cry of Blood, Blood, Associations,
Conspiracies, Rebellion, Treason, and what not, that was frightful and terrible.

Rome it self could not possibly have ordered matters better for the service of
Holy Church; ^e Protestant Religion is now mocked, ^rliaments derided, the
Witnesses of the Plot vilified, and the belief of any other then a Presbyterian
Plot vanishes.

This proceeding gave new life and heart to the Popish Conspirators, and stroke
no small damp upon their Prosecutors; of the Witnesses, some were bought off,
and others terrified from their Testimony; of which I should recount Instances,
but that I have dwelt too long upon the foregoing Melancholy Contemplations.

To proceed therefore to the matter intended, and from which I have too long
digressed, Dr Otes the first discoverer of the Popish Plot, being no way
shaken, but bearing with most undaunted Courage and Constancy, innumerable
Reproaches and Slanders from the Pulpit and Press, nay, and from the Stage
also, Hell it self seemed to be engaged to discredit and batter down the belief
of his Evidence; Knox and Lane, to blast his Reputation were employed to accuse
him of an unusual, but most heinous Wickedness, that Plot not obtaining, and
matters being prepared for placing unmasked Popery upon the Throne, he was
condemned in One Hundred Thousand Pounds, for words spoken of the Duke of York,
and thereupon secured against the desired season for the Conspirators taking
their full revenge upon him.

Upon the 8 th of May, 1685. he was brought to Trial in the King's Bench Court,
upon an Indictment to the effect following ( viz.) that Whitebread, Ireland,
Fenwick, Pickering and Grove (five Jesuits) were Indicted of high Treason, for
conspiring the Death of King Charles the second; and that Ireland, Pickering
and Grove were Tried December the 17 th 1678. And that the Defendant gave
Evidence, that there was a treasonable Consult at the White-Horse Tavern in the
Strand, the 24 th of April, 1678. at which Whitebread, Fenwick, and Ireland,
and the Defendant were present; and that they there came to a Resolution to
Murder the King, and that the Defendant carried the Resolution from Chamber to
Chamber to be Signed by the Jesuits, whereas in truth he was not present, nor
carried any such Resolution to be Signed, and so committed wilful Perjury.

The Jury upon this Trial, were Sr William Dodson, Sr Edmund Wiseman, Richard
Aley, Thomas Fowls, Thomas Blackmore, Peter Pickering, Robert Bedingfield,
Thomas Rawlinson, Roger Reeves, Ambrose Isted, Henry Collyer and Richard Howard.


And the Trial was managed against the Defendant, by Mr Attorney General, Mr
Solicitor General, The Recorder of London.
Mr North, Mr Jones, Mr Molley; and Mr Hanses, ( L'Estrang's Assistant and
Brother Burgess in Parliament for Winchester, both of them being chosen by the
direction of Mr Bernard Howard a noted Papist, Brother to Cardinal Howard.)

In the first place Mr Foster, one of Ireland's Jury, swore what the Defendant
evidenced at that Trial, ( viz.) his being at the White-Horse Consult the 24 th
of April 1678.

Then the King's Counsel produced about twenty Jesuits and Students of St
Omers, these all testified that the Defendant came to St Omers in December,
1677. and went not from thence until June, 1678.

Whosoever reads this Trial, cannot but observe some things worthy noting, as

First, The rage of the Chief Justice, and extraordinary zeal of the King's
Counsel, both against the Defendant, and the belief of the Popish Plot, (of
which more in its due place.)

Secondly, The Caresses and tender usage of these Jesuited Sparks, both by the
Court and Counsel; their Evidence was received without the least Interruption,
not one cross, thwarting, or doubting question being put to any one of them,
nay, there did not appear so much temper as to permit the Defendant to propose
his questions to them, which made him with undaunted Courage cry out, That his
defense was under a very great prejudice, and that there was a turn to be
served, and therefore he was not admitted to ask the Witnesses questions; And
said, I do verily believe, That at this rate, it is more safe for Papists to be
Traitors, than for any Protestant to discover a Popish Plot.

Thirdly, The harmony and uniformity of their Evidence, which was so
extraordinary, that any indifferent Reader must judge, that they were
instructed by their Tutors before they came from St Omers, and had often conn'd
their Lessons by the way, for they did to admiration agree in swearing to
particular days, and to most minute and trivial things, as to the day of
playing at Nine-Pins, of a Ball being stroke over a Wall, and the like.

In the next place, to insinuate that the Defendants Evidence was not always
true and credited; the King's Counsel produced the Earl of Castlemain, and Sr
George Wakeman, who decreed that what he swore against them at their Trials was
false.

Here the Chief Justice observing the Defendants undauntedness, said, I wonder
to see any one that has the face of a Man, carry it at this rate, when he hears
such Evidence brought against him; To which the Defendant replied, (very well)
I wonder Mr Attorney will offer to bring this Evidence, Jefferyes ( whose
Character with King Charles the second was, that he had the Impudence of ten
Carted Whores) in a raving fit retorted, such Impudence was never seen in any
Christian Nation, you are a shame to Mankind, to which the Defendant's Reply
was; No my Lord, I am neither a shame to my self, nor to Mankind; what I have
sworn is true, and I will seal it with my Blood if occasion be; Ah, Ah, my
Lord, I know why all this is, and so may the World, but this will not do the
work to make the Plot to be disbelieved, things are not to be done by great
Noises, I will stand by the Truth.

The Defendant in his defense observed, that the Indictment against him was six
years after the pretended Perjury; That the Witnesses against him were some of
those who gave Evidence at the Trial of the five Jesuits, and though there were
some fresh Witnesses that they did evidence the same thing that was then
offered, but the Testimony rejected, though then, and also at Langhorn's Trial,
sixteen St Omer's youths were brought to falsify his Evidence; He further
observed very pertinently, that Whitebread and Fenwick were present, and heard
the whole of the Evidence given by him upon the Trial of Ireland; that they
were Tried six Months after, and in that time might have provided Witnesses to
falsify his Evidence, they knowing what it was.

He urged that his Case was hard, his Testimony having been received with
credit, And the Jury upon convicting the Jesuits, being told by the Court,
That they had found an unexceptionable Verdict, That all the Objections against
the Evidence were then fully answered, that there was nothing that the
Prisoners had been wanting in, to object, which could be objected, and that the
thing was as clear as the Sun; And that yet after six years he must be called
to an account for Perjury in that Testimony, of part of the Popish Plot, with
which the King and Kingdom, four successive Parliaments, all the Judges of the
Land, and three Juries were so well satisfied.

He further observed the several attempts to baffle his Testimony, ( viz) the
Murder of Sr Edmundberry Godfrey, who took his first Depositions, and the
contrivance of Pain, Farewell and Thompson, to make Sr Edmund Felo de se. Then
he produced these Witnesses, ( viz.)

Cicilia Mayo, who swore that she saw Dr Otes, at Sr Richard Barker's House in
Barbican, the latter end of April or the beginning of May 1678, and that he
came again thither within a few days, and was frequently there; That she
remembered the time by a particular circumstance ( viz.) her Master Sr Richard
Barker's being sick all the Month of April.

All imaginable art was employed by the Chief Justice, and the King's Counsel
to perplex and confound this, and all other the Witnesses for the Defendant, by
impertinent and puzling cross questions; but she honestly and very boldly stood
to it, telling Jefferies, that her Evidence was the Truth, and nothing but the
Truth; to which he in a scoffing taunting way replied, Ay, no doubt of it, thou
swearest nothing but the Truth.

She further added, that the Defendant came in a disguise, in a white Hat and
colored Clothes, and went to Sr Richard's Ladies Sister, Madam Thorold (now in
Wales) who said to him, Mr Otes, I hear you are turned Jesuit, and We can have
no Society with you now. That a Servant of Sr Richard's, one Benjamine Turbet
(since dead) law him at those times, and told her that he was turned Jesuit.
That he Dyned with Dr Cocket and Madam Thorold (both now in Wales) and with her
two Sons (since dead) and two Daughters (now in Lincolnshire) at Sr Richard
Barker's House three or four days after his first coming to the House in the
latter end of April.

John Butler, Servant to Sr Richard, witnessed that Dr Otes came to his Masters
in disguise, in the beginning of May before the Plot broke out; hereupon
Jefferies demanded how he could be able to swear to the precise time, and vexed
him with repeated questions; and the demand of reasons for his remembering the
month, (tho, by the way no such question was put to any one of the twenty St
Omers Witnesses) to which Butler answered, that he was called to witness it
about six or seven Months afterward, at Ireland's Trial; that he remembered the
time by the token that in May Sr Richard was sick at Putney, whether he went
the latter end of April, and stayed a fortnight.

The Solicitor General endeavored to confound this Witness with abundance of
Questions very little to the purpose; and Jeffryes (with little reason) called
his Evidence a wild Story without Reason. Upon which the Defendant said, Truly,
my Lord, I do not find you were so strict in the examination of the St Omers
Witnesses, or bore half so hard upon them as you do upon my Witnesses.

Mrs Mayo being again and again interrogated and thwarted with apparent design
to confound her, did declare that she did see Dr Otes in May 1678. and that she
spoke nothing there but as in the presence of the Lord: Upon which Jeffryes
said, We are all of us in the presence of the Lord always; and she retorted,
And shall answer before him for all that we have done and said, all of us, the
proudest and the greatest here.

Philip Page swore that he could not remember the precise time, but that Dr.
Otes came to Sr Richard Barker's in a disguise, when Sr Richard was sick at
Putney (whereupon the Defendant did well observe that the St Omers men did
swear through-stitch, but that his honest Witnesses were cautious, it being so
long ago.)

Mr W. Walter a Minister, swore that he met Mr Otes between St Martins Lane and
Leicester-Fields in a strange disguise, and that he did then observe the
Elm-Trees in Leicester Fields budded forth as big as Hazel-Nuts, so that by
that token he reckoned it was between Lady Day, and the latter end of April,
and that it was near a Year and a Quarter before the time when he was examined
about this matter at the Trial of the five Jesuits, which was the 13th of June,
1679.

The Attorney General called these Canting Witnesses that beat about the Bush,
and spoke of Uncertainties.

Then the Defendant proceeded in his defense, and offered these Objections to
the Validity of the Evidence brought against him.

1. That a Papist in a Cause of Religion is not to be received and believed as
a good Witness; (and this case did surely require Witnesses above all possible
Objections against their Testimony.) But.

Here Judge Wythens interposed, saying, Is not a Papist as good a Witness as a
Dissenter.

Which was answered by citing Bulstrode's Reports, part 2. 155. viz. A Popish
Recusant is not to be admitted a Witness between party and party; which was
also my Lord Cok's opinion.

Wythens replied, May a Presbyterian be a good Witness, Mr Otes? and Holloway
(who had helped the Bloodhounds to murder Stephen College) said, Or would Mr
College have been a good Witness, Mr Otes?

Most certainly by the rules of Law, the Testimonies of these Persons ought not
to have been offered in this Case to delude the People. And it may be well
observed here, as it was lately in relation to the Popish Witnesses about the
Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales; That the Civil Law so fully concurs
with our Common Law in rejecting Enemies to be Witnesses in the Cause of their
Enemy, that it denies credit to what they may testify in the cause of their
Enemy with their dying Breath after they have received the Encharist. That is
the general Conclusion of the Doctors of the Civil Law, Inimicus etiamsi in
Articulo mortis constitutus and accipisset Encharistiam repellitur a Testimonio
Causae sui Inimici.

Objection 2. To the Testimony of the St Omers Witnesses was their education,
bred up in a Seminary against Law. To which Jeffryes answered, Every Man that
is bred a Dissenter is bredup against Law. Whereupon the Defendant saying, My
Lord, I have not offered any Dissenter as an Evidence for me. Jeffryes in a
reproachful manner retorted, No, they are all of them no doubt of it, very good
People; Good-Wife Mayo and her Companions, excellent Protestants without all
question.

Object 3. The Statute 27 Eliz. cap. 2. entitled An Act against Jesuits,
Priests, and other such like disobedient Persons. Which Act makes it Treason
for any Jesuit or Ecclesiastic Person of the Romish Church to come into
England. And the Statute 3. Car. 1. Cap. 2. whereby it is enacted, That in case
any Person shall go into parts beyond the Seas, and be resident or trained up
in any Priory, Abbey or Popish University or School, he shall be disabled to
sue, or to be an Executor or Administrator, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of
Gift, or to bear any Office, and shall forfeit his Goods, and also his Lands
for his Life.

Object. 4. The Judgments of Papists in case of Conscience, whereby they
maintain the vilest Wickedness to be lawful for the Churches Service: and they
own They have Dispensations to swear Lies for promoting the Catholic Cause.

Object. 5. What was said and done in the Earl of Shaftsbury's Case at the
Sessions in the Old-Bayly and Hickes-Hall. It was there moved for Liberty to
bring Indictments of Perjury against the Witnesses who accused him of Treason,
but those Motions were overruled, because they would not have the King's
Witnesses indicted of Perjury, nor the Popish Plot called in question.

These Objections receiving no other answer from the Bench, then that all was
trifling and idle; and being so huff'd off, the Defendant proceeded to speak to
this effect,

My Lord, this I say, The Evidence upon which I am indicted, is the same which
was delivered six Years ago at Whitebread 's and Langhorn 's Trials, where were
sixteen Witnesses against me, but what credit did they then receive? Now if my
Evidence was then to be believed, though opposed by so many Witnesses, what new
objestion does rise against it, which was not then hinted and answered -- I do
avow the Truth of the Popish Plot, and will stand by it whilst I live -- I have
called some Noble Lords to testify for me, but I find either the distance of
time has wrought upon their Memories, or the difference of the Season has
changed their Opinion -- Was ever Man dealt with as I am, or had such Evidence
offered against him? Who are the Witnesses to prove this Perjury, but Youths
out of a Seminary? My Lord of Castlemaine and Sr George Wakeman, known Papists?
As for Castlemaine, all the World knows he was acquitted, because there was but
one Witness against him, and that without any reflection by the Lord Chief
Justice Scrogs upon my Testimony. Then Wakeman swears all I said against him
was false, whereas had it not been for two dishonest Persons, one of them (
meaning Graham) I have now in my sight, we could have proved 5000 l. of the
Money paid to him, and that he gave a Receipt for it. But my Lord this I am
sure of, if I had been a VVitness against those who suffered in the late
Fanatic Plot (as 'twas called) I had never been called in question, if my
Evidence had been false; but it is apparent the Papists have now a turn to
serve, and these St Omers Youths are brought to falsify my Evidence, and to
bring off the Lords who stand impeached of high Treason for the Popish
Conspiracy -- My Lord, it is not me they indict, but the whole protestant
Interest is aimed at in this Prosecution -- For my own part I care not what
becomes of me, the Truth will one time or another appear.

Then Mr Solicitor in a long Harangue gave great Reputation to the St Omers
Witnesses, and then told the Jury, that the Defendants Witnesses were these
four, Cicely Mayo, Butler, Page and Walter, the Parson; and that he would first
mention Page and Walter, and set them out of the way: Page (says he) remembers
to have seen Otes in a disguise at Sr Richard Barker's, but he is not certain
as to the time; and he cannot take upon him to say what time of the Year, or
what Year it was, only he believes it was in May; and therefore that can be no
sufficient evidence to contradict Witnesses, that with great particularity
speak to certain times. As for Walter he cannot remember the time when,
neither: Nay, the remembrance he has of it goes rather to another time, then
the time in question, for being asked what circumstance he knew the time by, he
said it was about a year and a quarter before the Plot was discovered, which
must be in April or May 1677, and that will do the Doctor no service at all
upon this question; thus Mr Solicitor.

For trial of this learned Gentleman's Sincerity, I shall review the Evidence
given by these two Persons, that the Reader may make his Judgment how fairly
they were set out of the way.

Page did indeed declare, that he could not be positive to the Year or Month,
but that to the best of his remembrance 'twas in the Year 1678, and in the
beginning of May (this was like an honest conscientious Witness) but what he
further testified, did evidently show the time to be in the beginning of May
1678. For besides his mentioning the Doctors coming in disguise, according to
the evidence of Mrs Mayo and Butler he declared that it was at the time when Sr
Richard Barker was ill at Putney, and that Sr Richard came to Town soon after,
and Mrs Mayo and Butler swore expressly that the time of the Doctors coming in
disguise, was when Sr Richard was sick at Putney, and that that was in the end
of April or beginning of May 1678.

As to Mr Walter, his evidence was, that he met the Doctor in disguise, and did
upon that very day observe the Elm Trees budded forth, so that by that token he
thought it might be between Lady Day and the latter end of April; and as to the
Year, that it was near a Year and Quarter, before he was examined about this
matter, at the Trial of the five Jesuits, which was the 13th of June, 1679; but
Mr Solicitor ( to the end this Man's Testimony might not serve the Doctor, as
he himself worded it) represents it quite otherwise, and tells the Jury, that
Mr Walter said, the time was about a year and a quarter before the Plot was
discovered, and so makes the time to be April or May 1677, though Mr Walter, in
speaking for himself, being asked about the time of the discovery of the Plot,
said, that he could not tell when the Plot was discovered, or whether it be
found out yet or no. Where is the Candor or Ingenuity of this proceeding?

Now comes the Scandal of the Law, Jeffryes, that mortal Enemy to the Liberties
of England, and all true Englishmen; He foaming, vomits a flood of Malice and
Rage; First, he caresses Sr William Dodson and his Brethren of the Jury, with
the complement, that to his knowledge they are Persons of great understanding
and abilities; and adds, that Mr Solicitor had shortened his Labor, by the
pains he had taken, to sum up the Evidence to them, which he concluded he had
without doubt done, with all faithfulness to his Master.

He then proceeds to blacken the Defendant with all the foul Language that
Malice could suggest, and tells his old Friends of the Jury, (whose
acquaintance with him disposed them to credit him) that the Popish Plot was a
sham, and that under the pretense thereof, another black and bloody Conspiracy
was carried on: Then he magnifies the evidence against the Defendant, both from
the number of the St Omers Sparks, no less then twenty, but also their harmony:
and he affirms, that against the credit of their Testimony, there was no
objection really made, but only Impudence; that the Defendant had produced but
two positive Witnesses, and that they were likewise positive in their
contradiction of one another; that they swore according as their humor led
them, and not according to any remembrance they had of the thing; and that he
rather believed it, because the third Witness, Page, gave an evidence contrary
to both of them, ( how notoriously false these malicious Suggestions are, will
evidently appear upon the perusal of what these three honest and plain-dealing
Witnesses swore.)

Then he comes to the Defendants fourth Witness, Mr Walter; and positively
affirms, that he says nothing to the matter, for that it did plainly appear,
the time which he speaks of, was about a year and a half before the five
Jesuits Trial, which must be in 1677, before the Defendant went to St Omers.

Mr Solicitor told the Jury, that Mr Walter spoke of a year and a quarter
before the discovery of the Plot; had that been true, it had run it back to the
year 1677, and to a time before the Doctor went to St Omers. His Lordship makes
Mr Walter to speak of about a year and a half before the Jesuits Trial, which
runs it back to December 1677; and then the King's celebrated Witnesses and Mr
Walter are agreed; but Mr Walter, (speaking for himself) says, the time was
near a year and a quarter before the Trial of the Jesuits, which brings us to
April 1678.

Though the Chief Justice and Solicitor were not agreed in this matter, yet
they would not quarrel about it, provided the understanding Jury would credit
either of them, against Mr Walter, and so serve the turn they aimed at, the
baffling the credit of the Popish Plot; and not allow this Witness to be
serviceable to the Vindication of Dr Otes.

Upon the following day after this Trial, Dr Otes was tried upon an Indictment
for another supposed Perjury, but that prosecution being of the Complexion with
what is here presented, I shall not trouble the Reader with any thing further
upon this subject, then to present him with the Names of the Jury (viz.) Sr
Thomas Vernon, Nicholas Charlton, Esquire Tho. Langham, Esquire Thomas Hartop, Francis
Griffith, John Kent, George Tory Ano. Hen. Loades, Tory Also. John Midgley,
John Pelling, Thomas Short, and George Peck.


The Juries, having according to the direction of that Man of Blood Jeffryes,
brought in the Defendant guilty of both the Perjuries; Comes the Abhorrer of
Parliaments, the tenderhearted good natured Protestant Judge VVythens, to
pronounce the Sentence; This very Person Wythens being Counsel for Knox, did
declare openly in the Court of King's Bench that Dr Otes had served the Nation
too well to be vilified in that Court.
previous to it he tells the Defendant, That no Christian's Heart can think of
the innocent Blood which was shed by his Oath, without bleeding; That every
knowing Man believed, and every honest Man grieved for it: He proceeds, God be
thanked, our Eyes are now opened -- You had not one Word to justify your self
from that great and heinous Perjury you were accused of [ transcendant
Impudence.]

The Judgment of the Court ( inter alia) is, You shall upon Wednesday next be
Whipped from Algate to Newgate.

Upon Friday you shall be Whipped from Newgate to Tyburn, by the Hands of the
common Hangman.

This I pronounce to be the Judgment of the Court upon you, and I must tell you
plainly, If it had been in my power to have carried it further, I should not
have been unwilling to have given Judgment of Death upon you.

I shall sum up all, with the sense of the present House of Commons upon this
whole proceeding, which take in this Vote;

Martis 11th die Junij 1689.

Resolved, That the Prosecution of Titus Otes upon two Indictments for Perjury
in the Court of King's Bench, was a design to stifle the Popish Plot, and that
the Verdicts given thereupon were corrupt, and that the Judgments given
thereupon, were cruel and illegal.



Notes upon the Trial of Nathaniel Reading Esquire for attempting to stifle the
King's Evidence as to the horrid Popish Plot; upon Wednesday, the 24th of April
1679. before the Lord Chief Justice North, etc.
THe Conspirators against our Religion, Laws and Liberties, being struck with
astonishment, and the Imprisoned and Impeached Traitors with no small Terror,
at the most providential and happy accession of Captain William Bedloe's
Testimony, to the discovery made by Dr Otes of the hellish Popish Plot, in
which he had stood single, and much discouraged, we do quickly find their
thoughts at work how to remove this newly acquired Witness. Their way of taking
off Sr Edmundbury Godfrey, having so highly dis-served their Cause, that is not
to be again practiced, therefore, the resolution taken in the present case is,
to tamper with and buy off Captain Bedloe, and they pitched upon Mr Reading to
carry on this Intrigue, whose parts and principles did very well qualify him
for such an undertaking, but Mr Bedloe, being above the reach of very powerful
Temptations, he very honestly; detected the villainous Attempts upon him, and
the Suborner was brought to Justice as follows:

The Indictment sets forth the Plot against the King, the Government and the
Protestant Religion, and that Colman, Ireland and Grove were tried, condemned
and executed for the same. That several Lords, viz. the Earl of Powis, Lord
Viscount Stafford, Lord Bellasis, Lord Arundel of Wardour, Lord Petre, and also
Sr Henry Titchbourn stand impeached of the said Treason: That Reading well
knowing these things, and to obstruct and stifle them, and to retard the
prosecution of Justice against the Lord Powis, Stafford, Bellasis, Petre, and
Sr Henry Titchbourn, did, on their part, the 29th of March last, solicit,
suborn and endeavor to persuade Mr William Bedlooe, whom he knew to have
given Information of those Treasons against the said Persons, to lessen, stifle
and not to give in evidence the full truth against them, and to give such
evidence as he should direct, and to that purpose did give him fifty six
Guineas, and promised him other great Rewards, to the hindrance and suppression
of Justice.

The Jury were these; Sr John Cutler, Thomas Cass, Joshua Galliard, Rains.
Waterhouse, Edw. Willford, Matthew Bateman, Tho. Henslow, Walter Moil, Thomas
Earsby, Richard Pagget, John Serle, John Haines.
Esquires.

The King's Counsel were, Sr Creswell Levens, The Attorney General, Mr Ward.


The evidence of this practice and subornation, was very clear and full,
particularly Mr Bedloe witnessed, that Reading had often treated with him about
mincing his Evidence for the bringing off the Lords, and Sr Henry Titchborne,
and gave him Money at several times, and did draw up a Paper of what Bedloe
should Swear, and did carry it to the Lords in the Tower, to be viewed and
corrected by them: Mr Speak testified that Bedloe had from time to time
informed him how the Treaty was carried on; that upon the 29 th of March 1679.
Mr Speak and VViggins Bedloe's Servant, being concealed in his Chamber, Mr
Reading came, and in the first place asked whether any body could hear their
discourse, and being assured that he was secure and secret, he told Mr Bedloe,
upon his demand, what the Lords in the Tower said, and what my Lord Stafford
said, that as to my Lord Stafford, he should be sure of the Estate in
Gloucester-shire, which had been promised to be settled upon him; for my Lord
had ordered him to prepare a blank Deed, which within ten days after his
Discharge, should be perfected; and the rest of the Lords did assure him, that
after they were acquitted, in proportion to the service he did them, in
lessening of his Evidence, he should have a plentiful Reward.

That Bedloe did then demand to have something under their hands, but Reading
said, that they think that not convenient, but I do take their Words, and you
must take mine; and then promised to go to the Lords in the Tower against
Monday, to prepare and bring him the Instructions from them for his Evidence.

Mr Speak added, that upon the Monday morning, he was to watch and see the
Delivery of the Paper, and did see Reading put it into Bedloe's hand, in the
painted-Chamber, who immediately delivered it to Mr Speak: This Paper was all
of Mr Reading's writing, and being read in Court, was found to contain the
purport of the Evidence to be given against the Lords, and was so ordered that
the whole was only hearsay, and could no way touch them.

Wiggins agreed with Mr Speak, in the Evidence given, of the Transactions
between Mr Bedloe and Mr Reading, in Mr Bedloe's Chamber.

Reading coming to make his Defense, offered nothing against the credit of the
Witnesses, but did, in effect, confess all they had testified, and the whole
matter charged in the Indictment, and in truth he was the greatest witness
against himself, as was well observed, after he was found guilty; by the Right
Honorable Sr Robert Atkyns, then one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, (but
soon after thrust out for Noncompliance with Sr Francis North, then Chief
Justice; and is now most deservedly Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and
Speaker of the House of Lords.)

The Jury having brought him in guilty, he was fined 1000 l. adjudged to a
years Imprisonment, and to be set in the Pillory upon the monday following, for
the space of one hour, in the Palace-Yard in Westminster.

When the late King James ascended the Throne, he was a particular Favorite,
and his Suffering in this matter was well rewarded.

It may not seem impertinent, to present the Reader, upon this occasion, with
so much of Captain Bedloe's solemn Deathbed Declaration, as the Lord Chief
Justice North allowed the World to see, His Lordship was pleased to
acknowledge, that he took Captain Bedloe's Examination upon Oath at Bristol,
upon the 16 th of August 1681. And that he declared, that the Duke of York had
been so far engaged in the Plot, that there was no part that had been proved
against any Man that had suffered, but he was to the full guilty of it; all but
what tended to the Kings Death; from the trouble whereof the Jesuits had
undertaken to deliver the Duke. And his Lordship added, that Mr Bedloe told him
he looked upon himself as a dying Man, and that he must shortly appear before
the Lord of Hosts, to give an account of all his Actions; and that, because
many persons had made it their business to baffle and deride the Plot, He did
for satisfaction of the World there declare, upon the Faith of a dying Man, and
as he hoped for Salvation, that whatever he had testified concerning the Plot
was true; and that he had many Witnesses to produce, who would make the Plot as
clear as the Sun. That the Jesuits had resolved the King's Death, and would
spare him no longer, than he continued to be kind to them; And that they
resolved to set up an Head for their Cause here, whatever came of it; and said,
that if they should slip the opportunity they then had, they should never have
such another.

Notes upon the Trial of Thomas Knox and John Lane, for a Conspiracy to Defame
and Scandalize Dr Otes and Mr Bedloe, thereby to discredit their Evidence about
the Popish Plot; At the King's Bench Bar at Westminster, upon the 25 th of
November, 1679.
The Judges then upon the Bench were, Sr William Scroggs, Lord Chief Justice,
Sr Francis Pemberton, and Sr Thomas Jones.


THe unlucky miscarriage of Reading's attempt, to corrupt the King's Evidence,
or to overthrow the credit of their Testimony, deterred not others from
prosecuting so pious a work; for that is instantly succeeded by the cursed
Conspiracy of Knox, and of Lane, and Osborne; the one lately, the other at that
time a Servant to Dr Otes, but Justice overtook them; as the following Scheme
of their Trial shows.

The Indictment being read, upon their pleading not guilty, the following Jury
was sworn.

Sr John Kirk, Knight. John Roberts, Thomas Harriot, R. Waterhouse, Henry Johnson,
Thomas Earsby, Simon Middleton, Joseph Ratcliffe, Hugh Squire, James Supple,
Francis Dorrington, Richard Cooper.
Esquire.

The King's Counsel were Mr Attorney General, Mr Solicitor General, Mr Sergeant
Maynard, Sr Francis VVinnigton, Mr Williams, Mr Thomas Smith, and Mr Trenchard.


For Knox, Mr Saunders, Mr VVithens, and Mr Scroggs.


For Lane, Mr Holt, (assigned by the Court.)


The Indictment (opened by Mr Trenchard) was, that whereas Colman, Ireland,
Pickering and Grove, conspired to destroy the King and change the Religion
Established by Law; and to introduce Popery, and were thereof Convicted,
Attainted and Executed; And whereas the Lord Powis, Lord Arundel of VVardour,
and others were accused of those Treasons, and Impeached for the same in
Parliament, etc. The Defendants knowing Mr Otes and Mr Bedloe had given
Information of these Treasons, to stifle the Evidence and scandalize them, did
conspire to represent them as wicked Persons, and of no credit. And the
Indictment further sets forth, that Knox, with the agreement of Lane and
Osborne, caused Letters to be wrote, with contrivance to accuse Otes and
Bedloe, that they had conspired falsely to accuse the E. of Danby. And that Otes
had attempted to commit Sodomy with Lane: that, to effect those wicked designs,
Knox gave several sums of Money to Osborne and Lane, and had promised great
Rewards to them.

Then the Cause was opened by that most incomparable Person ( the honor of the
Law) old Sr John Maynard, ( now first Lord Commissioner of the great Seal,
whose Ability, Integrity and Desert, have kept him from a Seat upon the Benches
of Westminster, till about the eighty eighth Year of his Age; when Heaven set
the Law free) he spoke to this effect;

This Cause is of great consequence; there has been an horrid and abominable
Conspiracy, against the King, the Nation, our Religion and the Law: The first
discovery of this Conspiracy came from a single Person, who stood single and
discouraged a long time, and there were endeavors to discourage his further
discovery, when it stood so. Sr Edmundbury Godfrey having taken his
Examination, then the endeavor was to suppress it, and that by no less a
wickedness then the barbarous Murder of that honest Gentleman; that being
accomplished, they strived to baffle and defame him when dead. All this while
he stood single; it fell out, by the mercy of God, that Bedloe made a further
discovery, and public Justice has gone upon it.

Then they attempted to corrupt his Testimony with Bribes and Rewards, and
Reading, who transacted it, is attainted of it, scelere tutandum est scelus.

Having gone all these ways, they return again to see if they can disgrace and
baffle the Evidence of Otes and Bedloe, by scandalizing them, with foul
offenses, especially Dr Otes; and that was thus, Knox tampered with Lane, a
Servant to Otes, to accuse him of the Horrid Sin of Sodomy: In order to it,
there were Letters wrote by Osborne, who is run away, but contrived by Knox.

It happens in this case as it did long ago; as the Historian told us, multi ob
stultitiam non put abant, multi ob ignorantiam non videbant, multi ob
pravitatem non credebant et non credendo conjurationem adjuvabant. To this Sr
Creswell Levens, the King's Attorney General added, This is a counter-part of
Mr Reading 's Case, only it seems in this to differ, that it exceeds the
Original.

In the proceeding upon the cause, it was proved that Lane, upon his first
coming to Dr Otes in November 1678, had a design to accuse him, as he afterward
did, of Sodomy, a Crime above the common standard of Villainies; That he
declared whilst he was with the Doctor, that he hoped in a short time to get
1000 l. That Lane sent for Sr William Waller, that he might confess the whole
Contrivance to him, declaring that he was pricked in Conscience for the false
Oaths he had taken.

That Lane and Osborne had confessed before a Committee of the House of Lords
(and also before Sr William Waller and Justice Warcup) that they were suborned
by Knox to swear falsely against Dr Otes and Mr Bedloe, and that he had given
them money to do it. That Knox made Lane and Osborne swear Secrecy, and to
stand fast to the Instructions he had given them. That he went to the
Sugar Loaf in Pickadilly, and took Lodgings for them, and lay there with them,
and promised them Money and Preferment; and told Lane that he need not doubt
but the Lords in the Tower would acknowledge their Kindness.

That Lane and Osborne said, they were going from Dr Otes, that they were sworn
Brothers, if the one did go, the other would; and they should get Preferment
and have 100 l. per annum, and 500 l. in Money.

As to Knox his endeavors to blast the Testimony of Dr Otes and Mr Bedloe, it
was proved, That

Knox endeavored to suborn H. Wiggins to accuse Mr Bedloe, his Master. That he
proposed to Thurston, a Servant to Dr Otes, to be very kind to him, if he could
find any thing to Swear against his Master. That Knox, to invite VViggins to
betray and accuse Mr Bedloe, said, The King knows Otes and Bedloe to be great
Rogues, and when he has got what he can out of them, he will hang them up. That
when Knox, Lane and Osborne were Prisoners in the Gatehouse, for this
contrivance; Knox offered the Vnder-Keeper a Reward to allow him to correspond
by Letters with Lane, and gave him three half Crowns, desiring him to speak to
Lane to stand fast to him, and then they should be two against one; for he
feared Osborne had betrayed them about the business of Dr Otes; That Knox, and
Lane, and Osborne went to Justice Dewy, and Knox told him, he was advised to
come to him to take an Information against Dr Otes; and that they went to
Justice Cheyney upon the same errand. That Lane had been kept the last Summer
at the Lord Powis his house, and had 10 s. per week allowed him. That Knox was
to have 30 or 40 l. to carry on the business, and that Knox, Osborne and Lane
were to be rewarded by the Lords in the Tower, for their evidence against Dr
Otes and Mr Bedloe.

That Lane being taken, Knox sent for Osborne, and carried him in a Coach to
White Friars.

That the Papers relating to the Conspiracy were delivered by Knox to
Dangerfield, and went about to the Lords in the Tower, and afterward to Nevil
alias Pain, and were by him amended, and then delivered to Knox again.

The Case appearing so very clear upon the Evidence, the Jury without going
from the Bar found the Defendants guilty. Whereupon they received this merciful
Sentence; Knox, the principal, ( who is now at this day in a better station (at
Court) than ever he was in his Life, or could ever have hoped for) Fined two
hundred Marks; to be Imprisoned a year, and to be bound to the good behavior
for three years; Lane fined one hundred Mark^; to stand once in the Pillory,
and to be Imprisoned a Year.

Notes upon the Trial of John Tasborough and Ann Price for Subornation of
Perjury, in endeavoring to persuade Mr Stephen Dugdale to retract and deny his
Evidence about the Popish Plot, with an intent to stifle the further
Prosecution of the same. At the Kings Bench, upon the third of February 1679,
before Sr William Scroggs, Sr Thomas Jones, Sr William Dolben, and Sr Francis
Pemberton, Judges of that Court.
The Jury were, Thomas Harriot, Tho. Johnson, Char. Vmphrerile, Tho. Earsby,
Richard Pagget, John Green, Edward Willford, Richard Bull, Joseph Ratclaffe,
Richard Cooper, James Supple, George Read.


THe suborning attempt of Knox and Lane, was succeeded by another of the like
nature, carried on by two Popish Engines, Mr Tasborough and Mrs Price; which
being likewise happily detected, they were prosecuted as follows;

The Indictment was to this effect, That Whitebread, Harcourt and Langhorne,
and others, were convicted and attainted for Treason, and that Dugdale had been
a material Evidence against them, and the Defendants knowing this, and
contriving to stifle the evidence of those Treasons, did before Harcourts
Trial, suborn and endeavor to persuade Dugdale, not to give evidence against
him, and after the Trial solicited him to retract the Evidence he had given;
and promised him large Rewards for it; and to accomplish it, they incited him
to withdraw and retire himself, and produced a Note which he was to sign, which
follows in these words, Being touched with a true Remorse of Conscience, and
hearty sorrow for the great e'l I did, in coming in a VVitness against the
Catholics, and there speaking things which I know in my Conscience to be very
far from the Truth, I think my self bound in duty both to God and man, and for
the safety of my own Soul, to make a true declaration, how I was drawn in to
this wicked action: But being very well satisfied that I shall create my self
many powerful Enemies upon this account, I have retired my self to a place of
safety, where I will with my own Hand discover the great wrong that has been
done the Catholics, and hope it may gain belief: and likewise, I protest
before Almighty God, that I have no motive to induce me to this Confession, but
a true Repentance for the Mischiefs I have done, and hope God Almighty will
forgive me. And they promised him great Rewards to sign this Note. To this
Indictment they pleaded not Guilty.

The King's Counsel were, Mr Sergeant Maynard, Mr Attorney General,
Solicitor-General, Mr Belwood.


For Tasborough, Mr Pollexfew, Mr Scroggs, Mr Thompson.


For Price, Mr Saunders,


Mr Sergeant Maynard observed to the Jury that this practice was not new, and
minded them of what Reading, and what Knox and Lane did, and that this was the
third Cause of that Kind, and it went somewhat further then the two former; for
this was to be done in writing, and subscribed by Dugdale to be produced upon
occasion, to defame all the Evidence; the Witnesses being then called, Dugdale
testified that he had been long acquainted with Mrs Price, and that before
Harcourt's Trial, she desired him to be kind to Harcourt, because he had been
her Confessor; and Mr Wright testified that he overheard her make this request
to Dugdale; and that Dugdale, upon their parting, told him (upon his enquiry
what she said to him) that it was to take off his Evidence against Harcourt.

Dugdale further testified, that she treated with him for to retrct his
Evidence, and to be gone, and to leave the Paper behind him, to signify the
trouble in his mind, for the wrong done in his Testimony: To this he is invited
by the promise of 1000 l. of a Pardon for Body and Soul, and assurance of
Security abroad.

That Dugdale acquainted my Lord of Shaftsbury, Mr Hambden and Mr Charleton
with this; who advised him to get some Persons to be by, when they further
treated about this business, which he did.

That Mrs Price told him, that the Duke of York had a wise Council, and
contrived it so, that if he would come over to them, there would not a Papist
more suffer; that the Witnesses should in a short time be hanged, Note this, of
Hanging the Witnesses is the same Argument used by Knox in his tampering with
Lane and Osborne, and it evinces, that by the common consent of the
Conspirators, some of the Witnesses were to be corrupted, and those who were
temptation proof, to be scandalized and hanged.
The Plot should be turned on the Protestants, and Popery should be established
in half a Year.

That Mrs Price brought Mr Tasborough to him, who told him that all that Mrs
Price had proposed and promised to him, should be performed; that he must sign
the Paper; be gone, and give no more evidence; and he should have protection,
pardon and security; and That Tasborough transacted all this in the Duke of
York 's Name.

Dr Chamberlain testified, that he was in a Closet in Dugdale's Chamber, and
that Mrs Price came into the Chamber, and he heard their Discourse; and she
told him, that the Spanish Ambassador was unwilling to treat with him, because
he must use an Interpreter, which would be dangerous. That she persuaded him to
be gone, and the Duke of York would protect him, pardon him, and give him 1000
l. and that then Dugdale said to her, You know Mrs Price that I began not this
Intrigue with you, but you proposed it to me, which she owned; That upon
Dugdale's demanding of her how the 1000 l. should be secured; She said she
would in a Weeks time bring a Person of quality, who should secure it to him.

Mr Cleave, who was in the Closet at the same time, testified to the same
effect with Dr Chamberlain; and added, that Dugdale asked her when he should
go to the Spanish Ambassador; and that Dugdale told her, he well liked her
offer of bringing a person of Quality to secure the 1000 l. and she then said,
you shall have the Duke of York's Protection, and a Pardon, not only for your
Body but your Soul; a large Proffer?

That Dugdale told her, that his coming over to them, and going away, would
signify little, there being Dr Otes and others to go on with the Evidence: To
which she answered, We do not care so much for them, for the Duke's Eye is only
upon you.

Sr Robert Southwell, Sr John Nicolas, and Sr Thomas Doleman, Clerks of the
Council, testified, that Mrs Price, being examined before the Council the 23 d
of October, and being demanded who framed the Paper for her, set forth in the
Indictment, she said, that she studied it, and indicted it her self.

That Mr Tasborough being asked about the Paper, spoke very cautiously; that he
did not positively say he had pressed Dugdale to sign it, but told him, unless
he signed it, he could not proceed to get any favor for him, for that was to
testify him to be a Penitent.

Mr Cross testified, that Mrs Price spoke to Dugdale not to proceed further
against Parson's (a Priest in the Gatehouse) than he had done.

The guilt of the Defendants being thus clearly made out, and nothing material
offered in their defense; the Jury without stirring from the Bar, found them
both guilty of the Charge in the Indictment.

It might have been reasonably expected, that the reiterated attempts to suborn
the Witnesses of the Popish Plot, would have irritated the Justice of the
Nation, to more severity upon these Offenders; but it is evident that the Plot
did daily grow and gain ground, even upon our Courts of Justice.

I shall here take occasion to observe, what Fines had been formerly imposed
upon Protestants, for Offenses, very slight, compared with this; Mr Joseph
Brown, in the Term before the Popish Plot broke out, in 1678. was adjudged to
pay 1000 Marks fine; to find Sureties for the good Behavior for seven years,
and to have his name struck out of the Roll of Attorneys, and what was his
Crime? Why, the Superscribing a Packet to the East Indies, wherein was only
enclosed a very good Book, called the Long Parliament Dissolved.

Benjamin Harris a Bookseller, in the year 1680. adjudged to pay 500 l. Fine,
to stand in the Pillory, and to be bound to the good Behavior for three years;
(and Chief Justice Scroggs, would have had him Whipped into the bargain, but that
Mr Justice Pemberton checked it, by holding up his hands in Admiration) this
persons Crime was, the publishing a Book called, An Appeal from the Country to
the City, in which this passage was contained; We in the Country have done our
parts in choosing good Members for Parliament, but if they must be Dissolved or
Prorogued whenever they come to redress the Grievances of the Subject, we may
be pitied, not blamed, if the Plot takes effect, as in all probability it
will; Our Parliaments are not then to be condemned, for their not being
suffered to sit occasioned it.

But now, when we come to Judgments for Misdemeaners on the other side; We
shall perceive great Compassion and Mercy appearing in that Court; indeed
Reading, who was Convicted for the first attempt upon the King's-Witnesses, was
adjudged to pay 1000 l. to be Pilloried, and Imprisoned for a year; and one
would have thought, that more severe Judgments would have past upon such as
should dare to repeat the same Crimes, after such an Example; but we see the
contrary; About six Months afterward Knox and Lane being Convicted of the same
Offense, accompanied with much blacker Circumstances, Knox the principal, was
only Fined 200 Marks, and condemned to a years Imprisonment, and to be bound to
the good Behavior for three years: And Lane Fined 1^ Marks, and adjudged to
stand once in the Pillory, and to be Imprisoned a year. And now in the Case
before us, (Mr Tasborough, a Gentleman of a good Estate, who had treated about
so great a Villainy in the name of the Duke of York) was only Fined 100 l. And
Mrs Price 200 l. But who can admire at this notorious departure from the rules
of Justice and Equality in the assessing of Fines, that remembers that the
Chief Justice Scroggs, did in this very Term declare in open Court, in the Case
of Dr Jessop, a very honest and worthy Protestant of Norfolk, that he would
have regard to Persons and their Principles, in imposing of Fines; and would
set a Fine of 500 l. on one person, for the same offense, for which he would
not Fine another 100 l. And accordingly Fined Dr Jessop 100 l. for reporting
false News, as they called it, and at the same time Fined the Doctor's Author
of that News, ( a right Tory no doubt) only five Marks; Now surely will the
Reader say, this Jessop was undoubtedly a very naughty Man; but to undeceive
him, I can affirm, he is as true a Church of England Man as can be found; and
the bad principle, which made him to be thus marked, was, that he was an avowed
Enemy to Popery, and true to the Liberties of England; and did, upon every
occasion, exert himself, to a degree hardly to be equalled by any Gentleman of
Norfolk; for the choosing deserving men for Knights of the shire; and
particularly for Sr John Hobart, then whom none ever deserved better of that
County, and whose name will always be remembered there, with great Honor. For
this extravagant Partiality and Injustice in imposing Fines, the Court of
King's Bench, was deservedly marked with this Vote of the House of Commons.

December the 23 d 1680:

Resolved, That the Court of King's Bench, in the Imposition of Fines on
Offenders of late years, has acted Arbitrarily, Illegally, and Partially,
Favoring Papists and persons Popishly affected, and excessively Oppressing
Protestants.



Reflections upon the Proceedings in the Old Baily, before the Lord Chief
Justices, Pemberton and North. November 24 1681. upon an Indictment for High
Treason, framed against the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury, for
conspiring the Death of the King, and Subversion of the Government.
THe Names of the Grand Jury, returned by Sheriff Filkington and Sheriff Shute,
and who were Sworn upon that occasion, were, Sr Sam. Barnardiston, John Morden,
Thomas Papillon, John Dubois, Charles Herle, Edward Rudge, Humphrey Edwm, John
Morris, Edmund Harrison, Joseph Wright, John Cox, Thomas Parker, Leonard
Robinson, Thomas Shepherd, John Flavel, Michael Godfrey, Joseph Richarson,
William Empson, Andrew Kendrick, John Lane, and John Hall.


A sort of people called Tories, (wedded to their own blindness) having loudly
clamoured of this great Jury, I shall here add the names of those who were
returned upon the same Panel.

Alderman Ellis, Mr Mellish, Mr Tho. Gardener, Samuel Swinnock, Mr Ben.
Godfrey, Mr John Pollexfen, Mr John Smith, Mr John Gardener, Mr Peter Delence,
Mr Peter Hubland, Mr William Ashurst, Mr John Deagle, Mr Thomas Western, Mr
Bonnel, Mr Gabriel Wheatley, Mr Tho. Carpenter, Mr L. Baskervile, Mr George
Marwood, Mr John Smith.
And now, let all who know the City of London judge, whether a more substantial
Panel, in every respect, was ever returned to serve at the Old-Bailey.

The King's Council for the management of this Intrigue, were, The Attorney
General, Sr Francis Wythens ( the Abhorrer of Parliaments.) And Mr Saunders (
afterward the Quo Warranto, Lord Chief Justice.)


Mr Graham, ( the Solicitor of all the late Sham Plots upon Protestants, and
play master of corrupt Juries and perjured Witnesses) solicited this
Prosecution, and hence took his first step to such Preferment, as enabled him
to give Eight or ten thousand Pounds with a Daughter; It Is to be lamented that
he has lived to this day without further Preferment, in the way, which at that
time the then Lord Chancellor promised to honest Captain Wilkinson.

The magnified Evidence of this horrid Treason, and that, which the King's
Council relying upon, begun with, was a Paper proved by Secretary Jenkins, Mr
Blaithwaite, and Mr Gwin, to have been found in the Earl's House; of which such
noise has been made in the World, by the virulent Observator, and the Popish
News-Writers (as well as from too many of our Pulpits) that it may not be
ungratful to the Reader, to be here presented with the very words thereof,
which follow,

The Association.
WE the Knights etc. finding, to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priests
and Jesuits, with the Papists, and their Adherents, and Abettors, have for
several years last past, pursued a most pernicious and hellish Plot, to root
out the true Protestant Religion, as a pestilent Heresy, to take away the Life
of our Gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties and to set up Arbitrary
Power and Popery.

And it being notorious, that they have been highly encouraged by the
Countenance and Protection, given and procured for them, by James Duke of York,
and by their expectations of his succeeding to the Crown; and, that through
Crafty Popish Councils, his Designs have so far prevailed, that he has created
many and great Dependants upon him, by his bestowing Offices and Preferments,
both in Church and State.

It appearing also to us, that by his influence, Mercenary Forces bave been
levied and kept on foot, for his secret Designs, contrary to our Laws; the
Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the apparent hazard
of his Majesty's Person, our Religion and Government, if the Danger had not
been timely foreseen by several Parliaments; and part of those Forces, with
great difficulty, caused by them to be Disbanded, at the Kingdoms great
Expense; and, it being evident; that, notwithstanding all the continual
endeavors of the Parliament, to deliver his Majesty from the Councils, and out
of the power of the said Duke; yet his interest in the Ministry of State, and
others, have been so prevalent, that Parliaments have been unreasonably
Prorogued and Dissolved, when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish
Conspiracies, and ill Ministers of State, their Assistants.

And that the said Duke, in order to reduce all into his own Power, has
procured the Garrisons the Army and Ammunition, and all the Power of the Seas,
and Soldiery, and Lands belonging to these three Kingdoms, to be put into the
hands of his Party, and their Adherents, even in opposition to the Advice and
Order of the (...) Parliament.

And, as we considering with heavy hearts, how greatly the Strength, Reputation
and Treasure of the Kingdom, both at Sea and Land, is wasted, and consumed and
lost, by the intricate, expensive management of these wicked destructive
Designs; and finding the same Councils, after exemplary Justice upon some of
the Conspirators, to be still pursued, with the utmost devilish Malice, and
desire of Revenge, whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard of being
Murdered, to make way for the said Duke's advancement to the Crown; and the
whole Kingdom, in such case is destitute of all security of their Religion,
Laws, Estates and Liberty; Sad Experience, in the Case of Queen Mary, having
proved the wisest Laws to be of little force, to keep out Popery and Tyranny
under a Popish Prince.

We have therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way, by a Bill for that
purpose, to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown; and
to Banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland; But the
first means of the King and Kingdoms safety being utterly rejected; and We left
almost in Despair of obtaining any real and effectual Security; and knowing our
selves to be entrusted, to advise and act for the preservation of his Majesty
and the Kingdom; and, being persuaded in our Consciences, that the dangers
aforesaid, are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the
best means that are in our power, to secure the Kingdom against them; We have
thought fit to propose to all true Protestants, an Union amongst themselves, by
solemn and sacred Promise, of mutual Defense and Assistance, in the
preservation of the true Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Person, and Royal
State, and our Laws, Liberties and Properties; and we hold i^ our bounden Duty,
to join our selves for the same intent, in a Declaration of our united
Affections and Resolutions in the form ensuing.

I A. B. do in the Presence of God, solemnly Promise, Vow and Protest; to
maintain and defend, to the utmost of my Power, with my Person and Estate, the
true Protestant Religion, against Popery, and all Popish Superstition,
Idolatry, or Innovation; and all those, who do or shall endeavor to spread or
advance it, within this Kingdom.

I will also, as far as in me lies, maintain and defend his Majesty's Royal
Person and Estate, as also the Power and Privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, against all Encroachments and Usurpation
of Arbitrary Power whatsoever; and endeavor entirely, to Disband all such
Mercenary Forces as we have reason to believe were raised to advance it, and
are still kept up in and about the City of London; to the great Amazement and
Terror of all the good People of the Land.

Moreover, James Duke of York, having publicly propessed and owned the Popish
Religion, and notoriously given Life and Birth, to the damnable and hellish
Plots of the Papists against his Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and
the Government of this Kingdom: I will never consent that the said James Duke
of York or any other, who is, or has been a Papist, or any ways adhered to the
Papists in their wicked Designs, be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of
England: But by all lawful means, and by force of Arms, if need so require,
according to my Ability, will oppose him; and endeavor to Subdue, Expel and
Destroy him, if he come into England, or the Dominions thereof, and seek by
Force to set up his pretended Title; and all such as shall adhere unto him, or
raise any War, Tumult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as public
Enemies of our Laws, Religion and Country.

To this end, We and every one of Us, whose hands are here-under written, do
most willingly bind our selves and every one of Us, unto the other; jointly and
severally, in the Bond of one firm and loyal Society, or Association; and do
Promise and Vow before God, that with Our joint and particular Forces, We will
oppose and pursue unto Destruction, all such as upon any Title what soever,
shall oppose the Just and Righteous ends of this Association; and Maintain,
Protect and Defend all such, as shall enter into it, in the just performance of
the true intent and meaning of it. And, least this just and pious Work should
be any ways obstructed or hindered, for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any
evil minded Persons under pretense of raising Forces for the Service of this
Association, should attempt or commit Disorders; We will follow such Orders, as
we shall from time to time receive from this present Parliament, whilst it
shall be sitting; or the major part of the Members of both Houses, Subscribing
this Association, when it shall be prorogued or dissolved; and obey such
Officers as shall by Them be set over Us, in the several Countries, Cities and
Buroughs; until the next meeting of this, or another Parliament; and will then
show the same Obedience and Submission to it, and those who shall be of it.

Neither will we for any respect of Persons, or Causes, or for Fear, or Reward;
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the prosecution thereof,
during our Lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted and
suppressed, as perjured persons, and public Enemies to God, the King, and our
native Country.

To which Pains and Punishments we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every
one of us, without benefit of any color or pretense to excuse it.

In witness of all which Premises, to be inviolably kept, we do to this
present Writing, put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and
admit any others hereafter into this Society and Association.

It is to be observed, that this Paper had neither date, nor any Hand to it;
nor did it appear of whose Handwriting it was; but Sr Francis Wythens
aggravated the matter, saying, That though the Paper began very plausibly, and
went a great way so, yet in the last clause but one, they came to perfect
levying of War, declaring, that they would join to destroy the mercenary Forces
about London ( the words by the way were, to disband the mercenary Forces
raised and kept up to advance arbitrary Power; but such a mistake may be
remitted to Sr F. Wythens, and also to that smooth Lord Chief Justice North,
who in suming up the Evidence to the Grand Jury, did wilfully (no doubt of it)
make the same mis-representation of that matter. Mr Saunders added, that the
design of the Paper was pretended to oppose Popery and Arbitrary Power, and
destroy the Papists; which seemed not so much in it self; but that their
Witnesses would show, who those Papists were that were to be destroyed.

And now the Witnesses are called, who were, John Booth, (a most notorious and
scandalous Villain, who had been guilty of several Felonies); Edward
Turbervile, and John Smyth, an Irish Priest (who were manifestly perjured in
the Trial of honest College) Brian Haynes, John Macnamar, Dennis Macnamar,
Edward Ivey and Bernard Dennis ( Profligate Irish Witnesses, who, according to
every season, had traded in Swearing and Counterswearing.)

It may suffice to present the Impartial Reader with the Names of these
scandalous Fellows; for 'twould be nauseous to detain him, in reading the
non-sensical, incredible, contradictory stuff, sworn by them; as, That the Earl
would raise the Kingdom, to compel the King to give Haynes a Pardon. That the
Government was to be changed to a Commonwealth, and the Duke of Buckingham to
be King. That the Earl should tell Macnamar, and Ivey, that he would bring the
King's Head to the Block. That a Person of the Earl of Shaftesbury's
extraordinary caution should talk Treason (or any thing else) with so infamous
a Fellow as Haynes, for an Hour together, in a Cook's Shop in Ironmonger-Lane.

It seems here worthy of Observation, that the Conspirators clapped this Noble
Lord into the Tower, in the beginning of July 1681; but the Term coming on,
when they must prosecute him, or he would be bailed out; they were then to seek
for English Witnesses to back the trusty Irish; so Booth and the rest were
raked together; and Captain Wilkinson ( one of the honestest Men, then or now
living) was tempted and threatened, at a more then ordinary rate, to come in, to
back and credit their Testimony; as was evidently made out by his Information,
which, to his eternal honor, he published before this prosecution; an Abstract
whereof, I do hereunto subjoyn, to evince the cursed practices of those days,
and to mind an ungratful Generation, of the merit of that worthy upright Person.

It may also deserve Remark, that the Treasonable discourses Sworn against his
Lordship by these Varlets, were fixed by them, to February and March before;
the Instructors of these Witnesses well remembering, that that was a time when
the Nation was in no small ferment, upon the trifling with Parliaments for the
introduceing Popery and Tyranry; yet most of these Witnesses, upon their
examination, were forced to acknowledge that they gave ( or rather sold) their
Informations, after my Lord of Shaftesbury was committed in July, upon a
Warrant for high Treason, which Secretary Jenkins ( who managed this whole
Intrigue and the Witnesses thereof) gloried, that he had the honor to sign.

I shall here take occasion to declare, what I have long believed, that the
amusing us in England, with the Irish Popish Plot, did proceed from the depth
of the Jesuits Counsels, with design to trip up the Heels of their execrable
Plot here; and that they sent us these wretches on that very errand. I do also
think that the Conspirators then at Whitehall, did, in the management of this
Intrigue, overreach this great and wise Lord, the Earl of Shaftesbury; and
that his zeal to extirpate Popery in both the Kingdoms, disposed him to be too
credulous in that matter of the Irish Plot, at least as to the honesty of the
Witnesses thereof. But, what Man endued with the least grain of Honesty and
Sense, could ever credit the Evidence against this Noble Peer, after the
reading Mr Colledge's Trial; and the Information of worthy Captain Wilkinson,
about this very affair.

As to the Paper found in the Earl's House, and upon which so great stress was
laid, I shall here note, that at this time it was notoriously known, even in
every Coffee-House, that an Association (and very probably this now given in
evidence had been resolved upon and read in Parliament; and the Foreman of the
Grand Jury, who was a Member, well knowing that the Plot-Secretary was then of
the House of Commons; examined him strictly about it; but he appeared very
reserved and cautions in his answers, and could not at first remember that he
had heard of the Association, but as Town-talk; but being closely followed with
Questions by the worthy Foreman, he, very unwillingly, went a little further,
saying, That to the best of his remembrance he was not present in the House at
the Reading the Association; though it is notoriously known that he did there
make Speeches against it.

To evince that the project of an Association was no new thing; I cannot hinder
my self from a small digression, to show, that one of this formal Secretary's
Confidents, Nathaniel Thompson, the Popish Printer, had published the news of
this Association, near two Years before this prosecution; it is in his
Intelligence of December the 9th, 1679, in these Words, A form of an
Association is preparing, for People to subscribe, for the defense of the
King's sacred Person, the present Established Form of Government, and the
Protestant Religion, parallel to that in Queen Elizabeth's time, which was
afterward, confirmed by Act of Parliament. This seems to take its Rise from the
Resolve of the late Parliament.

This very Advertisement may be well supposed to put such as were curious to
know the transactions of that time, to get a sight of the Association, so
notified to be on foot; and it is very probable, that by that means it might, as
news, be handed to the Earl of Shaftesbury, and so come to be thrown by amongst
his old Papers; however, had not an upright understanding English Jury
interposed, it had as certainly destroyed the Honor, Estate and Life of this
never to be forgotten Noble Lord, as the Westminster Carpenter ( in disguise
with his little Presbyterian Band) and his eleven Brethren, did destroy the
brave Colonel Sydney, upon the evidence of old loose Papers, found in his
House, enforced with a Maxim in three cramp Words, Scribere est Agere; as
unintelligible, in all probality, to that packed Jury, as was the Treatise of
that great Man, or as the Maxim it self is to learned Lawyers.

Well, to conclude, after much contrasting between the Jury and the Court,
whether the Jury might consider the credibility of the Witnesses; which the
Chief Justice denied; and Mr Papillon, with much tugging, having gained a great
point of the Court (viz.) That they were within the compass of their own
Understanding and Consciences to give their Judgment; Which is in truth no more
than the giving them leave, to see with their own Eyes, hear with their own
Ears, and judge by their own Reason; the Jury returned Ignoramus upon the
Indictment, to the unspeakable satisfaction and joy of all Men, who were not in
the Conspiracy or Well-Wishers to it.

An Abstract of Captain Henry Wilkinson's Information, of what passed between
him, and the Persons who attempted to prevail with him, to swear high Treason
against the Earl of Shaftesbury.
Imprimis,
HE declares on his Oath, That upon the 8th of October, 1681, Mr Walter Baines
came to him in the King's Bench Prison, and, caressing him with great kindness,
told him, that Mr Browrig was sent Prisoner to York-Castle for Treason, and for
appearing for the Earl of Shaftesbury.

He then told the Informant, that he could not but know much of my Lord
Shaftesbury's designs against the King; and, that if he would make discovery to
him, he was ready to do him any Kindness, and desired an opportunity; and
added, that he had been lately with Mr Graham, and that he had a great Interest
with my Lord Hide.

That Baines spent all the time he staid with him, in expressing a great deal
of Zeal upon that subject, and assured the Informant, that he should have
Pardon, and should be considerably rewarded, to which the Informant,
(perceiving what was designed, and resolving to humor it) seemed to listen,
telling Baines, that when he was requited for his former Services (having
suffered much for King Charles the first, and been very active in the
Restoration of the second) he would serve his Majesty in what he could.

That upon the 11th of October, the Informant was sent for to Mr Booth, who was
a Prisoner at Weaver's House near the King's Bench ( he having been removed
thither the Night before from one of the Compters) That the Informant
understood Booth to be in the design; that he had known him above twenty Years,
and to be a Person of good learning, and ingenuous, but of bad Principles, and
very ill Reputation, having been accused and condemned for Cliping and Coining,
besides Murder, therefore he resolved to stand upon his Guard.

That Booth said to the Informant, that he was to tell him, that he had an
opportunity to be a better man in his Fortune then ever he was, and to make his
Fortune; and that he might have 500 l. per annum, to him and his Heirs, or
10000 l. which he pleased, to discover what he knew of my Lord Shaftesbury, and
of his design to change the Government to a Commonwealth, and to witness
against him; to which the Informant replied, that no Body would believe that he
should be trusted with such a design; but that Booth answered, that he was the
likeliest man to know, having served the King, and been slighted; that the
Informant, (to humor the matter, and to provoke Booth to speak his full mind)
told him, that he was with the Lord Shaftesbury the Night before he was
apprehended, and that Sr Thomas Armstrong was there.

That the Informant gave an account of this transaction to one Mr Gervas James
that Night, desiring him to put it in Writing, declaring that if he should be
tempted to Swear any thing of a Plot or Design by the Lord Shaftesbury against
the King, it was for Reward, and desired him to witness it against him.

That upon the 12th of October, he was invited to the same place, to Booth,
with whom he found Baines, where they tempted him as before, to be a Witness
against the Lord Shaftesbury, who answered, that till he was satisfied for
bypast Services, he would not be any way concerned at Court, but that if they
would give him two Thousand Guineas toward the Injury he had received, he
would discover what he knew; but still declared that he knew nothing of any
design by that Lord; but that the more he declared he knew nothing, the more
Booth urged the Reward, saying, that 500 l. per annum, or 10000 l. was intended
for him. That the Informant upon Booth's importunity said, when he had the
Money and a Pardon, he would do any Service he could; that Baines thereupon
told him, that he might have a Pardon in two or three days, and then took his
Christian Name; which the Informant conceived was with intention to get a
Pardon.

That upon the 13th of October, the Informant was sent for by Booth and Baines,
to dine with them at Mr Weaver's House; and that Mr Graham came thither, and
told the Informant, whom he had known about twenty Years, that my Lord H. and
my Lord H. and the two Secretaries of State, had inquired of him concerning the
Informant, and his Reputation, and that he the said Graham, had answered, that
the Informant had served the King and his Father faithfully, and was a very
honest man, and a great sufferer; and had received great disappointments; and
they had sent him the said Graham, to carry him to the King, where he should
have his promise to be requited for his Sufferings, and to receive his Royal
Promise for his Reward. That the Informant thereupon told Graham, that he could
say nothing, and would not go to Whitehall; upon which Graham said, That
whether he could say any thing or not, he might be recompensed for his
Sufferings; Whereupon the Informant took leave, and went away dissatisfied to
be so tempted.

That upon the 14th of October, Booth came to the Informant, to know whether he
would go to the King or not, and told him, That Mr Wilson, my Lord Shaftesbury
's Secretary, then in the Gate House, had offered to come in and make discovery
if he might be pardoned, and therefore he would have the Informant to have the
honor to be the first discoverer. That the Informant then telling him, that he
had no business at Whitehall. Booth said, if he would not go to the King, the
Lord Chief Justice's Warrant would be sent to fetch him to his Chamber, where
some of the Council would examine and swear him, that Booth then demanded of
him, whether he did not ride with Sword and Pistols, out of Town with the Lord
Shaftesbury when he went to Oxford, which being confessed by the Informant,
Booth then said, that he must needs be privy to this, that if the King would
not pass three Acts; one, for excluding the Duke, the next for making void the
Act of Queen Elizabeth against Recusancy, and the third for uniting
Protestants, then by force of Arms he was to be compelled; and added that all
the Council were satisfied that he knew this.

That, upon the 15th of October, Booth came again to the Informant, to know
whether he would yet go to Whitehall. Who demanding for what: Booth said, To
evidence against the Earl of Shaftesbury. And being told by the Informant, that
he had nothing to say against him, Booth importuned him not to lose the great
opportunity he then had. That Baines then came to them, and the Informant
inquired why they should be so urgent to have him a Witness? who told him,
There were yet none but Irish Witnesses who had not credit; but if he would
come in, though he had been unfortunate in his private Concerns, yet he was not
blemished in his Credit. That Baines then told him, if he would not go to
Whitehall, the Marshal had a Habeas Corpus to carry him, and so they parted.

That about four in the afternoon the Marshal came, with Booth and Baines, and
compelled him to go to Whitehall: That there, Secretary Jenkins, and my Lord
Conway, did strictly examine him about the Lord of Shaftesbury, and what he
knew of any design against the King; who told them he knew nothing, That the
King then came, and honored the Infornant, by saying, that he knew him well,
and that he had served his Father and him faithfully, and he hoped he would not
decline his Obedience; to which the Informant answering, that he deserved not
to be suspected, the King told him that he had not had an opportunity to serve
his Friends, but hoped he might, and promised to consider the Informants
Sufferings, but told him, that what kindness was intended him, was not with a
design to invite him to speak a word, but truth it self; and then demanded what
he knew of a design against his Person, and Government; that he thereupon told
the King that he knew nothing of any Plot or Design against his Majesty or
Government; that the King seemed not to be satisfied; but still pressed hard
upon him; and he, not being able to give any satisfactory answer to the
questions put to him by the King; his Majesty told him, if he would say, as he
hoped to be saved, he knew nothing of any design against his Person, he would
believe him; which the Informant did say, in those very words; at which the
King seemed to wonder, That then he was left to Secretary Jenkins, who used
such Arguments as he thought fit; And then he was carried into another Room,
before the King, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Hallifax, and Lord Hide, the two
Secretaries, and Chief Justice Pemberton, and Examined there; Graham, Burton
and Baines being present: That the Chancellor was sharp upon him, with several
Questions, which the Informant could not answer, and would not believe, but
that he must be guilty of knowing great things against the Lord Shaftesbury:
That thereupon the Informant told him, if they would not take his Word, he
would declare his Knowledge upon Oath if they brought the Lord Shaftesbury to
Trial, and that without any hopes of Gain or Advancement, upon which, the
Chancellor told him, there were two sorts of Advancement, and he need not give
himself that trouble, for he himself was like to come to Trial before the Lord
Shaftesbury. That then the Chancellor demanded of the Informant, whether he
had not a Commission for the new Service against the King, which being denied;
he told the Informant, that he was to have a Troop of Fifty Men, and that
Booth, who stood by, gave that Information, and was Listed under him; which
Booth affirmed (...) true, and that he had made Oath of it; that the Informant
knowing his Innocence, was unconcerned, and told the Council, if they had such
another Witness they might do his Business.



The Information of Gervas James Gentleman.
THat Captain Wilkinson upon the 11 th of October, 1681. and daily afterward,
acquainted him, with the Treaties and Transactions between him and Bains, Booth
and Graham, and the other persons mentioned in the foregoing Information, and
that they were in substance the same with what is therein set forth, the
Informant, at Captain VVilkinson's request, and for his own satisfaction,
having kept a daily journal during the said Treaties.



The Information of Mrs Susannah Wilkinson, Wife of Captain Wilkinson.
THat upon the 12th of October, 1681, she found her Husband at VVeaver's House,
with Booth and Baines, who were very largely treating him with Wine; That her
Husband stepping out, Booth told her that he was a most obstinate man; and
desired her to persuade him, to be guided by him; and said, the King would do
more for her Husband then ever the Ld. of Shaftesbury would, and was sensible
of his Service and Sufferings; And if her Husband would be persuaded by him,
the said Booth, to appear against the Ld. of Shaftesbury, he should have 500 l.
per annum settled upon him and his Heirs forever.

That upon the 14th of October, 1681, she being with her Husband at the King's
Bench-Prison; Booth came, and desired her for God's sake, to persuade her
Husband to be ruled by him; and that if he would, he might be a happy man, and
the Duke of York would settle 500 l. a Year in Ireland upon him and his Heirs.



Having, in the foregoing Abstract, shown what mighty Temptations honest
Captain Wilkinson withstood; I shall now intimate something of the manner how
the Irish VVitnesses were corrupted, and wrought upon; to Swear against my Lord
of Shaftesbury.

Mr Robert Boulter of London Stationer, and Mary Cox of Stoke-Newington in
Middlesix Spinster, upon the 8 th of July 1681. gave Information in writing
upon Oath, before Sr John Fredrick, a Justice of the Peace for London, That
upon the 7 th of June 1681. Bernard Dennis told them, that David Fitz. Gerald
had made him great proffers, to retract his Evidence about the Popish Plot.

Bryan Haynes made Oath before the Council the 5 th of October, 1681. that
David Fitz. Gerald one of the King's Evidence, about the end of last February,
told him, that he had possessed the King, that the late Plot was a Presbyterian
Plot, and invented by the Earl of Shaftesbury, to extirpate the Family of the
Stewarts, and turn England into a Commonwealth, or set the Crown upon the
Earl's Head. That Fitz. Gerald did diverse times tamper with the Deponent to
retract his Evidence concerning the Popish Plot, and that Fitz. Gerald told
him, that he wanted but John Macnamar to come in and join with him, and he
would have the Earl of Shaftesbury's Head off, and Sham the whole Popish Plot.

This Information of Bryan Haynes is still extant, and certified to the World
by Mr Blathwayte then one of the Clerks of the Council, in these Words, A true
Copy of a Paper, remaining at the Council Board, attested in pursuance of an
Order in Council dated the 5 th of October, 1681.

William Blathwaite.



Now, Is it not a most astonishing thing, and not to be believed in the next
Age, that the King's Council, should, without blushing, produce these very Men,
Dennis, Haynes, Macnamar, etc. as Witnesses against this Noble Lord; and that
Mr Secretary Jenkins; and Mr Blathwaite, and Mr Gwin, Clerks of the Council,
could stand in the Court and hear them give their Evidence without Exclamation?
But they may say as the Poet has it, Aetas Parentum peior Avis,
Nos tandem protulit Progeniem
Vitiosorem.


Notes upon the Trial of Mr Stephen College at Oxford, upon an Indictment for
High Treason, the 17 th of August, 1681.
THe Conspirators having been disappointed of many (...) hopeful Plot, and to
this time not getting one to bear; They now resolve to content themselves with
a very ill-favored one; and having suborned and bought in a Set of proper
Witnesses; They resolve, first to enter them upon Stephen College, a Joyner,
before they run them at more Noble Game.

Hereupon he is clapped into the Tower, and an Indictment for High Treason, is
offered to this following City-Grand-Jury.

John Wilmore, William Mackley, Sampson Puller, Thomas Cope, Peter Mortimer,
John Wood, Thomas Haynes, Thomas Fox, John Read, Mark Stretton, Edward Powel,
Paul Dorrel, Francis Lascoe, John Armiger, Samuel Totton, John Pettyt, S.
Maine, Caleb Hocke, and Robert Davies.
These Gentlemen well-seeing the Villainy of the practice, and weighing (as
undoubtedly they might, and ought) the Credibility of the Infamous Witnesses;
They reject the Bill, and hand it back to them who sent it, with an Honorable
Ignoramus.

The Being of their Plot, depending upon their gaining the point against this
Poor Man's Life, They change the Scene to Oxford; and at the Assizes there, one
Gregory, the well-disposed Sheriff of that County; picks out a Grand Jury for
the purpose, and so an Indictment of Treason is there found against him.

Matters being thus prepared for the Murdering this honest Man, the
Proto-Martyr in the sham Presbyterian Plot, and it being a thing of mighty
moment, these four Judges are speeded to Oxford, armed with a special
Commission to try, or rather to dispatch him.

Lord Chief Justice North, Mr Justice Jones, Mr Justice Raymond, Mr Justice
Levins.
College is hurried from his close Imprisonment in the Tower, down to Oxford,
and was, at his first entering the County, exposed by Gregory the High Sheriff,
and mocked at the House of Mr Stoner a notorious Papist.

Upon the 17 th of August, 1681. he is brought into the Court, where the
Council against him were; The Attorney General, The Solicitor General, The late
infamous Lord Chancellor, Sergeant Holloway, Mr North, and Mr Jones.


He being charged with an Indictment for conspiring the Death of the King, and
to levy War, and subvert the Government; prayed a Copy of the Indictment and
the Names of the Jury; and that the Court would assign him Counsel; these
things were not only refused him, but an un-heard of Injustice was put upon
him, for just before he was brought into the Court, they took from him the
Papers which he had prepared for his defense, and most unjustly withheld them.

Then this Jury was sworn to pass upon him.

Henry Standard, William Big, Robert Bird, John Shorter, William Windlow,
Charles Hobbs, Roger Brown, Timothy Doily, Ralph Wallis, John Benson, John
Peircy, and John Laurence.
Now Mr Attorney General falls to work about him, addressing himself in this
manner to the Jury;

Gentlemen! The Prisoner stands indicted of High Treason, and that of the
deepest dye; it is for an endeavor to destroy the King, to subvert the
Government, and to raise a Rebellion -- He laid his design to seize the King at
Oxford, and he wanted not his Accomplices to do it: The World never was, nor
ever will be obliged with a List of the Accomplices here talked of.
But they were not Protestants, but Men that were Rebels in the late War -- In
order to this, he has prepared Arms of a great value for a Joyner; He prepared
a good Horse, extraordinary Pistols, a Carbine a Coat of Mail, an Headpiece,
and so being armed Cap a Pe, with that design he came to Oxford -- We shall
show you, that he made it his business to persuade others to undertake the
design, and join with him. -- He gave out a Sign which was a blew Ribbon
wrought with Letters in it ( No Popery, no Slavery) by this they were to know
one another -- We shall give you an Account of his Principles; and what
encouragement he was to have, for he boasted he should in a little time be a
Colonel -- This was not a sudden unpremeditated thing; for he had entertained
the horridest malice against the King, that ever Subject did, He has made it
his common discourse ( I believe I could bring you forty and forty Witnesses to
it) to defame the King, and murder him in his Reputation -- We shall give
evidence, that he carried on the same design, with that Arch-Taytor, Fitz.
Harris, who was a Papist; and I believe if he were examined thoroughly, he would
be found of the same Stamp -- The King has been traduced, as a designer of
Arbitrary Government, and as an Introducer of Popery -- If any Man ever was
guilty of high Treason sure he is, and deserves the severest punishment.

Then Stephen Dugdale, John Smyth, Bryan Haynes and Edward Turbervile were
sworn: Dugdale said, That the Prisoner had often railed against the King, and
said he was a Papist, and as deep in the Plot as any Papist of them all; that
nothing was to be expected from him, but introducing of Popery and Arbitrary
Government; That he would arm himself, and be here at Oxford, having several
stout Men, particularly Captain Clinton, Captain Brown, and Don Lewis; that
would stand by him, in case there should be a Rising.

That the Prisoner gave him forty Shillings worth of Blew-Ribbon, with the
Inscription, No Popery, No Slavery, to give to his Friends -- That the Prisoner
said at Oxford, Let the King begin as soon as he will, his Party is but an
handful to our Party.

Smyth declared, That the Prisoner told him, that the King was as great a
Papist as the Duke of York, and every way as dangerous to the Protestant
Interest, and he doubted not but he would dye his Fathers death.

That College carried him to his House, and shows him his Pistols,
Blunderbuss, great Sword, Armor Back and Breast, and his Headpiece; and told
him these would destroy Rowlye's pitiful Guards, which were kept up against
Law to set up Popery and Arbitrary Power.

That the Prisoner said he expected some sport at Oxford, and would go thither,
and would be one who should seize the King, if he should seize any of the
Members; That upon a Discourse of disarming the City, the Prisoner said, that
if the Earl of Feversham or the King himself should come to do it, he would be
the Death of him; rather than he should take away his Arms.

Haynes Witnessed, That the Prisoner told him, that the King should be called
to an Account for all his Actions, for, it was notorious, That he resolved to
Establish Popery and Arbitrary Power. -- And that no King of his Race should
ever Reign in England after him.

Turbervile said, That the Prisoner told him at Oxford, that there was no good
to be expected from the King, for he and all his Family were Papists. That he
wished the King would begin, and said, but if he do not, We will begin with
him, and seize him; for there are several brave Fellows about this Town, that
will secure him, till we have those terms we expect; adding, That he had got a
Case of Pistols, and a very good Sword and a Velvet-Cap. (This Mr Attorney
represented, to be Armor Cap a Pe.)

In the next place Sr George Jefferies brought against the Prisoner, one Mr
Robert Masters, whom he recommended to the Jury, as a Gentleman of an undoubted
toping Reputation; and he swore that Mr College in discourse with him, had
justified the Proceedings of the Parliament of 1640. And that the last
Westminsters-Parliament, was of the Opinion with that Parliament; And that he
the said Masters, having in a pleasant way saluted College, by the name of
Colonel, he said, don't mock me, I may be one in a little time.

Then Sr William Jennings testified, That Mr College was showing a Picture, to
a Crowd of seven or eight or ten People, at Oxford; and gave one of the
Pictures to him, which he gave to Justice Warcup. That the next day he saw
College sell a yard of Blew Ribbon (with the Words, No Popery, No Slavery,
workt into it) Note how does this stand with the A. General's Suggestion about
the Ribbon given for a Signal?
to a Parliament Man in the Coffee-House, for 2 s. who tied it upon his Sword.
That Mr College, upon the day of the Dissolution of the Parliament, told him,
that Mr Fitz. Gerald had spit in his face, and that they went to fifty Cuffs,
and that he told Mr College, that his Nose bled, and he thereupon replied, I
have lost the first Blood in the Cause, but it will not be long before more be
lost.

After some Contrasting with the Judges and King's Council, The Prisoner spoke
to this effect. I don't question but to prove this one of the most Hellish
Conspiracies that ever was upon the face of the Earth, an absolute Design to
destroy all the Protestants of England, that have had the Courage to oppose the
Popish Plot; In which no Man of my Condition, has done more than I have done; I
was bred a Protestant, have so continued, and by the Grace of God will dye so
-- It Is the greatest Nonsense to believe, that I would say these things, to
persons whom I could never hope would conceal my Treasons, having discovered
their own. I had been a Fool, a Madman, to discover them to Papists, Priests
and Irish-Men; Men ready to starve for Bread. Had I declared a design to seize
the King when he was here at Oxford, they neither would nor ought to have
concealed it -- I declare, as God is my Judge, that, had I had a design to
seize the King, I know not of one Man upon the face of the Earth, to have stood
by me; Parliament Man, or other -- I have a Soul that must live to Eternity, I
would not call God to Witness to a Lie, to save One Thousand Lives; This is a
Villainous Conspiracy, and if it take place against me, God knows how far it
may go: This is the 17 th or 18 th Sham Plot of the Papists against the
Protestants; If they can make me a Traitor, they will try it upon others, and
so hope to Sham off their own Treasons.

Then the Prisoner called his Witnesses.

Mr William Shewin testified, that Turbervile told him, the week before at
Charing Cross, that there would be strange things at Oxford against College,
and he would lay ten to one,
that Mr Bethel and Mr Wilmore would be Hanged at Christmas; and that he would
lead Mr. Bethel by the Gold-Chain about Fleet Street.

Mr Hickman testified that he overheard Haynes say to a Papist, who Lodged in
Hickman's-House, God Damn me, I care not what I Swear, nor whom I Swear
against, for it is my Trade to get Money by Swearing.

Mrs Hall and Mary Richards her Servant testified, That Haynes acknowledged,
that he was employed, to turn the plot upon the Protestant Dissenters.

Mr Whaley testified, that about 6 years ago, Haynes stole a Silver Tankard
from him.

Mr Lun testified, that soon after the London Grand Jury had brought in their
Ignoramus upon the Indictment against Mr College; Haynes in discourse about
it, fell very foully upon that Jury, and said he would do the Earl of
Shaftesbury's business, and help the King to Money enough out of the Fanatics
Estates, And that upon the last Monday, Haynes told him, that ever long the
King should have Sheriff Bethel's Estate.

Mr Broadgate testified, that Turbervile told him that the King's evidence were
slighted and vilified, and that he was tempted, with great offers, to disown
the Popish Plot, and to turn to the other side.

Dr Otes being called, produced to the Court a Petition to the Common Council
of London, signed by Turbervile, etc. wherein they acknowledged, that they had
been tempted to retract and deny the Evidence they had given about the Popish
Plot; and the Dr. testified, that Turbervile denied to him that he had given
evidence to the London grand Jury against College; and declared that he could
not give any evidence against him: That the Dr. afterward charging him with
it, He said, that the Protestant Citizens had deserted them, and God damn him,
he would not starve.

The Dr. further testified that upon a quarrel between College and Smith, at
Richard's Coffee-House, he heard Smith swear God damn him he would have
Colledge's Blood.

That Dugdale had told the Dr. that he knew nothing against any Protestant in
England; that afterward the Dr. charging him that he had gone against his
Conscience; Dugdale said, that he was necessitated to it, for he could not
otherwise get Money: and confessed that Colonel Warcup promised him a place in
the Custom-House.

Mr Samuel Smith and Mr Thomas Gardener testified, that Smith the Witness, did
several times declare to them, that he believed a Popish Plot, but not any
Protestant Plot.

Bolron and Mowbray testified, that Smith endeavored to suborn them, to Swear
against Sr John Brooks of Yorkshire; and Bolron added, that Smith would have
suborned him, to witness against the Earl of Shaftesbury and College, teling
him what he should say, and that if he managed it rightly, he should be made
for ever.

And that he had heard Haynes declare, that he knew nothing of a Popish Plot,
nor of a Presbyterian Plot; but that he did not care what he swore, and would
swear any thing to get money, and would be of that Religion, which had the
strongest party.

Then Mr Everard testified; That Smith told him very lately, that he knew of no
Presbyterian or Protestant Plot; and that Justice Warcup would have persuaded
him the said Everard to have sworn a Presbyterian Plot. That Haynes told him,
that he was drove by necessity to swear against Protestants, for he had but
short pay -- And that the Irishmen's swearing against the English, was justly
fallen upon them, for their Injustice in outing the Irish of their Estates.

The Prisoner after he had called these and many other Witnesses (whose
evidence (though material) I do for brevity sake omit to transcribe) spoke thus;

My Lord, I have no flourishes to set off my Defense; I cannot take the Jury,
nor the Court with Oratory. -- My Lord They have sworn desperately against me,
and it appears they have contradicted one another; It has been proved, that
this was a design: That they were tampered withal; That they complained they
were in Poverty; They confessed they were tempted to come over to swear against
Protestants; and now, the Lord knows, they have closed with it, and they begin
with me. -- There is never a Man that has sworn against me, but has been
sufficiently confuted by Persons of Integrity, Honesty, Men of Principles, and
Men of Religion, such as make Conscience of what they say. -- I have been Lover
of the Church of England, I never had a prejudice against any Man in the Church
in my Life, but such as have made it their business to promote the Interest of
the Papists; and such there are amongst them, who divide the Protestants, and
allow none to be true Protestants, but those that are within the Church of
England established by Law -- I have been an hearty Man against the Papists,
and for Parliaments, the Bulwark of our Liberty -- I have ever since the
discovery of the Plot, endeavored, with all my Heart and all my Power, to come
to the very bottom of it -- These Men that swear against me, used to follow me,
and would say, that they came to save our Lives, and yet We let them want
Bread; and the Argument was so fair, that, I thought it unreasonable to see
them starve.

The Prisoner, afterward speaking to the Judges, said, My Life and your Souls
lie at stake to do me Justice -- My Witnesses have spoken materially, to
contradict what has been said against me, to prove that this was done for
Money, and that every one of them have confessed they were hired to it, and
that they did it for a Livelihood; And Haynes, said It was a good Trade; Damn
him, he would do any thing for Money -- I need insist upon this no further; The
whole Nation is sensible what is doing, and what this does signify; They have
begun with me, in order to the making of a Presbyterian Plot, which they would
carry on to stifle the Noise of the Popish Plot, and this is not the first, the
second, nor the tenth time that they have been at this Game; how many Shams
have they endeavored to raise? -- I only desire the Jury to take all into
their serious consideration; I expect a Storm of Thunder from the learned
Counsel to fall upon me -- and I must defend my self without Counsel. I know
not whether it be the practice in any other Nation, but certainly it is hard
measure, that I, being illiterate and ignorant in the Law, must stand here all
day, They being many, and taking all advantages against me, and I a Single
Person, and not able to use one means or another, either of writing or speaking
-- Then applying to the Jury ( after a solemn Protestation of his Innocence)
said, I beseech you, be not frightened nor flattered, -- you are to acquit me or
condemn me, and my Blood will be required at your Hands.

Now comes Mr Solicitor to bestow his Rhetoric upon the Prisoner, saying; Here
has been a great deal of time spent, and truly I think for no other Reason but
to divert from the matter before you, and that you might forget the Evidence,
and therefore, to refresh your Memories, I shall repeat it: The Fact charged
upon the Prisoner, is a design to Kill the King, the manifestation of that
design is, by preparing Arms to that purpose, and by coming down to seize the
King here, the proof of it has been by Witnesses, that I think by and by, you
will have no Objections against.

Then, having recounted the Stories of the Witnesses, he proceeds thus, The
Objection made to this proof by the Prisoner, is, That this is a Popish design
to raise a new Plot, and cast it upon the Protestants; And that these Witnesses
are now to deny all the Evidence they have given of the Popish Plot; This is
that he would persuade you to believe, but I think it will be impossible for
you to have such a Thought; For what are the Evidence that have proved this?
Men of Credit, that have been Evidences against the Popish Plotters, Men that
still stand to the Evidence they have given -- And yet forsooth, these Men are
going about to stifle this Plot.

Gentlemen! These are the Men the whole Nation has given Credit to, My Lord
Stafford dyed upon the Credit of these Men, These are the Witnesses, Gentlemen,
that this Man thinks ought to be blown off, with that srivolous Objection, that
they are persons, he would have you believe, Who are guilty of a design to
throw the Plot upon the Protestants.

Now, Gentlemen! If College have all this while under the name of a
Protestant, acted the part of a Papist, I may say, he is not that good
Protestant he pretends to be. I must do him right, and repeat the Evidence he
has given against our Witnesses; Mr Hickman says, he overheard Haynes say, it
was his Trade to Swear, and he must get Money by it; Lun says, that Haynes
declared the same thing to him. Whaley says, that Haynes stole a Silver
Tankard; but he was never prosecuted for it. I think the Nature of this
Evidence has not that weight, as to take off the Credit of what this Man has
said upon his Oath, especially being backed with the Evidence of Dugdale, Smtyh
and Turbervile, whose credit has not been impeached: Indeed Dr Otes is produced
against them, and he must vilify their Credit, whose Testimony, at first of
the Popish Plot, received Credit by being seconded by these Men: A thing much
more monstrous was put in practice by the King's Council, when they produced
the very persons ^om Dr Otes had charged with the Popish Plot, to co^vict him
of Perjury in the Evidence which he gave of their Plot.
It is a strange thing, that this Man comes now to vilify the Testimony of
those who have been Credited by the whole Kingdom -- This looks as if the
Doctor were again returning to St Omers.

There are two Witnesses, Bolron and Mowbray, who testify, That Smyth would
have suborned them to swear against Sr John Brooks: But I think I need say no
more to these Men, but only to desire you to weigh their Credit; They have, I
confess, been evidence against several that have been accused of the Popish
Plot, but, they have been so unfortunate, that they were never yet believed,
though they have been sworn in their own Country.

[Note, This by the way was not true, for at Summer Assizes at York in 1680,
Thwyng was convicted of the Plot, and afterward executed, and that upon the
Testimony of these very men, Bolron and Mowbray, in their own Country.]

Mr Solicitor then closes thus,

I think, Gentlemen, this is the substance of what has been offered against the
King's Witnesses, except that of Mr Everard, who says something against Haynes;
that he should say, he swore for self-preservation; And against Mr Smyth, he
says, that he heard him say, he did not know of any Presbyterian Plot.

By these things ( And by a great many others, which had slipped the Memory of
the Solicitor, and also of the Chief Justice) he has endeavored to take off
the credit of our Witnesses; and he would have you believe, that he is a very
good Protestant, though he does the Papists work. -- I think it a great piece
of arrogance for him, to take upon him the Title of a Protestant, when he has
abused that title by such unsuitable Practices -- I cannot but reflect upon the
condition of this Man, whose only hope is, that you should now forget your
selves and become as ill as he is, But as that cannot be presumed, so I shall
not need to say any more to you.

After the making of very long Speeches to the Jury, by Sr George Jeffryes, and
also by the Lord Chief Justice North, to the same effect with the Solicitor's;
The Prisoner minded the Lord Chief Justice, that he had omitted to mind the
Jury of several material things evidenced for him; but his Lordship answered,
That he had repeated to them as much as he could remember; And so the Jury
having been for a short time sent out, and returning, it being about three in
the Morning, they brought in the Prisoner Guilty.

The Lord Chief Justice North coming to pronounce Sentence, said, I think the
Court were all very well satisfied with the Verdict, and the Jury did according
to Justice and Right; I thought it was a Case, that, as you made your own
defense, small proof would serve the turn, to make any one believe you Guilty;
and so he was sentenced to dye as a Traitor.

At the place of Execution upon the 31st of August 1681. he behaved himself
with great Courage and Constancy, and expressed himself to this effect,

He professed in the presence of the Living God, That he was so far from being
Guilty of those Treasons falsely sworn against him by the wretched and mercenary
Men, Dugdale, Turbervile, Smyth and Haynes, that he never spoke so much as one
single word of those Treasons to them, or either of them; or ever heard them
spoke, till sworn in the Court.

He declared, that Haynes had discovered to him, that the Parliament was to be
destroyed at Oxford; and that Fitz. Gerald and his party had a design to murder
the Earl of Shaftesbury, and that they did endeavor to bring Macnamar over,
and said that then it would be well with them; And they would not be long
before they had Shaftesbury's Life.

That, as for what Arms he and others had, they were for their own defense in
case the Papists should make any attempt by way of Massacre.

He took it upon his Death, that he was never engaged in any manner of Plot or
Conspiracy against the King, the Laws or Government, or knew of any, except
that of the Papists.

That if it had been true, that he was to have seized the King, he knew not of
so much as one single Person, that was, or would have stood by him in that
attempt.

That Masters was unjust in what he swore, in omitting the material part of the
discourse about the Parliament of 1640, for when Masters cursed them and the
last Westminster-Parliament; and charged the Parliament of 1640, with beginning
the War, and cutting off the King's Head; he denied both, and told Masters that
the Papists begun that War, and that the death of the King was the fatal
consequence of it.

That Sr William Jennings also did him wrong, for his words were, that he had
lost the first Blood for the Parliament, and wished it might be the last.

That he was reported to be a Papist, but he declared he detested Popery, and
that he had lived and dyed a Protestant.

That Secretary Jenkins, my Lord Killingworth and Mr Seymour, when they
committed him, did interrogate him to many things, that he should be privy to
against the King; Mr Sevmour saying that College did know, the Lord of
Shaftesbury, the Lord Howard, and Mr Ferguson were also engaged; but that he
answered, were it to save his Life, he could not accuse a Man of them, nor any
other Person whatsoever.

That upon the 23d of August, the Messenger who brought him the message of his
Death, told him he might save his Life, if he would confess who was the Cause
of his coming to Oxford, and upon what account? And that he answered him, that
he came voluntarily of himself, rode his own Horse, spent his own Money, and
neither was invited, nor had dependency on any Person whatsoever; and had only
one Case of Pistols and a Sword, and that had the Papists offered to have
destroyed the Parliament, as was sworn they would; that he was there to have
lived and dyed with them.

That when he had said this to the Messenger (though the very truth) he found
it was not that he wanted, and so left him with a Curse.

He concluded, I dye by the Hands of the Enemies of the great God, his Christ,
his Servants, his Gospel, and my Country; to which I willingly submit, and
earnestly pray mine may be the last Protestants Blood, that murdering Church of
Rome may shed in Christendom; And that my Death may be a far greater Blow to
their Bloody Cause, than I either have, or could have been by my Life, The Lord
God Almighty save England from Popery and Slavery, bless the City of London,
and unite all good Protestants in the Nation. Amen, Amen.

Notes upon the Trial of Nathaniel Thompson ( the Popish Printer) William Pain
(Brother of the famous Nevil Pain) and John Farewell, upon the 20 th of June,
1682. before the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton upon an Information for Writing
and Publishing Libels, importing that Sr Edmundbury Godfry Murdered himself.
THe Conspirators from the very first discovery, resolved that the Popish Plot,
should be turned to a Presbyterian Plot; pursuant thereto, the credit of the
Evidence, especially from the time of the Dissolution of the Oxford-Parliament,
in the beginning of the year 1681. had been, with matchless Impudence, and
Virulence, traduced and run down, by the scriblings of L'Estrange, and of
Heraclitus ridens, and the Intelligences of this Thompson now before us; so
that by this time, a multitude were infected with the poison of their Works,
and seduced into a belief, that the Popish Plot was a Sham; nothing but a thing
raised by the Protestants against the Papists; however, it still remained upon
them to wipe off the Blood of that Martyr, the worthy Sr Edmundbury Godfry,
which was more then One Thousand Witnesses against them, and now, they judging
matters to be ripened for it, with effronted Foreheads, set to the Work, as
will appear by what follows.

The Information against these notorious Criminals, Thompson, Pain and
Farewell, was to this effect, That they well knowing that Green, Berry and Hill
were Convicted, Attainted and Ex^uted for the Murder of Sr Edmundbury Godfry,
and that Prance, Bedloe, Brown, Curtis, Skillarne and Cambridge, were Witnesses
for the King against them, and that by the Coroners Inquest, taken upon view of
the Body, it was found, that he was Strangled and Choked; they, to subvert and
elude the due course of Law, and to defame the Justice of the Kingdom, and to
render as well the Witnesses, as the Coroner contemptible, and to deter others
from detecting the Designs of Papists, and to induce a belief that Green, Berry
and Hill were unjustly Executed; and that Sr Edmundbury Godfry was Felo de se,
they did most impiously Compose and cause to be Printed and Published, two
false Scandalous and Defamatory Libels, entitled, Letters to Mr Miles Prance;
and three other Scandalous Libels called the Loyal Protestant and true
Domestic Intelligence, and did, by these Libels, suggest, that Sr Edmundbury
Godfry was Felo de se; and did reflect on every of the said Witnesses, as if
they had contradicted themselves, and Insinuate, that the Coroner's-Jury did at
first declare, that he was Felo de se, and that the Coroner used much Art and
Skill to procure their Verdict to the contrary.

The Jury which tried this Cause, were, Peter Houblon, John Ellis, William
Barret, Joshua Brooks, Gervas Byfeild, Jonathan Lee, George Widows, William
Sambrooke, William Jacomb, John Delinee, Samuel Bailey, and Samuel Howard.


The Counsel for the King, were, Mr Sergeant Maynard, Mr Solicitor General, Sr
Francis Winnington, Mr Williams, Mr Thompson,


Mr Saunders, and Mr Gooding,
Council for Pain. Mr Yalden
for Thompson. Mr Osborne
for Farewell.

Mr Thompson having opened the Indictment, Mr Sergeant Maynard spoke to the
Crime, and declared it to be as impudent a thing as ever was done, in that it
scandalized the public Justice of the Nation, undertook to vindicate the
Murderers, and to accuse the Proceedings of the Nation, and then calling the
Witnesses.

Sr John Nicholas, Sr Philip Loyd, and Mr Bridgman, Clerks of the Council;
proved that the two Letters set forth in the Information, were showed to the
Defendants at the Council, and that Thompson owned the Printing both of them;
and that Farewell owned the carrying the first, and Pain the carrying the
second to Thompson. After reading these Letters in Court; Thompson's
Intelligence of the 17 th of March 1681, was produced, wherein it is contained
as follows;

There is not in the said Letter (meaning the said first Letter) the least Item
or Circumstance, but what will be by undeniable Evidence made out to be Truth,
so that Mr Prance, having not as yet vouchsafed an Answer to that Letter; he
will speedily receive a further Letter, relating to that Murder, wherein the
further truth will be set forth, and other Circumstances set out.

Another of those Intelligences of March 11 th, 1681. given in Evidence, ran
thus; Whereas Dick Janeway in this days Mercury, promises an Answer to the late
Letter to Mr Prance, etc. This is to give him, and all the World notice, that
such an Answer is impatiently expected by the Author of that Letter, who
questions not but to prove every tittle of that Letter, to the satisfaction of
all Mankind; and then it proceeds to challenge the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, to inspect the truth of that Letter; and says, That then the
Fraud and Blindness put upon the World, in Relation to the Murder of Sr
Edmundbury Godfry will be manifestly proved.

A third of these Intelligences, took a further step, glorying, in an imagined
victory in this matter, for it says Last Wednesday Nathaniel Thompson, upon
Summons appeared before the Lords of the Council, about the Letters to Mr
Prance concerning the death of Sr Edmunbury Godfry, where he justified the
matter, and produced the Authors who are ready to prove (by undeniable and sub
stantial Witnesses, etc.) that every tittle and jot a of these Letters are
true, And after adds, Mr Thompson, and the Gentlemen, his Friends are to attend
the next Wednesday at Council, where they do not doubt, but that honorable
Board, will put them into a Method, to prove the whole, or any particular,
which their Honors, in their great Wisdom shall think convenient to be brought
to the Test, or Examination.

An honest Englishman, can never better express his admiration and detestation
of the transcendent impudence, of these vile Miscreants, then in the Language
of the late famous Baron of Wem, upon another occasion, with a small alteration
of Words, Good God! whither were we running, when many easy People were so
strangely wrought upon by these Impostors, and when the villainous and black
Designs of some evil Instruments among us, were so powerfully abetted and
countenanced, that they were arrived to this degree of assurance, that they
could beguile and delude, not only some of the Shepherds of our Church of
England, with their silly innocent Flocks; but even the King and his
Privy Council, into the belief of so horrid a falsehood; and that at a time when
not a hidden, but a deeply contrived and detected Treason was carried on
amongst us, for extirpating our Religion, (termed the Northern Heresy) our
Laws and Liberties; The Conspirators had a fair Game of it, whilst these
Fellows were believed; and they needed no other means to complete their design;
I cannot but say, my Blood does curdle, and my Spirits are raised, to see
fellows so impudent, as to brazen it out, as these monstrous Villains do; the
blackness of their Souls, the baseness of their Actions, ought to be looked upon
with such horror and detestation, as to think them unworthy any longer to tread
upon the face of God's Earth. But, to return to the matter in hand, from which
I have digressed;

It being, as aforesaid made out, that the Defendants had published, that, what
was testified against the Murderers of Sr Edmundbury Godfry was a lie; Mr
Saunders and Mr Gooding, Counsel for Pain, declared it was a rash and
unadvised Act, but not out of Malice; and that he was sorry for what he had
done, and had offered to give any Satisfaction.

To whom the Lord Chief Justice replied, To me he said he would make it out by
five hundred Witnesses, they would make it as plain as the day: and Counselor
Thompson added; since the last time that was appointed for the Trial, they have
printed that they would prove it by sixty Witnesses; and were very sorry it did
not come on.

Mr Yalden, Counsel for Thompson, said, that he thought his Client was
unfortunately drawn into the business by Pain and Farewell, who turn all upon
him now.

Mr Osborne, Counsel for Farewell, said, It was a foolish thing, to do as he had
done, but, that his Client said he had several Witnesses, who being called; it
was manifest that Farewell designed, to have even then, raised a doubt whether
Sr Edmundbury Godfry was murdered, or not; but it appeared, that of the eleven
or twelve Witnesses he called, there was not one but was as much against him as
could be; for they did plainly evince it, that Sr Edmundbury Godfry was Killed,
and that by Strangling, and so confirmed the evidence given against Green,
Berry and Hill.

It being thus manifested, that this was a cursed combination to affront the
public justice of the Nation; and that done, to the end, to persuade the
World, there was no Popish Plot. The Jury, without stirring from the Bar found
them all three guilty of the Information; and the judgment was, that Farewell
and Thompson should stand in the Pillory in the Palace-Yard, for one hour, the
last day of the Term, and each of them pay 100 l. Fine, and to be Imprisoned
till paid; and that Pain should only pay 100 l. Fine, and be imprisoned till
paid. Upon the 5th of July 1682. according to the judgment, Thompson and
Farewell stood in the Pillory with this Writing over their Heads, For Libelling
the Justice of the Nation, by making the World believe, that Sr Edmundbury
Godfry murdered himself.

Though this bold and daring Contrivance of these Champions for Holy Church, was
thus happily defeated, and their own Counsel did not only declare that it was
an unadvised undertaking, but some of their own Gang began to say that the
Devil owed them a sham; yet, no doubt of it the design was better laid, then
some imagined. But what fence for ill luck? They did confidently rely upon the
Council Board to cherish the undertaking, and to instruct the prosecution
thereof, and nothing disappointed them there, but an unlucky mistimeing the
matter. They also knew full well, that the credit of Popery must be restored
and that, by suppressing the evidence of their Plot, and that if one thing
failed, another would hit; they remembered the Prophecy of one of the Guides of
the hare-brain'd Toryes, Heraclitus Ridens, who foretold, soon after the
election of Sr John Moore to be Lord Mayor; that at or before 1683. they should
have Juries for their turn, and, that then talking to the Whiggs about hanging,
that Author with great assurance told them, They must come to it, and should
come to it; so that all had been Cock-sure, if they had timed it, so as to have
had it tried, before any one of the corrupt and murdering Juryes, which that
year of 1683. furnished for my Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, and others.

Reflections upon the Trial of Thomas Pilkington, Esquire and Samuel Shute, Esquire
Sheriffs of London.
And of Ford Lord Gray, Alderman Cornish, Sr Thomas Player, Slingesby Bethel,
Esquire Mr Francis Jenks, Mr John Deagle, Mr Richard Freeman, Mr Robert Key, Mr
John Wickham, Mr Samuel Swinnock, Mr John Jekyl, and Mr R. Goodenough.
Upon an Information for a pretended Riot at Guild Hall, at the day for
Election of Sheriffs, being the 24th of June, 1682.
THe Conspirators, having in the beginning of the Year 1681, delivered
themselves from the danger of Parliaments: They well knew that there then stood
nothing in their way, but the old fashioned, abhorred way of Trials by Juryes:
Therefore, they must now (to cut off all who stood in their way) have Jurymen,
as they had already Judges, at their own Nomination and Devotion, so

In October 1681, Sr John Moore is made Lord Mayor of London; than which (to
the discerning part of Mankind) nothing was more portentous, nor of worse Omen;
and the dire effects with that foreboded were quickly felt; For now ( the Lord
Mayor giving himself up, entirely and implicitly, ^o the dispose and conduct of
Sr Leoline Jenkins) all things went according to the Will of the Conspirators.

The great care now is, how to get such Sheriffs, as would furnish proper
Juryes to serve the turn; for securing this great point, the Mayor is closely
plied by their little Engines in the City; and directed to insist upon a
pretended Prerogative, to elect one of the Sheriffs; This point being gained
upon him, they bethink themselves of a fit Man; and incline to Sr Benjamin
Newland, but at length they pitch upon Mr North ( lately returned from Turkey,
Brother to the Lord Chief Justice North) He readily embraces the Employment,
and before the day for election of Sheriffs was come (a thing never before
known) he seals a Bond to the Court of Aldermen, to hold Sheriff; and the
Gazette proclaims it to the World, that the Lord May or had elected Dudley
North Esquire Sheriff of London

The Conspirators and the Mayor, having thus acted the matter by concert,
Midsummer-day, the accustomed time for Election of Sheriffs, being come; the
Mayor insists to have Mr North admitted as one of the Sheriffs, and his Party
put up Mr Box to be joined with him; But the Citizens withstood the Mayor's
Usurpation upon their undoubted Rights; and proceeded according to immemorial
Custom, to Elect their Sheriffs; and fixed upon those well-deserving and
eminent Citizens, Mr Papillon, and Mr Dubois; who were chosen upon the view, by
a very great majority of Voices.

Hereupon, to gain time for Consultation, how to trick this Election; the
Accomplices of the Conspiracy, demand a Poll, that being yielded to them; the
Sheriffs went upon the taking the Poll; and it being far proceeded upon, and
it appearing that there were two to one of the Electors, polled for Mr Papillon
and Mr Dubois; the Mayor was sent with a Rabble, in a Tumultuous manner, to
interrupt the finishing the Poll, by Adjourning the Court.

The Sheriffs, Mr Pillington and Mr Shute, well knowing the Managment of the
Election to belong to them; continued for some time to proceed in taking the
Poll, and then adjourned to the Tuesday following.

The Conspirators call this a Riot, ( as in truth it was of their own side) and
the Council at Whitehall, commit the Sheriffs to the Tower; and there lock them
up, till, by an unlucky English Instrument, called an Habeas Corpus, the Tower
Gates were forced open; they nevertheless with undaunted resolution, persisted
to assert their own and the Citizens Rights; and declared Mr Papillon and Mr
Dubois, to be Elected Sheriffs.

Then it was proposed and consented to, that a new Poll should be taken; which
being done, it appeared, that Mr North had 170 Voices, Mr Box 1353. and Mr
Papillon and Mr Dubois, upwards of 2700. and they are a second time declared to
be Elected Sheriffs.

Thereupon, upon the 20 th of July, diverse eminent Citizens attended the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen; and for themselves, and on behalf of the rest of
the Citizens, demanded, that they would cause Proclamation to be made, for Mr
Papillon and Mr Dubois, to appear and seal Bonds, according to Custom; to take
the Office of Sheriffs; And at the same time, they entered a Caveat, to Mr
Wagstaffe the Town Clerk, against the swearing and admitting, Mr North and Mr
Box, Sheriffs.

However, the Lord Mayor by the direction of Sr L. Jenkins, and the influence
of Saunders, and of Jefferies (both declared Enemies to the City Rights, and at
that time, of Council with the Conspirators, for the overthrow of their Ancient
Charters) assumes the boldness to declare, both Mr North and Mr Box, Sheriffs;
and so ravishes from the Citizens, the right to Elect either of the Sheriffs;
But Mr Box appearing to be endued with a better stock of Discretion, than to
undertake the Office, upon that Title, declined it; Whereupon it is resolved
that Mr Rich shall be the Man, and a Common Hall being called, a little before
Michaelmas, where, though above ten to one were found against Rich, yet, the
Common Sergeant ( who was deeply engaged in the Intrigue) makes report to the
Mayor; as was before concerted; that Mr Rich was Elected, and so, without more
to do, he is declared Mr North's Partner.

Upon the day for swearing the new Sheriffs, being Michaelmas-Eve, 1682. The
Citizens went in a very great Body to Guild Hall, to present Mr Papillon and Mr
Dubois to be sworn, but were with-stood by Soldiers, Armed with Pikes and
Muskets, then in possession of the Hall; By these means, and in this Military,
Arbitrary, and most Illegal way, were Mr North and Rich constituted Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex, to the unspeakable joy of the Conspirators, and their
insipid Adherents in the City.

These new Sheriffs, to gratify their Faction, and to oblige the World, with
notice of what must be expected from them; At the public Feast upon their
entering upon the Office, They entertain their Crew with these Rhimes, Sung at
their own Table, Thanks to Sr John, our good Lord Mayor,
Against Sheriffs tricks he kept the Chair;
Then to the famous Sr John Moore,
May after Age, that Name Adore.
For Ropes and Gibbets the next year,
The Whigs, we hope need not despair;
If Rich find Timber (give 'em scope)
Brave North will never grudg 'em Rope.
Then to brave North a double Dose,
Who the strong Factions did oppose.
Then to brave Rich a Health off hand,
Who the loud Tumults did withstand.


Well, to be serious, and after a too tedious digression, to return to the
matter proposed; These Sheriffs, being thus settled, and by consequence, Juryes
to serve the turn, at hand; They set themselves to a vigorous prosecution of
the Quo Warranto, brought against the City Charters; and of an Information
exhibited about this notorious and horrid Riot; and to make sure work herein,
they cast an Eye into Westminster Hall, and finding Sr Francis Pemberton, Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench would not serve this purpose; He is thrust
down into the Common Pleas; with a Complement from the Lord Keeper North; that
no Man's services were more eminent nor better accepted, than my Lord Chief
Justice Pemberton's; And Mr Saunders ( the Counsel against the City upon the
Quo Warranto, and Adviser of the Lord Mayor's most extravagant proceeding in
the matter of the Sheriffs) is upon the 23d of January 1682, promoted to be
Lord Chief Justice; being then told by the Lord Keeper; That the King's People
might not suffer in the want of so good a Magistrate as his Predecessor, his
Majesty had taken care in the choice of him, to succeed in that great and
important Office; he being a Person of manifest Integrity and Affection to the
King's service; And that his Lordship might say without flattery, that he came
into the Seat of Lord Chief Justice, with as few Passions and personal
Frailties as any that had been before him. [ Methinks Sr Matthew Hale or Sr
William Scroggs, might have been excepted.] That the Age was so degenerate, and
full of Faults;
Faults of Irreligion, Immorality, Debauchery, etc. that it required more than
a Man to censure them. And, his Lordship added, That the temper of the present
Age required his Severity in cases of Sedition, Which, he said, was ^lly grown
to that height and Insolence, and managed with that Malice, that it was very
near breaking out into open force.

All things being now thus well prepared; upon the 8th of May 1683, the matter
of the Riot is brought to Trial at Guild Hall before this virtuous Lord Chief
Justice Saunders, upon an Information to this effect.

That upon the 24 th of June 1682. in Guild Hall, there was a Common Hall
summoned by Sr John Moore Lord Mayor, for the Election of Sheriffs; and that on
that day, the Lord Mayor in a lawful manner adjourned the Court, till Tuesday
following; That after the Adjournment, the Lord Mayor made Proclamation for all
persons to depart; That the Defendants intending to disturb the King's Peace,
did unlawfully meet together, and riotously assault the Lord Mayor; And, that
after the Adjournment, Mr Pilkington and Mr Shute, by color of their Office,
as Sheriffs; and the rest of the Defendants, did continue the Poll, and affirm
to the People, that Sr John Moore had no power to adjourn them; and that they
continued this great Tumult three hours; to the terror of the King's Subjects,
and against the Peace.

The Prosecution of this Information, was managed by, The Kings Attorney
General, Solicitor General, Sr George Jefferies, Mr Dolben, Mr Jones, and Mr
Molloy.


And defended by, Mr Wallop, Sr Francis Winnington, Mr Williams, Mr Thompson,
Mr Holt, Mr Summers, and Mr Freke.


Mr Summers and Mr Thompson, upon calling the Jury, offered a Challenge of the
Array; and pressed to have it read, which being done; Sr George Jefferies
called it a Tale of a Tub, But Mr Thompson persisted, Urging, that Sheriff
North was interessed in the matter, and if Sr John Moore had not Authority to
Adjourn the Poll; Mr North was not duly chosen Sheriff; and so ought not to
return a Jury; the very Title, to the Office of Sheriff, being in question.

This point was further pressed by Mr Williams, Sr Francis Winnington, and Mr
Wallop; but opposed by the Attorney, and Solicitor General, and Jefferies; and
overruled by the Lord Chief Justice, Then, Mr Thompson prayed the Benefit of a
Bill of Exceptions; but that was also overruled; and the Jury, returned by the
Sheriffs, who were forced upon the City by the true Rioters, were, Sr Benjamin
Newland, Sr John Mathews, Sr John Buckworth, Sr Tho. Griffith, Sr Edmund
Wiseman, Percival Gilburne, Henry Wagstaffe, Barth. Ferryman, Tho. Blackmore,
Samuel Newton, William Watton, and George Villers.


Then Mr Dolben opened the Information, and Mr Attorney followed, saying, That
the Information was brought for settling the Peace of the City, and to show who
is the Supreme Magistrate there; That the Lord Mayor in all times, was the
Kings Lieutenant; and no public Assemblies could ever meet, without his
Summons; That the question was about the Election of Sheriffs; That the Lord
Mayor adjourned the Court; and the Sheriffs proceeded, and made Proclamation,
that it was not in the power of the Mayor; and continued the Poll in a Riotous
manner; and when the Mayor attempted to go out of the Hall; they struck him,
struck his Hat off, and pressed several of the Aldermen; That if the others had
made opposition, all had been in Confusion, upon this Usurpation.

To this, Mr Solicitor added; That after my Lord Mayor commanded them to
depart, they continued their Assembly there, in a very riotous manner, and as
my Lord came down, they offered Insolences to his Person.

Then comes Sr George Jefferies ( the main Contriver and Abettor of the Lord
Mayor's most daring and unjustifiable attempt) and tells the Jury; That the
Rabble came upon my Lord Mayor; had him down upon his Knees, and if some
Gentlemen had not come in, they had trod him under feet; He then called Sr
William Hooker, Mr Lightfoote, Mr King, the Common Sergeant, the Common Crier,
the Sword Bearer, and Mr Bancroft; to testify (as they did) that the Lord
Mayor, did always convene and dismiss the Common Hall, and, as to the matter in
question, the Common Crier evidenced, that about five or six of the Clock, he
adjourned the Court by my Lord Mayor's Order, to the Tuesday following.

Mr Weston witnessed the same, about the Adjournment; and that he saw my Lord's
Hat off; and his Train bearer, was knocked down, or fell down.

The Common Sergeant evidenced, that he heard them ( but could name no Person)
cry out, No God Bless the King; down with the Sword; No Lord Mayor; No King.
And he affirmed, that he had the sole management of Elections of Sheriffs, as
the Duty of his Place.

Then Cradock, and others, witnessed that the several persons charged in the
Information, continued upon the place, after the Adiournment: And Cradock said,
that Mr Bethel came to him and bid him resist my Lord Mayor.

Major Kelsey declared, That he saw my Lord Mayor's Hat upon his Back. And
Captain Clark, said, that he heard above a hundred hiss and cry, No King's man,
upon the proclaming, God save the King, and that they also cried, Press on,
Press on.

Higgins said, that some cried, God save the Protestant Sheriffs; down with the
Sword; and that after the Lord Mayor was gone home, he saw one Freeman ( whom
they call the Protestant Cheesmonger) calling to Poll to Poll; And that he
heard Alderman Cornish tell the Sheriffs, they were doing right; and you shall
have all right done to you; Higgins added, that he was saying, you are all in a
Riot; and Mr Swinnock said, this is no Riot -- I can never meet you, but you
are railing against the King's Evidence.

Mr Vavasor Note, This Spark Vavasor, was the malicious and implacable Mover
and Promoter of the unjust Prosecution of honest Mr VVilmore; and said, This
Dog VVilmore, this Ignoramus Dog, If I do but rout him, I shall be made the
King's Attorney.

Had Mr Attorney General known, that he had the Ambitious thought of
supplanting him, he would not have given him this lift toward the Office of
Kings Attorney, by making him one of his Majesty's VVitnesses.


(called by Mr Attorney General) witnessed that Sheriff Shute ordered
Proclamation to be made, and told them, where as my Lord Mayor had taken upon
him to Adjourn; We the Sheriffs, being the proper Officers; do Adjourn to
Tuesday at nine of the Clock; And Vavasor added, that had it not been for Trice
Hammond, he believes he had been trod under foot.

Then Farrington testified, that, Mr Wickham a Scrivener said to him, My Lord
Mayor has nothing to do here, We will not be ruled by any of your Tory Lord
Mayors; and he added, that they fell about him, and he was in great danger of
mischief, for they trod upon his Toes.

Mr Kemp, testified, that Mr Deagle confessed to him, that he was there about
seven at night, with Alderman Cornish. It will no doubt, be a warning to Mr
Deagle, to go, upon his next transgression, a little further than Pater
Noster-Row, for a Confessor.


Mr Williams then urged on behalf of the Defendants; That for the Cries and
Disorders, nothing was fixed upon them; and it appeared not, whether one Party,
or other made the noise; That, the question here was, whether the Sheriffs did
more than their Office; and he did not see the Government concerned, one way or
other; -- That here is nothing more proved, than the continuing the Poll, and
it will be very hard to make them guilty of a Riot.

Sr Francis VVinnington added; That at this rate, They that are the greatest
Number ( or rather the most powerful Party) may, upon every occasion, make
them, against whom the Election is carried, to be Rioters.

Then Sr Robert Clayton witnessed, That when he was Lord Mayor, a Person whom
he drank to, for Sheriff, was rejected by the Common Hall; and they were left
to choose two Sheriffs for themselves; That the management of the Election was
left to the Sheriffs; who did grant a Poll, and managed it; which Sr Robert
took to be their duty; and did not apprehend it to be his right. That that Poll
was the most litigious he had known; and lasted five or six days, and the
Sheriffs adjourned it, without consulting him, or receiving any direction from
him; for he did not look upon it to be in his power.

Here, the Attorney General and Mr Jones (designing without doubt to catch this
prudent and well-deserving Gentleman; as they lately had the worthy Sr Patience
Ward) did mightily labor to have him be positive in his evidence; but, he not
being to be so ensnared; declared, that he spoke to the best of his
remembrance, every thing he said.

Alderman Love then witnessed, that when he was Sheriff, about two and twenty
Years ago, he took it for granted, that it was the Sheriffs Office, to manage
the Common Hall; as my Lord Mayor's was, to have a Sword born before him; and
that he received it by Tradition from all before him: That in his Sheriffalty,
when they came to choose Sheriffs; the Lord Mayor said to him and his Brother;
Gentlemen, look to your Office; that one was put in nomination who had been
drank to; and, he being a sitting Alderman; he was chosen with another; He
added, that had my Lord Mayor gone about to intermeddle; he should have desired
him to meddle in his own Office, and let him alone with his. That he never knew
or heard, that the Lord Mayor interposed, till of late years; but the Sheriffs
managed the whole business of choosing Sheriffs.

Deputy Sibley then testified, that he had been of the Livery ever since the
Year 1639. That, in all his time ( except of late) the Sheriffs had the
management of the Election; and the Lord Mayor never interposed; but he and the
Aldermen, went off the Bench.

Mr Winstanley testified, that when Sr Samuel Starling was Mayor, Sr James
Edwards, and Sr James Smyth, the Sheriffs, managed the Poll, between Mr Kyffen
and Sr Robert Clayton.

Mr Wallop then put this Case; in a point of right; if there be a probable
Cause to insist upon it; Suppose I send three or four Men to a Wood, and take a
Car or Team; if they be a competent Number to cut down Wood; if I am mistaken
in the title, that is no Riot.

Then Mr Roe testified that he saw a Rabble, of about one hundred in the
Street, with their Hats upon Sticks, crying, damn the Whiggs; and they
declared, that they did it, to stop the Polling for Sheriffs.

Then something in excuse for the Lord Grey's being there was offered.

Sr Simon Lewis and Sr Jonathan Raymond, who were Sheriffs in Sr Robert
Clayton's Mayoralty, then said, That upon the first day of Election of
Sheriffs, my Lord Mayor adjourned the Court; and that afterward they only
appointed from day to day till the Poll was ended.

The Common Sergeant out-stripped these Gentlemen, and now declared, that upon
the Poll for Mr Bethel and Mr Cornish; against Mr Box and Mr Nicholson, in the
Mayoralty of Sr Robert Clayton; every Adjournment was made, by my Lord Mayor's
direction to him.

[ This Gentleman's endearedness to Jeffryes did sufficiently dispose him to
give his best assistance to the Conviction of these worthy Citizens, aimed at
in this prosecution; and it may be suspected that it would not have much
displeased him, to have seen them capitally accused; for he was heard to say at
Tunbridge, to some of his Confidents, soon after my Lord Russel's Death, That
the Plot, at present lay amongst Lords and Country-Gentlemen, but when it came
into the City, they should see what work it would make.]

The Attorney General concluded, saying, This matter relates immediately to the
Government: here is the public Peace of the City in danger, and if my Lord
Mayor had been a person of great Spirit, and had raised others to suppress this
Riot; then the City had been in a fine condition; therefore, Gentlemen, it is
hoped you will settle the City, by destroying this pretense, which has been
fluttering in the Air, but has no ground for it.

Then, the Chief Justice summing up the matter, told the Jury; That the Rioters
would make the Sheriffs, the Men; and that the Lord Mayor was no body; and that
it was something of the Commonwealth Seed, that was like to grow up among the
good Corn. -- That the Jury must consider, whether these Gentlemen did not in a
tumultuary way, make a Riot, to set up a Magistracy, by the power of the People
-- That in truth, the King must be put out of his Throne; to put these two
Sheriffs in it. -- That it was to dethrone the King, as far as they could. --
That my Lord Mayor himself, had like to have been trod under foot; his Hat was
down -- That, all this Flame took fire from this Spark; That the Sheriffs might
do what they thought fit, about choosing Officers.

Hereupon, the Jury having found the Defendants guilty: Upon the 26th of June,
Justice Jones, declaring the heinousness of the Fact, and what an evil
President it might prove, if it should pass unpunished; after a little
Whispering, with his Brother Wythens, awarded the following Fines to be paid (
viz.) Mr Pilkington (to whom Royal Mercy was extended, in regard, he was a
Prisoner upon Execution for 100000 l. given by a Loyal Hertfordshire-Jury, for
Words about the Duke of York) only 500 l. Mr Shute 1000 Marks. Lord Gray 1000
Marks. Alderman Cornish 1000 Marks. Sr Tho. Player 500 Marks. Mr Bethel 1000
Marks. Mr Jenks 300 Marks. Mr Deagle 400 Marks. ( Quere If not bestowed upon
Kemp for betraying his Neighbor.) Mr Freeman 300 Marks. Mr Key 100 Marks. Mr
Wickham 100 Marks. Mr Swinnock 500 Marks. Mr Jekil 200 Marks. Mr Goodenough 500
Marks.


The black Representation of the demeanor of the Sheriffs, and many of the
most valuable Persons in the City, upon this Election of Sheriffs; as, that it
was a Branch, a Limb, any thing, or every thing, of an horrid Fanatical
Conspiracy against the King's Life; A deliberate design to spoil the Crown, the
Church and the Subject. The impetuous prosecution of the Information; The
strange practices to procure the Conviction of the Persons now named; the
exorbitant Fines imposed upon them; And, to add no more, the avouching and
out-facing the accession of the Tory Crew, to most of the extravagant and
arbitrary Practices of the late Reigns; in the attempt (even in the beginning
of the auspicious Reign of their present Majesty's, whom God long preserve) to
bring Sr John Moore a second time to the Chair, and that at a time when the
House of Commons had received Petitions, charing him with high Misdemeanors,
in his Mayoralty, and were proceeding to the examination thereof; I say, the
consideration of these things, may well justify the Remarking with some
plainness, the transactions at Guild Hall upon the memorable 24th of June 1682,
so that Truth may be vindicated against Calumny.

As to the Evidence of the Riot and Disorders, given by Sr John Moore's
Witnesses, some things seem pretty observable, as,

1 st. Though the Witnesses were all forward enough; the most Splenetick,
violent and imbittered Tories, saw and heard most, indeed every thing, for
Instance; Mr Bethel, amongst the many hundreds or thousands there Assembled,
unhappily chopped upon (or rather sought out) Gradock, for he swore Mr B. came,
to him and had him resist my Lord Mayor. Captain Clarke heard above one
hundred hiss and cry no King's Man, upon the proclaiming God save the King, and
yet it was not heard by one other, of more than twenty Witnesses produced on
that side. The Common Sergeant went a step higher than Clark, for he, and no
body else, heard them cry, No Lord Mayor, no King.

2 dly, Captain Clarke heard the People cry, Press on, press on; Major Kelsey
saw my Lord Mayor's Hat upon his Back; Vavasor was in danger of being trod
under foot; Nay, the Roguy VVhigs trod upon Farrington's Tory Toes; but they
paid dear for it, for he Swore Mr Wickham in for his 100. Marks. But, which
was worst of all, there was such a Crowd, my Lord Mayor (taking a false step)
had like to have got a fall.

Now, though it may be thought, that but few of these Gentlemen-Witnesses do
frequent thronged Churches; yet they will not deny, but when they have gone to
divert themselves, with the lashing of the Whiggs, at one or other of the
London Churches, upon a Set-day, they have been in such haste, to get out to
the Wonder Tavern to drink their Confusion, that they have not only used this
naughty guage now complained of, press on, press on; but have also ( in a
riotous manner) trod upon one another Toes. But if so, it may be objected,
that it was amongst themselves; so in truth was this We are talking of, for the
matter was no other than this,

Heat of the Brains, reigning at that day to an high degree, amongst many of
that party; when my Lord Mayor went out of the Hall, toward the Sheriffs, who
were taking the Poll in the Guild-Hall-Yard; the Crowd of his own furious
Followers (of whom every one strove to be foremost) pressed upon him; and by
that means, and no other, did the disaster happen, of his Lordship's Hat
falling from his Head.

To conclude, though the carriage of things at that time of the swearing Mr
North and Mr Rich, Sheriffs (when that notorious Usurpation upon the Citizens
right, was justified by Bashaw Quiney and his Janazaries) did creat an
apprehension, that no Laws, Usages or Customs, would be regarded, when they
came in competition with the designs then on foot; yet the Citizens, asserted
their Rights with all modesty, and the Sheriffs, in the whole proceeding,
carried themselves, with all imaginable impartiality, and with the greatest
regard to the Quiet and Peace of the City.

Having just touched the unheard of practice, of bringing the Military Power,
to strike a Terror into the Citizens; and thereby to wrest from them their
undoubted privilege of choosing Sheriffs; I shall take leave to subjoyn a brief
account, of the Indignities and Violence then used toward several of the Chief
Magistrates of the City; but shall by the way (though it comes not in its
proper place) present the Reader with a Transcript, of the New-fashion'd
Summons, issued by the Lord Mayor, upon the extraordinary occasion, which then
appeared, to have Sheriffs of Sr L. Jenkins his Nomination.

By the Mayor.
THese are to require you, that on Midsummer day next ( being the day
appointed, as well for Confirmation of the Person who has been by me Chosen,
according to the Ancient Custom and Constitution of this City; to be one of the
Sheriffs of this City and the County of Middlesex, for the Year ensuing; as for
the Election of the other of the said Sheriffs, and other Officers) you cause
the Livery of your Company to meet Together, at your Common Hall, early in the
Morning, and from thence to come together, Decently and Orderly, in their Gowns
to Guild Hall, there to make the said Confirmation and Elections.

Given this 19th Day of June, 1682. Wagstaffe.

To return to what was last proposed; The accustomed day for Swearing the
Sheriffs being come, the Aldermen were called to Guildhall, by Summons from the
Lord Mayor, as follows.

Sir, your Worship is desired to be at a Cort of Aldermen at Guildhall, on
Thursday at nine of the Clock in the forenoon, in your Violet Gown and Cloak;
it being the 28th of September.

Hereupon, at that hour, six Aldermen ( viz.) Sr John Laurence, Sr Robert
Clayton, Sr Patience Ward, Sr Thomas Goold, Sr John Shorter and Alderman
Cornish, went, with Mr Papillon and Mr Dubois, to Guildhall; where Quiney, in a
very insolent manner came to them, and told them, he had a command to keep the
Hall clear; whereupon they demanded, whether he did not know them to be
Magistrates, of the City, and could believe his Order reached them; he replied,
that he knew them, and they must remove; They then said, they were summoned and
attended in all peaceableness; quickly after, he accosted them again, saying,
Gentlemen; you must withdraw, I have a command to require it; They then
demanded a sight of his Warrant, but (huffing) he said, he would show none to
such as they were; and then laid hold of Sr P. Ward, saying, Sr, you must
remove; and in the same manner laid hold of Sr John Laurence, pulling him with
such violence, that he had like to have thrown him down; and treating the rest
of the Aldermen in that manner, they were all forced to retire; in this
proceeding, he was abetted and supported by, Mr Wythers, Wiseman, Nichols,
Steverton, etc. then present in Guildhall, ( proper men to be returned to serve
upon the Jury in the foregoing Cause).

The Lord Mayor being come to the Court, Mr Papillon and Mr Dubois declared,
that they were ready, and did there tender themselves to take the Office of
Sheriffs, and to be sworn; and humbly prayed the Answer of his Lordship and the
Court; but without condescending thereto, the Mayor went to the Hustings,
calling Mr North and Rich to follow him; and there, calling them to the Book to
be sworn, Mr Papillon and Mr Dubois offered themselves to be sworn, and Mr
Papillon laid his hand on the Book; but his Lordship and Sr J. E. Sr W. P. and
some other Aldermen commanded them to forbear, and keep the Peace and be gone:
Some of the Aldermen claimed to be heard, but the Mayor refused it, and
proceeded to swear North and Rich; whereupon the duly elected Sheriffs with
the six Aldermen, withdrew, protesting against those irregular and arbitrary
proceedings.

Remarks upon the Trial of my Lord Russell, upon the 13 th of July, 1683.
UPon the Discovery of the Popish Plot, the Conspirators, finding their
measures to be broken, as indeed were those of the French King all over Europe;
they advised King Charles the Second, to make use of the Discovery, as a
Cripple, to beg Money of the then approaching Parliament, which was immediately
to sit; for the better effecting thereof, the obsequious Clergy were privately
instructed to Preach against Popery, and to magnify the Discovery of the Plot;
this Doctrine was thundered out from the Pulpits, till the Dissolution of that
notorious Pentionary Parliament. Having then found their hopes dashed, new
Instructions were given, and the Clergy advertised that there was some fear
from the Dissenters, but yet for a time, they were to Preach against Popery,
but not to talk of the Plot; this humor continued till the Dissolution of the
Parliament which met in March 1678. and was dissolved in May following, 1679.
Then they received advice that there was a Presbyteterian as well as a Popish
plot; this made the Ecclesiastical Drums beat loudly against Dissenters, and
that work was closely followed, till the breaking the Parliament at Oxford, in
the beginning of the year 1681. When the Conspirators influenced too many of
the Pulpits, to thunder against the credit of the Popish plot, and to insinuate
a belief of a Presbyterian Plot; which they were all the while hammering; and
by this art, they did at length usher it into the World.

The Nobility and Gentry of England, to make bold with their own words in their
Memorial for our now Gracious King and Queen, then Prince and Princess of
Orange; had been, as they therein freely confessed, too slow to believe the
desperate Popish Plot, and had been deluded with the King's Promises to protect
and maintain the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Government of England;
until they saw them all undermined: But many discerning this Delusion, more
early than others did, the never to be forgotten Duke of Monmouth, Earl of
Essex, Lord Russel, and Colonel Sidney; with some other great and valuable
Persons, who were of that well-grounded Opinion; That a free Nation, like this
of England, might defend their Religion and Liberties, when Invaded and taken
from them, under pretense and color of Law; began to bethink themselves how to
restore Parliaments to their ancient freedom, and to deliver the Nation from
the fury of that Torrent of Popery, which they wisely foresaw ready to break
in and carry all before it.

At this juncture the Conspirators laid hold of the Information given by
Keeling, of unadvised and rash Discourses of a very small number of Men, (nine
or ten at the most, all Strangers to the Persons and honest Consultations of
those great Men before named) and they cunningly and maliciously, ^atch'd and
worked it into one piece, and emitted it to the World by their Declaration,
read in all Churches, under the name of a Presbyterian or Fanatic Plot, which
they had long wanted.

Hereupon a Proclamation pursues the Duke of Monmouth, and some others
(designed for destruction) who chose to stand aside, out of the reach of the
Blood-thirsty Conspirators; But the Earl of Essex, my Lord Russell, and Colonel
Sidney, would not be overcome by the persuasions of those who invited them to
safe retirements; and so were clapped into the Tower, and afterward, in
different ways butchered.

It was resolved that my Lord Russell ( the Honor of his Age) should be cut
off in a seeming way of Justice; and as he was a Person of inestimable value,
so the art used to destroy him was extraordinary; in the first place, The
Conspirators, to introduce a belief of his Lordship's guilt, procure two
Persons charged with Keeling's Plot, to be convicted just before my Lord is
brought to Trial; reserving other two of them, of whose Conviction they more
doubted, to be tried after his Lordship.

Then a well prepared Panel of Jurors (many of them trained and disciplined
under L'Estrange, and some Inferior Clergymen his Prostitutes) was returned
by Sr John Moore's Sheriffs.

Matters being thus prepared, He is brought upon his Trial at the Old-Bayly
upon Friday the 13th of July 1683; At the instant of entering upon it, the
Conspirators cut the Ea^l Essex's Throat in the Tower; and to facilitate the
dispatch of the Lord then at the Bar, they immediately intimate by an express
to the Old-Bayly, that the Earl of Essex had murdered himself; from hence a
wicked (and unquestionably a premeditated) Inference is raised, of the good
Lord Rassell's guilt, and by this diabolical contrivance, the Blood of the Earl
of Essex is made a main Evidence toward the Prisoner's Conviction, that being
accomplished; upon the day ensuing, the Verdict of his guilt, is made an
Argument to seduce and delude the Coroner's Inquest, into a belief that the
Earl of Essex had destroyed himself.

The Jury being called, his Lordship was overruled in his Challenges, of those
of them, who were not Freeholders; though the learned in the Laws, did and do
say, that he was entitled to those Challenges not of Grace but Right; and the
same was allowed to others by my Lord's Prosecutors, at such Seasons, when it
would not disserve their turn; thus the Estate, Honor and Life of this Noble
Lord, are put into the Hands and Power of Tradesmen and Shopkeepers.

He being charged with an Indictment for high Treason, the right of my Lord's
Challenging for want of Freehold, was argued and insisted upon by his Council,
Mr Pollexfen, Mr Holt, and Mr Ward.


But was opposed by The Attorney General, The Solicitor General, Sr George
Jeffryes, and Mr North.


And was overruled by the Judges upon the Bench who were, The Lord Chief
Justice Pemberton, The Lord Chief Baron, Justice Jones, Justice Wyndham,
Justice Charleton, Justice Levins, Baron Street, and Justice Wythens.


Then the following Jury were sworn, Jahn Martin, William Rouse, Gervas Seaton,
William Fashion, Thomas Short, George Tory Ano. William Butler, James
Pickering, Thomas Ieve, Hugh Noden, Robert Brough, and Thomas Oneby.


Then Mr North the King's Counsel, opened the Indictment to this effect, That
the Prisoner stood charged with no less than conspiring the Death of the King,
and that in order to it, he with other Traitors, the second of November, 1682,
conspired to raise War against him, and to Massacre his Subjects, and to seize
his Guards and Person.

The Attorney General, (being so hot upon this bloody pursuit, that he had
before positively refused to defer the Trial till the Afternooon It Is probable
that he might imagine that by the Afternoon the suspicion of the Earl of
Essex's Assassination might reach the Ears of the Jury, as it did in a few
hours many about the Town, and then Mr Attorney had lost that which he made a
mighty part of his Evidence.
and imposed upon the Court to go instantly upon it) did now apply himself
totis viribus, to impress the Jury, telling them that the Prisoner was one of
the Council of State ( as he in a scornful way expressed himself) to give forth
directions for the general Rising, that ( as had appeared) was to be in the
Kingdom; That the Rising was of great concern and expense, and must be managed
by Persons of Interest, Prudence and Secrecy -- That they consulted in October
and November how to seize the Guards, and at several meetings, they received
Messages from my Lord of Shaftesbury, touching the Rising. That this was the
great Consult, and moved all the Wheels. That there were Underlings who were to
manage the Assassination -- who were an inferior Council of seven. That there
was a great Council of six, who were the Prisoner, the Earl of Essex ( whom he
pretended he was sorry to name, he having that Morning prevented the hand of
Justice upon himself) Note, this was spoken within an hour or two after the
Earl's death, before any Inquisition taken, or it could possibly be known how
he came by his death, but, right or wrong, this Jury must now pass upon him,
and find him Felo de se, to facilitate and justify the Murder they are now to
commit.
and four others -- That they debated how they should make the Rising, and
Resolved, that before they fell upon it, they would have an exact account of
the time and Method of the Scotch Rising; and thereupon Colonel Sidney sent
Aaron Smyth on purpose to invite Scotch Commissioners to treat with these Noble
Lords; that pursuant to this, just before the Plot broke out, several came from
Scotland, to treat how to manage the Work; They demanded at first 30000 l. then
fell to 10000 l. and at last to 5000 l. but they not coming to their terms, it
broke off the Week the Plot was discovered. He concluded, that they should
show, that all the Inferior party, still looked upon these to be the Heads.

I shall not here trouble the Reader, with the particulars of the Evidence
given against this Noble Lord, by the Lord Howard, Colonel Romsey, and Mr
Shepherd; nor offer at any Remarks thereupon, much less to touch upon the many
Hardships and great Injustice put upon his Lordship in this Prosecution, in
point of Law; all that having been admirably well done, by the Learned Pens of
the right Honorable the Lord Chief Baron Atkyns, and of Mr Hawles of Lincolns
Inn, My purpose, not only in extracting these Notes in my Lord Russell's Case;
but also in this whole Tract; being only to present the World with some matters
of History, which they did not put down, or remark upon; and (which indeed
invited me to this work) to gather together, for public use, Abstracts and
Remarks upon some memorable Trials in the late unhappy Reigns; upon which they
never touched.

I shall therefore now proceed, to represent something further of the carriage
and exasperating Speeches of the King's Council, etc. against his Lordship.

The Solicitor General sum'd up the Evidence in this manner, That the Prisoner
stood Indicted for High Treason in conspiring the Death of the King, That the
Overt Act, laid to prove that Conspiracy by, is the assembling in Council, to
raise Arms against the King, and to raise a Rebellion, and that they had proved
that, by three Witnesses; He then proceeded to state the substance of the
Evidence, which having done as he thought fit; he added, That my Lord Russell
had made several Objections, and then he pretended to answer them, and in doing
it, said, That their Consultation was to seize the King's Person, and bring him
into their power, and, that to design to bring the King into their power, only
till he had consented to such things as should be moved in Parliament, was
equally Treason, as if they had agreed directly to Assassinate him -- That
therefore, the Jury were to consider nothing, but to see that the fact be fully
proved, and he saw nothing said by my Lord that does invalidate the Evidence.

He went on thus, That the last Objection (to which a great many Persons of
Honor and Quality had been called) was, That my Lord Russell being a man of
Honor, Virtue and so little blamable in his whole Conversation; 'twas not
likely he should be guilty of any thing of this kind, This he confessed to have
weight in it, but then he bad the Jury consider that he was but a man, and that
Men fall by several Temptations, some out of Revenge, some by Malice fall into
such Offenses as these; my Lord is not of this Temper, but Gentlemen, there is
another great and dangerous Temptation that attends people in his
Circumstances; whether it be Pride, or Ambition, or the cruel snare of
Popularity, being cried up as a Patron of Liberty; This is the only way to
tempt Persons of V^rtue, and the Devil knew it, when he tempted the Pattern of
Virtue -- Though he be a Person of Virtue, I am afraid these Temptations have
prevailed upon my Lord, for I cannot give my self any color of Objection to
dis-believe all these Witnesses; I see no Contradiction, no Correspondence, no
Contrivance at all between them, you have plain Oaths before you, and I hope
you will consider the weight of them, and the great Consequence that did attend
this Case, But under his favor, these celebrated VVitnesses were at Bargain,
and bought their own lives at the price of this Noble Lord's Blood.
the overthrow of the best Government in the World, and the best and most
unspotted Religion, which must needs have suffered. The greatest liberty and
the greatest security for Property that ever was in any Nation, bounded every
way by the Rules of Law and those kept sacred, I hope you will consider
the weight of this Evidence, and consider the Consequences such a Conspiracy
might have had.

Then Jefferies, to Insinuate this Noble Lord's Guilt, argued thus, Had not my
Lord of Essex been conscious of his being guilty of desperate things, he would
scarcely have brought himself to that untimely End, to avoid the methods of
public Justice. -- I am sorry to find that there have been so many of the
Nobility of this Land, that have lived so happily under the benign influence
of a Gracious Prince, should make so ill returns.

Gentlemen! whereas that Noble Lord says, he has a virtuous good Lady, he has
many Children, he has Virtue and Honor, he puts in the Scale. I must tell you
on the other side, you have Conscience, Religion, you have a Prince, and a most
merciful one too; Consider the Life of your Prince, the Life of his Posterity,
the Consequences that would have attended, if this Villainy had taken effect,
What would have become of your Lives and Religion? What would have become of
that Religion we have been so fond of preserving -- You have your
Understandings, your Wives and Children, let not the Greatness of any man
Corrupt you.

Then, the Lord Chief Justice directing the Jury, told them (after he had
repeated the evidence) that the Question before them was, whether they did
believe my Lord Russell had any design upon the King's Life, to destroy the
King, to take away his Life, and that that was the material part there -- you
have not evidence in this Case, as there was in the other matter, that was
tried in the morning, or yesterday, against the Conspirators to kill the King
at the Rye -- This is an Act of contriving Rebellion and an Insurrection, and
to seize the Guards; which is urged as an evidence, and surely is in it self an
evidence to seize and destroy the King -- If you believe the Prisoner at the
Bar, to have conspired the death of the King, and in order to that, to have had
these Consults, then you must find him guilty of this Treason laid to his
Charge.

The Court then adjourned, and at their sitting again in the Afternoon, the
Jury brought in their Verdict, that my Lord Russell, was Guilty.

I shall here, to refresh the Readers memory, subjoyn some brief Heads of the
dying Speech of this great and invaluable Person, a Martyr for the true
Religion and the Liberties of his Country.

He thanked God, that he found himself so composed and prepared for Death, and
his thoughts so fixed on another World, that he hoped in God, he was quite
weaned from setting his heart on this.

He blessed God for the many Blessings of his Life, That he was born of worthy
good Parents, and had the advantages of a Religious Education, which he had
looked upon as an invaluable Blessing, for when he minded it least, it still
hung about him, and gave him checks; and that he now, in his extremity, found
such happy effects of it, that the fear of Death had not been able to
discompose him.

That he had lived and now dyed of the Reformed Religion, a true and sincere
Protestant, and in the Communion of the Church of England, though he could never
rise up to all the heights of some People. He wished the removal of all our
unhappy differences, and that all sincere Protestants would consider the danger
of Popery, and lay aside their Heats, and agree against the Common Enemy; That
the Churchmen would be less severe, and the Dissenters less scrupulous.

He declared, that he looked upon Popery as an Idolatrous and bloody Religion;
and therefore thought himself bound in his station to do all he could against
it; and soresaw that he should procure such great and powerful Enemies to
himself, that he had been for some time expecting the worst; and blessed God
that he fell by the Ax, and not by the fiery Trial.

That, yet he never had a thought of doing any thing against Popery, basely or
inhumanly; but what could well consist with the Christian Religion, and the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

That he had always loved his Country more than his Life, and never had any
design of changing the Government, and would have ventured his Life to preserve
it; and would have suffered any extremity, rather than have consented to any
design to take away the King's Life; and that no Man ever had the Impudence to
propose so base and barbarous a thing to him.

That he sincerely prayed for the King; that he might be happy both here and
hereafter.

He took God to witness, that in the prosecution of the Popish Plot, he
proceeded in the sincerity of his Heart -- that he did still believe that
Popery was breaking in upon the Nation; and that those who advance it, will
stop at nothing; and declared his sorrow that so many Protestants gave their,
helping hand to it; But he declared his hope, that God would preserve the
Protestant Religion and the Nation; though he feared it would fall under very
great Trials, and sharp Sufferings. That the barefaced Profaneness and
Impiety in the Nation, gave Reason to fear the worst things that could befall a
People. He prayed God to prevent it, and give those, who showed concern for the
public good; and appeared hearty for the Protestant Religion; Grace to live so
that they might not cast a reproach on that which they endeavored to advance;
which he declared had often given him many sad thoughts.

As to his condition, he said, he had no repining in his Heart at it; and did
freely forgive all the World, particularly those concerned in taking away his
Life; and conjured his Friends to think of no Revenge, but to submit to the
holy will of God.

He declared, as to his appearing in the business of the Bill of Exclusion,
that he thought the Nation in such danger of Popery, and that the expectation
of a Popish Successor put the King's Life in such danger, that he saw no way so
effectual to secure both, as that Bill; and that he thought, his earnestness in
that matter had no small influence in his present Sufferings.

As to his conspiring to seize the Guards, the Crime for which he was
condemned, and which was made a constructive Treason to take away the King's
Life, to bring it within the Statute of Edward 3. His Lordship gave this
account. That he never was at Shepherd's but once, and that there was no
undertaking then, of securing or seizing the Guards, nor none appointed to view
or examine them: Some discourse there was about the feasableness of it, and he
heard it several times by accident in general discourse elsewhere, but never
consented to it as fit to be done, -- That the Duke of Monmouth exclaimed
against it, and his Lordship said that he ever observed in him an abhorrence of
all base things.

He thanked God, that his part was sincere and well meant; he observed, that it
was inferred that he was acquainted with the Heats and ill Designs of some
great Men, and did not discover them, but that that was but misprision of
Treason, at most; and so he dyed innocent of the Crime he stood condemned for;
and hoped, that no body would imagine that so mean a thought could enter into
him, as to go about to save his Life, by accusing others; The part that some
had acted lately of that kind, had not been such, as to invite him to love Life
at such a rate.

He declared; that he could not but think the sentence upon him very hard, for
nothing was sworn against him ( whether true or false) but discourses about
making some stirs. -- That by a strange fetch, the story of seizing the Guards,
was construed a design of killing the King; and so he was cast in that.

He prayed God, not to lay it to the charge of the King's Counsel, the Judges,
Sheriffs or Jury; That, for the Witnesses, he pitied and wished them well, and
should not reckon up the particulars wherein they wronged him; but had rather
their own Consciences should do that; to which, and the mercies of God, he left
them.

His Lordship added, that from the time of choosing Sheriffs, he concluded, that
the heat in that matter, would produce something of this kind, and that he was
not much surprised to find it fall upon himself, and wished that his Blood
might satiate some Peoples Revenge -- He wished those Gentlemen of the Law, who
have great readiness in speaking, would make more Conscience in the use of it,
and not run Men down by strains and fetches; and impose on easy and willing
Juryes, to the ruin of innocent Men; for to kill by forms and subtilties of
Law, is the worst sort of Murder. He further wished, that the rage of hot Men
and the partiality of Juries might be stopped with his Blood, and said, he
should offer it up with more joy, if he thought he should be the last to suffer
in such a way.

He then concluded thus, The Will of the Lord be done, into whose Hands I
commend my Spirit; and trust that thou, O most merciful Father, have forgiven
me all my Transgressions: The Sins of my Youth, and all the Errors of my past
Life; and that thou will not lay my secret Sins to my Charge, but wilt
graciously support me, during that small part of my Life now before me; and
assist me in my last Moments, and not leave me then to be disordered by Fear,
or any other Temptation; but make the light of thy Countenance to shine upon
me; For thou art my Sun and my Shield: And as thou supportest me by thy Grace,
so I hope thou will hereafter crown me with Glory, and receive me into the
Fellowship of Angels and Saints, in that blessed Inheritance purchased for me
by my most merciful Redeemer, who is, I trust, at thy Right hand, preparing a
place for me; Into whose Hands I commend my Spirit.

Notes upon the Trial, of the honorable Algernon Sidney Esquire upon an
Indictment, for conspiring the Death of the King, and intending to raise a
Rebellion; Before the Lord Chief Justice Jeffrys, Justice Wythens, Justice
Holloway, and Justice Walcot at the King's Bench, upon the one and twentieth of
November, 1683.
THis honorable Person Colonel Sidney, having been long Imprisoned in the
Tower, without any prosecution, brought his Habeas Corpus, for the obtaining
his liberty, upon which; being brought to the King's Bench, upon the 7th of
November; the Attorney General, upon the sudden, clapped an Indictment of Treason
upon him, to which he was instantly compelled to plead.

Upon the 21st of November he was brought to Trial, and this Jury, packed by
Graham and Burton, was sworn upon him, viz. John Aunger, Carpenter. Richard
White, William Lyn, Laur. Wood, Adam Andrews, Emery Arguise, Josiah Clerk,
George Glisby, Nicolas Baxter, Horse Rider. William Reeves, William Grove,
Cheesmonger, and John Burt.


The King's Counsel were, Sr To. Sawyer, Attorney General. Mr Finch, Solicitor
General. Mr North, Mr Dolben, and Mr Jones.


The Indictment, opened by Mr Dolben was to this effect; That the Prisoner,
with others, conspired the death of the King, and to levy War in the Kingdom,
and sent one Aaron Smyth into Scotland, to excite some to come from thence, and
to consult upon assistance to carry on those designs; And that the Prisoner to
persuade the People, that it was lawful to raise Rebellion; did cause a
seditious Libel to be written, containing expressions; That the power is
originally in the People, etc. Note, the Indictment did not charge the Prisoner
with publishing the Papers, which was ever till now done, when Libels have been
made Criminal, but their proof in this case would not come up to publishing.


Then the Attorney General thunders thus against him; The Prisoner is indicted
of the highest Crimes, the conspiring the King's Death, and the overthrow of
the Monarchy -- There is no Englishman but does believe, that for several
years a Design was laid; and to that end secret Instructions were made use of,
and Libels spread, to persuade the People, that the King was introducing
Arbitrary Power. ( Ay, so he was, and so were his Judges, and Council at Law).
that he subverted their Rights and Liberties, etc. ( a sad truth) They
endeavored to make the World believe the King was a Papist: ( So they did, and
his Dear and Royal Brother, cleared up that Point soon after his Death) -- And
then there was a Design of an open Rising -- This Gentleman's Head and Heart
was entire in this Service; he was at this very time preparing a most Seditious
and Traiterous Libel To persuade the People, that it is Lawful, nay, that they
have a Right, to set aside their Prince, in case it appears that he has broken
the Trust laid upon him by the People; He uses great Reason in the Case, That
the Power of the Prince is Originally in the People; and that the King's Power
was derived from the People upon Trust, (most horrid Heresy) and they might
assume the Original Power they had conferred, etc.

After this Harangue, to pre-possess the Jury; Mr West, Col. Romsey, and
Keeling were called, and told long Stories of Consultations, Plots and
Resolutions; without offering one Word of Evidence against Colonel Sidney.

Then the Lord Howard told his long History of the Plot; that being ended; They
gave in Evidence some scraps of a Manuscript found in the Colonel's Study, and
read three or four Paragraphs to the ( judicious) Jury, whereof I shall here
give the Reader a touch; When Pride had changed Nebuchadnezar into a Beast,
what should persuade the Assyrians not to drive him out amongst Beasts; until
God had restored unto him the Heart of a Man? When Tarquin had turned the Legal
Monarchy of Rome, into a most abominable Tyranny, Why should they not abolish
it? And when the Protestants of the Low Countries were so grievously oppressed
by the Power of Spain, under the Proud, Cruel and Savage Conduct of the Duke of
Alva; Why should they not make use of all the means that God has put into
their Hands, for their Deliverance? Let any Man who sees the present State of
the Provinces that then united themselves, judge; whether it is better for them
to be, as they are, or in the condition into which his Fury would have reduced
them, unless they had, to please him, renounced God, and their Religion: Our
Author may say, They ought to have suffered; The King of Spain, by their
Resistance, lost those Countries; and that they ought not to have been Judges
in their own Case. To which I Answer, That by resisting, they laid the
Foundation of many Churches, that have produced multitudes of Men, Eminent in
Gifts and Graces; and Established a most glorious and happy Commonwealth, that
has been since its first beginning, the strongest Pillar of the Protestant
Cause, now in the World, and a place of Refuge unto those, who in all Parts of
Europe have been oppressed for the Name of Christ: Whereas otherwise, they had
Slavishly, and I think I may say, Wickedly, as well as Foolishly; suffered
themselves to be Butchered; they had left those Provinces under the Power of
Antichrist, where the Name of God is no otherwise known, than to be Blasphemed.

If the King of Spain had desired to keep his Subjects, He should have Governed
them with more Justice and Mercy; When contrary to all Laws, both Humane and
Divine, He seeks to destroy those, He ought to have preserved, He can blame
none but himself, if they deliver themselves from his Tyranny; And when the
matter is brought to that, That he must not Reign, or they over whom he would
Reign, must perish, the matter is easily decided; As if the Question had been
asked in the time of Nero or Domitian, whether they should be left at Liberty
to destroy the best part of the World, as they endeavored to do; or it should
be rescued, by their Destruction; And as for the Peoples being Judges in their
own Case, it is plain, they ought to be the only Judges; because it is their
own, and only concerns themselves. -- The general Revolt of a Nation, from its
own Magistrates, can never be called Rebellion.

The Papers being read, Mr Solicitor ( doubting surely the Capacity of the
intelligent Jury to judge of these Notions upon the first hearing) said, that
no time was misspent to make things clear, and that the Jury might have the
Words read again, if they had a mind to it; and he repeated that offer to them,
but the Gentlemen better understanding the work of the day, then the Treatise;
did not desire a repetition of the Words.

The Prisoner here said, They have proved a Paper found in my Study of Domitian
and Nero; that is compassing the death of the King, is it? -- Whatever my Lord
Howard is (of whom I have enough to say by and by) he is but one Witness; and
there ought to be two Witnesses to the same thing -- Let my Lord Howard
reconcile what he has said now, with what he said at my Lord Russell's Trial if
he pleases, there he swore, he said all he could, and now he has got I know not
how many things, that never were spoken of there. -- He has accused himself of
diverse Treasons, and is under the terror of punishment for them; and would get
his own Indemnity by destroying others -- He owes me a great sum of Money, and
when I should take the advantage, of the forfeit of his Mortgage, he finds a
way to have me laid up in the Tower; this is a point of great cunning, at once
to get his Pardon and save his Money. He was desirous to go further, and would
have got my Servants to put my Plate and Goods into his hands. -- He made
affirmations in the presence of God, that I was innocent in his opinion, and he
was confident of it; I know in my Lord Russell's Case, Dr Burnet testified
something like this; and when my Lord Howard came to answer it; he said he was
to face it out: Now he did face it out bravely against God, but was very
timorous of Man -- I am to give an account of these Papers, which they would
piece and patch to my Lord Howard's discourse, and by a strange kind of
construction and imagination, make to have relation to this PLOT, as they call
it (I know of none.) They offer no proof but similitude of Hands: Some years
ago, the Lady Car was indicted of Perjury; and as evidence, some Letters of
hers were produced, that were contrary to what she swore in Chancery; and it
was proved to be like her hand; but Chief Justice Keeling directed the Jury,
that this was the smallest and least of proofs, in Civil Causes; but in
Criminal it was none at all; So that my Lord Howard's Testimony is single -- As
to the Consult he talks of, What could six Men do? Can my Lord Howard raise
five Men by his credit? By his Purse? For my part I knew not where to raise
five Men. That such Men as We are, that have no Followers, should undertake so
vast a design, is very unlikely; And this great design thus carried on, had
neither Officers nor Soldiers, no Place, no Time, no Money for it. This is a
pretty Cabal, and a very deep maintaining of the Plot.

Then the Prisoner called the Earl of Anglesey, the Earl of Clare, Capt Philip
Howard, Dr Burnet, Mr Joseph Ducas, Lord Paget, and Mr Edward Howard; who all
testified that the Lord Howard had frequently with great asseverations, and
calling God to Witness, affirmed that he knew of no Plot, and that he was
confident of Colonel Sidney's Innocence.

Mr Blake proved, that my Lord Howard told him, that he could not get his
Pardon, till he had past the drudgery of Swearing.

Mr Ducas, Grace Tracy and Elizabeth Penwick, proved, that the Lord Howard came
to the Colonel's House, and being told that he was taken away to the Tower for
the Plot, He took God to witness, he knew nothing of it, and believed the
Colonel did not; and he then desired that the Colonel's Plate and Goods might
be sent to his House to be secured.

Then Mr Wharton offered to imitate those Sheets of paper, so that they should
not know which was which; but the Court did not regard it.

Now Mr Solicitor, in his wonted luxuriant way of talking Men to Death, falls
upon the Prisoner, and jumbles things thus together, ( in his Address to the
Jury) Gentlemen! We go about to prove the compassing and imagining the Death of
the King, by the Prisoner's consulting how to raise Arms; and by plain matter
in writing under his hand; where he does affirm, it is lawful to take away and
destroy the King [A strange Suggestion, no way warranted by the reading the
Papers] and he then proceeds in the same way to insinuate many things against
the Prisoner, which no way affected nor reached him, by the Evidence given. He
then comes to the Papers, and says, Compassing and imagining the Death of the
King, is the Act of the mind, and when once there is an Overt Act, that is, a
thing that manifests such intention; Then the Law takes hold of it: Now after
this Evidence. [ which the Reader will remember was only the Lord Howard's
Swearing] I think no Man will doubt, whether it was in the heart of the
Prisoner to destroy the King; here is an avowed principle of Rebellion,
Established, upon the strongest reason he has to back it -- Gentlemen! [
speaking to the Carpenter and his Fellows, most competent Judges of such a
Book] This, with the other Evidence that has been given, will be sufficient to
prove his compassing the Death of the King -- This Book is another, and more
than two Witnesses against him; you have heard one Witness prove it positively
to you, that he consulted to rise in Arms against the King, and here is his own
Book says, it is lawful to rise in Arms, if the King break his Trust, and in
effect he has said the King has broken his Trust, therefore, this will be a
sufficient demonstration, what the imagination of the Heart of this Man was;
that it was nothing but the Destruction of the King and of the Government --
Some Men, may by passion, be transported into such an offense; in them, it is
less dangerous, but it is this Gentleman's principle; Gentlemen! This is the
more dangerons Conspiracy in this Man, by how much the more it is rooted in
him; and how deep it is you hear, when a Man shall write as his principle, that
it is lawful to depose Kings, they breaking their Trust; and that the Revolt of
the whole Nation cannot be called Rebellion. It will be a very sad But late
Experience refutes his Opinion, and we now see it is a very happy Case.
Case, when People act this, according to their Consciences; and do all this
for the good of the People, as they would have it thought; but this is the
Principle of this Man, We think We have plainly made it out, that is was the
Imagination of his heart to Destroy the King.

Hereupon Colonel Sidney said, My Lord, We have had a long story, I desire Mr
Solicitor would not think it his Duty to take away Men's Lives any how -- My
Lord Coke and Lord Hales, were both of Opinion, That the Overt Act of one
Treason, is not an Overt Act of another; Hales says, Compassing by bare words
is not an Overt Act; Conspiring to levy War is no Overt Act.

Then the Chief Justice concluded, with a long Repetition, of what he pretended
had been given in Evidence? and said, that though some Judges had been of
opinion; that Words of themselves, were not an Overt Act; yet my Lord Hales nor
my Lord Coke, nor any other of the Sages of the Law, ever questioned, but that
a Letter would be an Overt Act, sufficient to prove a Man guilty of Treason;
for Scribere est Agere. -- Gentlemen! I must tell you, that in Case there be
but one Witness to prove a direct Treason, and another to prove a circumstance,
that contributes to that Treason; That will make two Witnesses to prove the
Treason -- Here is a most traiterous Lybel, if you believe that Colonel Sidney
writ it; No Man can doubt but it is a sufficient Evidence, that he is guilty of
Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King -- I must mind you that this
Book contains all the Malice, and Revenge, and Treason, that Mankind can be
guilty of. -- This is made use of by him to stir up the People to Rebellion [
yet by the way it was not so much as pretended that Colonel Sidney had
published the Book, or shown it to any Mortal] -- So it is not upon two, but
upon greater Evidence then two and twenty; if you believe this Book was writ by
him. Next I must tell you, upon, I think, a less Evidence, the Lord Russel was
Convicted and Executed, [ An excellent Argument, that having then tasted Noble
Blood, they must go on to drink their fill of it; it is to be lamented, that
such Miscreants have not been dismissed the World, as the famous Scythian Queen
Tomyris, did the Persian Tyrant with a Satiate vos Sanguine, quem sitistis,
Proditores Patriae et dedecus humani generis.]

This Doctrine thus powerfully insinuated to the well disposed Jury, ( a pack
of mere Tools, to echo back the pleasure of the Judge) procured a Guilty to be
without difficulty brought in, upon this Great and Noble Person.

It being hereupon demanded of him, what he had to say why Judgment of Death
should not be given against him, He said, that he had had no Trial, he was to
be Tried by his Country, and he did not find his Country in the Jury that tried
him; There were some of them that were not Freeholders; and there is neither
Law nor President of any Man Tried by a Jury, in a County; that were not
Freeholders; So he had had no Trial at all, and if so, there could be no
Judgment.

To this Jefferies replied, that he had had the Opinion of the Court in that
matter, and that they were unanimous in it. ( And so they were in all murdering
work at that day.)

Colonel Sidney then said, that there was nothing of Treason in the Words, said
to be written in the Papers if the nature of the thing were examined; To which
the Chief Justice retorted, There is not a line in the Book scarce, but what is
Treason.

The Sentence being passed, the Prisoner expressed himself in these Words; Why
then, O Lord, Sanctify I beseech thee these my Sufferings unto me, Sanctify
me through my Sufferings, Sanctify me through thy Truth, Thy Word is Truth;
Impute not my Blood unto this Nation, Impute it not unto the grand City,
through which I shall be led unto the place of Death; Let not my Soul cry, though
it lies under the Altar; make not Inquisition for my Blood, or if innocent
Blood must be expiated; let thy Vengeance fall only, upon the heads of those,
who knowingly and maliciously Persecute me for Righteousness sake.

Upon the 7th of December, 1683. He was Beheaded upon Tower Hill, when he
delivered to the Sheriffs, Daniel and Dashwood, a paper, the substance whereof
is here presented to the Reader.

Men, Brethren and Fathers; Friends, Countrymen and Strangers,
We live in an Age, that makes Truth pass for Treason; I dare not say any
thing contrary to Truth, and the Sheriff Daniel's, etc.
Ears of those that are about me, will probably be found too tender to hear it.

West, Romsey and Keeling, brought to prove the Plot, said no more of me, than
that they did not know me. The Lord Howard is too infamous by his Life, and his
many Perjuries, not to be denied, or rather sworn by himseif, to deserve
mention: and being a single Witness, would be of no value, though he had been
of unblemished Credit, or had not seen and confessed, that the Crimes committed
by him, would be pardoned, only for committing more.

This being laid aside, the whole matter is reduced to the Papers said to be
found in my Closet -- If I had been seen to write them, the matter would not be
much altered; They plainly appear to relate unto a Treatise written long since
in answer to Filmer's Book, which is grounded upon wicked Principles, equally
pernicious to Magistrates and People.

If he might publish unto the World, his Opinion, that all Men are born under a
necessity, derived from the Laws of God and Nature, to submit unto an absolute
Kingly Government, which could be restrained by no Law, or Oath; and that he
that has the Power, has the Right, and the Persons and Estates of his
Subjects, must be indispensably subject to it; I know not, why I might not have
published my opinion to the contrary, without the breach of any Law.

I might as freely as he, publicly have declared my thoughts, and the Reasons
of my belief.

That Magistrates were set up for the good of Nations, not Nations for the
honor or glory of Magistrates.

That the Right and Power of Magistrates was that which the Laws of the Country
made it to be.

That those Laws were to be observed; and the Oaths taken by them; having the
force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be violated
without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric.

That few would be so gentle, as to spare even the best Magistrates, if by
their destruction, a wild Usurper, could become God's Anointed.

This seems to agree, with the Doctrines, of the most Reverend Authors, of all
Times, Nations and Religions. The best and wisest of Kings have ever
acknowledged it. King James, in his Speech to the Parliament, Anno 1603, does,
in the highest degree, assert it; The Scripture seems to declare it. If the
Writer nevertheless, was mistaken, No Man, for such matters, has ever been
referred to the Judgment of a Jury, composed of Men, utterly unable to
comprehend them.

But there was little of this in my Case; The extravagance of my Prosecutors
goes higher; The Treatise was never finished, nor could be in many Years; So
much as is of it, was written long since; never reviewed, nor shown to any Man.

Whatsoever is said of the expulsion of Tarquin; The Insurrection of Nero; The
Slaughter of Caligula, or Domitian, etc. is applied by Innuendo unto the King.

They have not considered, that if such Acts of State be not good, no King in
the World has any title, nor can have any, unless he could deduce his Pedigree
from the eldest Son of Noah, and show, that the Succession, had still continued
in the Eldest, of the Eldest Line, and been so deduced to him.

But I was long since told that I must dye, or the Plot must dye.

Lest the means of destroying the best Protestants in England should fail, the
Bench must be filled with such, as have been Blemishes to the Bar.

None, But such as these, would have advised with the King's Council, of the
means of bringing a man to death, Suffered a Jury to be packed, by the King's
Solicitors, and the Undersheriff: Admit of Jury Men, who are not Freeholders;
Receive such evidence, as is above mentioned; refuse a Copy of an Indictment,
or to suffer the Statute of 46 Edward 3. to be read, that does enact, It
should, in no case, be denied unto any Man upon any occasion whatsoever;
overruled the most important points of Law without hearing. And, whereas the
Statute 25 Edward 3. upon which they said, I should be tried, does reserve unto
the Parliament all Constructions to be made, in point of Treason. They could
assume unto themselves, not only a power to make Constructions; but such
Constructions, as neither agree with Law, Reason, or Common Sense.

By these means, I am brought to this place; The Lord forgive these Practices,
and avert the Evils, that threaten the Nation from them; The Lord sanctify
these my Sufferings unto me, and though I fall, as a Sacrifice unto Idols; suffer
not Idolatry to be established in this Land. Bless thy People and save them,
defend thy own Cause, and defend those that defend it. Stir up such as are
saint: direct those that are willing: Confirm those that waver: Give Wisdom and
Integrity unto all. Order all things so as may most redound to thy own Glory.
Grant, that I may dye glorifying Thee, for all thy Mercies, and, that at the
last, thou have permitted me to be singled out, as a Witness of thy Truth; and
even by the Confession of my Opposers, for that old C^use in which I was from
my Youth engaged, and for which thou have often and wonderfully declared thy
Self.

Thus, for Innuendo Treasons, and by a barbarous prosecution; fell this never
to be forgotten Champion and Martyr for the English Liberties; the honorable
and valiant Colonel Algernon Sidney.

This great Man, having in his forementioned Paper, mentioned the Opinion of
King James, the first delivered in his Speech to the Parliament, in the Year
1603. I shall here, to gratify the Reader's Curiosity, transcribe a Paragraph
or two of that Learned King's Speech ( viz.)

I do acknowledge, that the special and greatest point of difference, that is
betwixt a rightful King, and an usurping Tyrant, is in this: That: whereas the
proud and ambitious Tyrant, does think his Kingdom and People, are only
ordained, for the satisfaction of his Desires and unreasonable Appetites; The
righteous and just King does, on the contrary, acknowledge himself to be
ordained, for the procuring of the Wealth and Prosperity of his People; and
that his great and principal Worldly Felicity, must consist in their
Prosperity. -- That I am a Servant, it is most true; That as I am Head and
Governor of all the People in my Dominion, who are my natural Subjects,
considering them in distinct Ranks; So, if we will take in the People as one
Body, Then, as the Head is ordained for the Body, and not the Body for the
Head; so, must a righteous King, know himself to be ordained for his People,
and not his People for him.

Wherefore, I will never be ashamed to sonfess it my principal honor, to be
the great Servant of the Commonwealth.

To this I shall subjoyn a few Words, to the same purpose, out of that King's
Speech to the Parliament, in 1609

Every just King in a settled Kingdom, is bound to observe that Paction made to
his People, by his Laws; in framing his Government agreeable thereunto; And
therefore, a King, governing in a settled Kingdom, ceases to be a King, and
degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off, to rule according to the
Laws.

Notes upon the Trial of Sr Samuel Barnardiston Baronet, at Guild Hall London,
Before Sr George Jefferies, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, upon the 14
th day of February, 1683. upon an Information to the effect following, ( viz.)
THat there having been a Horrid Plot lately discovered, the Defendant, to
scandalize the Evidence, wrote a Letter to this effect, viz. That the return of
the Duke of Monmouth and his being received into Favor with the King, had made
a great alteration at Court, and that those who before spoke indecently of him,
did now court and creep to him; Yesterday, being the last of the Term, all the
Prisoners in the Tower, upon the late Sham Protestant Plot, were Bailed. The
Information against Mr Bavddon ( who Prosecuted the Murder of the Earl of
Essex) for a Subornation, was not prosecuted, and his Bail was discharged, and
the passing Sentence upon the Author of Julian the Apostate, and the Printer of
the late Lord Russel's Speech, was passed over with silence; Great Applications
are made to the King, for the pardoning Mr Sidney -- The Lord Howard appears
despicable, in the eyes of all men -- The Papists and high Tories are quite
down in the Mouth, Their Pride is abated, and themselves and their Plot
confounded, but their Malice is not Assuaged. Its generally said, the Earl of
Essex was Murdered. The brave Lord Russel is afresh Lamented, The Plot is lost
here, except you in the Country can find it out amongst the Addressers and
Abhorrers. And that he wrote in another Letter to this effect. The King is
never pleased but when the Duke of Monmouth is with him -- His Pardon was
Sealed and delivered to him last Wednesday; it is said he will be restored to be
Master of the Horse, etc. -- He treats all his old Friends with great Civility,
they are all satisfied with his Integrity, and if God spare his Life, doubt not
but he will be an Instrument of much good, to the King and Kingdom; he said
publicly, that he knew my Lord Russel was as Loyal a Subject as any in
England; and that his Majesty believed the same now; it would make you laugh,
to see how strangely our high Torys and Clergy are mortified, their
Countenances speak it -- Sr George is grown very humble: Its said Mr Sidney is
reprieved for forty days, which bodes well.

And that in a third Letter he wrote thus, The late change here in public
Affairs, is so great and strange that we are like men in a Dream, and fear we
are not fit for so great a Mercy as the present Juncture seems to promise; the
Sham Protestant Plot is quite lost and confounded.

And that in a fourth Letter, there are these expressions -- Contrary to all
men's expectations, a Warrant is signed for beheading Colonel Sidney at
Tower Hill next Friday; great endeavors have been used to obtain this Pardon,
but the contrary party have carried it; which much dasheth our Hopes; but God
still governs.

The King's Counsel, to prosecute this matter were, The Recorder of London. Mr
Herbert ( quickly after made Lord Chief Justice.) Mr Jones.


Counsel for Sr S. Barnardiston, were, Mr Williams, Mr Thompson, and Mr
Blackerby.


The Jury, picked out to try this Cause, were, Thomas Vernon (Knighted soon
after the Service done in this Cause, and then made Foreman of a Jury to
convict Dr Otes of Perjury.) Percival Gilburne (one of the Jury upon the
Guildhall Riot.) Edward Bovery, William Withers senior; (A well qualified
Jury-Man for this Cause.) James VVood, Robert Masters, (A principal Witness
against College.) Samuel Newton, (Another of the Riot Jury.) George Toriano.
(One of the Lord Russell's Jury.) Kenelm Smyth, Thomas Goddard, Thomas Amy, and
Richard Blackburne.


The Rocorder of London and Mr Herbert, having aggravated the charge in the
Information. Mr Blaithwait, Atterbury the Messenger and Nehemiah Osland, Sr
Samuel's Servant, gave evidence of the writing those Letters, and sending them
by the Post, for Sr Philip Skippon, Mr Gael and Mr Cavel in Suffolk.

Then Mr Williams, Counsel for Sr Samuel, applied to the Jury, to this effect;
That the question was, Whether Sr Samuel were knowingly guilty of the Writing
and publishing the four Letters. That, as to his publishing them, he saw no
evidence, and he put it to the Court; whether the sending them to the
Post House, could amount to the publishing a Libel: and he added, to the Jury,
that he supposed they would not take it upon their Oaths, that he was guilty of
what he was there accused of, many things being laid in the Information, to
inhanse the Crime, of which there was no proof.

The Clamorous Chief Justice, proceeding to dierct the Jury, expressed himself
to this effect, That the Information took notice of a horrid Conspiracy lately
hatched, for the destruction of the King and subversion of the Government; and
that the Lord Russell and Algernon Sidney, who were engaged in that damnable
Conspiracy, were convicted and executed.

That the Defendant, being dissaffected and a man of ill Principles; to disturb
the Government, did cause the four Letters to be writ and published.

That the Letters were Factious, Seditious and Malicious; and as base as the
worst of mankind could have invented -- That it was a work of time and thought,
fixed in his very Nature; and showed so much Venom, as would make one think the
whole mass of his Blood were corrupted.

Here is malice against the King, malice against the Government, malice against
both Church and State, malice against any man that bears any share in the
Government, indeed malice against all mankind, that are not of the same
persuasion with those bloody Miscreants -- Here is the sanctifying of Traitors
justly executed -- Here is the Sainting of two horrid Conspirators, the Lord
Russell that blessed Martyr; my Lord Russell that good man, that excellent
Protestant, he is lamented; and here is Mr Sidney Sainted, and what an
extraordinary man was he -- it is a shame to think that such bloody Miscreants
should be Sainted and lamented.

It Is high time for all mankind that have any Christianity, or sense of Heaven
or Hell to bestir themselves, to rid the Nation of such Caterpillars, such
monsters of Villainy, as these are.

These Letters tell you, God would be sure to raise up Instruments; but what
Instruments do they mean? Instruments of Rebellion and Faction and Sedition;
which they most falsely call his own Work.

The question is, whether the Defendant be guilty of writing these Venomous,
Malicious, Seditious, Factious, Tumultuous Letters, of which you have as full
and plain proof as can be made; And as to his publishing them, can you think
that he would write all this Malicious Stuff, to put them in his Pocket; but
you have it sworn, that the Defendant said they were sent to the Post House.

Then, the Jury immediately gave in their Verdict, that the Defendant was
Guilty of the Offense and Misdemeanor, charged in the Indictment; as no doubt
they resolved to do, before they heard one word of the matter.

The Judgment upon this Verdict, was, that the Defendant should pay 10000 l
Fine, and be Imprisoned till paid, and to find Sureties for the good Behavior
for Life.

Accordingly, he was committed for the Fine, to the King's Bench, and continued
a Prisoner four or five years, which satisfied not, but Graham and Burton,
those Instruments of Rapine and Oppression, broke in upon his Estate, and
besides the Waste and Destruction made; they levied to their own Use and the
King's about 6000 l.

Notes upon the Proceedings against Sr Thomas Armstrong at the King's Bench,
the 14 th of June 1684. Before the Lord Chief Justice Jefferies Justice
VVithens, Justice Holloway and Justice VValcot.
SR Thomas Armstrong, having been Outlawed, upon an Indictment of high
Treason, and betrayed, and brought from Holland; was Committed to Newgate upon
the 10 th of June, 1684. by the Warrant of Sidney Goldolphin Esquire principal
Secretary of State; And upon the 14 th of June, being brought to the King's
Bench Bar; Sr Robert Sawyer Attorney General, moved the Court for an award of
Execution, upon the Outlawry; Whereupon he was Arraigned on the Outlawry (viz.)
that he had been Indicted of high Treason for conspiring against the King's
Life, and the Government; That for not appearing to plead and try that
Indictment, he stood Outlawed, and thereby Attainted of the Treason; And it was
demanded of him, what he had to say, why Execution should not be awarded
against him.

Sr Thomas urged, that he was beyond Sea at the time of the Outlawry, and
desired that he might be Tried; To which the Chief Justice answered, We have
nothing to do, but to award Execution.

Sr Thomas desired that the Statute 6. Edward 6. might be read, which gives the
Person Outlawed for Treason, a year to reverse it, if he were beyond Sea; and
desired that Counsel might be assigned him.

The Chief Justice ordered the Statute to be read, to which the Attorney
General assented, but said Sr Thomas would not find it to his purpose; it was
read to this effect, That all process of Outlawry for Treason against
Offenders, being beyond the Seas, shall be effectual in the Law, but it
provides that if the Party shall within a year, yield himself to the Chief
Justice, and offer to traverse the Indictment, he shall be received to
traverse, and being found not Guilty, he shall be acquitted of the Outlawry,
and of all Penalties and Forfeitures by reason thereof.

Then, the Attorney General said, Sr Thomas, now I suppose will show he yielded
himself to your Lordship; and added, that before he went out of England he
might have rendered himself, and been Tried if he had pleased.

Sr Thomas Armstrong answered, I have been a Prisoner; the year is not yet out,
I now render my self, and do conceive I am within the Benefit of the Statute,
and do desire it.

The Chief Justice replied, we are of another opinion, we cannot take notice of
it, there is no doubt nor difficulty at all in the thing, and applying to
Richardson, said, Captain Richardson, you shall have a rule for Execution on
Friday next.

Then, Sr Thomas offered to the Court, that one in that place had the benefit
of a Trial offered him, and that was it that he desired, for he thanked God his
Case was quite another then his. That he knew his own Innocence, ( And so did
They too, otherwise he had not been denied a Trial.) and desired to make it
appear by a Trial.

To this the Chief Justice answered, that which you speak of, was the Grace and
Mercy of King, who may, if he please extend the same to you; but we are
satisfied, that according to Law, we must award Execution upon this Outlawry.
Thereupon Mrs Mathews Sr Thomas's Daughter said, My Lord, I hope you will not
Murder my Father; for which being Brow-beaten and checked, she added, God
Almighty's Judgments light upon you.

Then, the Attorney General said, that he would acquaint the Court with one
thing, in reference to what Sr Thomas had said, That the King did indeed
indulge Holloway so far, as to offer him a Trial, and perhaps might have some
reason for it; but affirmed, that the Prisoner deserved no sort of Indulgence
or Mercy; and then, in effect went on to give Evidence against him, saying,
that it appeared that after the disappointment to the meeting at the Rye, by
the New Market fire, Sr Thomas was one of those, who engaged to destroy the
King by the way, upon his hasty coming then to Town; and affirmed, that this
did appear upon a full and clear Evidence; and that when he was taken beyond
Sea, Letters of Communication with Foreign Ministers and other people, were
found about him.

The Chief Justice (knowing a more expeditious way of murdering this Gentleman)
said he would not meddle with evidence; telling the Attorney, that that was not
their business ( and no doubt they were both conscious that they had not
evidence where with to convict him) and said, we have nothing more to do, but
to award Execution.

Sr Thomas still insisted that he was within the Statute, that he was Outlawed
while he was beyond Sea, and that the twelve Months not being past, he ought
to have the Law, and demanded no more. Thereupon, the Bloody-Monster, in a most
insolent and inhumane manner, concluded thus; That you shall have, by the Grace
of God; see that execution be done on Friday next, according to Law. You shall
have the full benefit of the Law.

It may seem proper in this place, to note to the Reader, the reason why the
Grace and Favor (as termed by the Chief Justice and Attorney General) of being
admitted to Trial, was offered to Holloway upon the one and twentieth of April
before; and now denied to Sr Thomas Armstrong; which cannot be better done,
then by casting an Eye to the proceedings upon Holloway; whereby it manifestly
appears, that that unhappy person, had been wrought upon, by the fear of Death
and hope of Pardon, to be very prodigal in his Confessions, it being most
evident, that what he had declared, was more then a thousand Witnesses against
himself; and that he had put down a multitude of Hear-says and Reports of
others; the truth whereof, never did nor will appear; Hereupon, they who had
before wheedled and deluded him, do now caress him; Mr Attorney told him, that
at Law he was gone, but if he had any thing to say to defend himself, the King
would not exclude him, but extend his Mercy so far, as to admit him to Trial.
Upon which the Chief Justice said, Mr Attorney, it is exceeding well; and told
the Prisoner that the King was pleased to signify his gracious Intention
toward him, in that he was contented to wave the Out-lawry, and allow him to
try the matter, if he thought he could defend himself. The Prisoner finding
himself snared, and that this Grace would serve him, as it did all others that
fell into their power at that time; did only answer, that he could not
undertake to defend himself, he having before thrown himself upon the King's
mercy, and confessed himself guilty of many things in the Indictment. So he was
sentenced, and dyed without Mercy.

At the place of Execution Sr Thomas Armstrong deported himself with Courage,
becoming a great man, and with the Seriousness and Piety suitable to a very
good Christian.

Sheriff Daniel told him, that he had leave to say what he pleased, and should
not be interrupted, unless he upbraided the Government; Sr Thomas thereupon
told him, that he should not say any thing by way of Speech; but delivered him
a Paper, which he said contained his mind, he then called for Dr Tennison who
prayed with him, and then he prayed himself.

In his Paper he thus expressed himself, That he thanked Almighty God, he found
himself prepared for Death, his thoughts set upon another World, and weaned
from this; yet he could not but give so much of his little time as to answer
some Calumnies, and particularly what Mr Attorney accused him of at the Bar;

That he prayed to be allowed a Trial for his Life, according to the Laws of
the Land, and urged the Statute of Edw. 6. which was expressly for it; but it
signified nothing, and he was with an extraordinary Roughness condemned and
made a precedent; though Holloway had it offered him, and he could not but think
all the world would conclude his case very different, else why refused to him?

That Mr Attorney charged him for being one of those that was to kill the King,
He took God to witness, that he never had a thought to take away the King's
Life, and that no man ever had the Impudence to propose so barbarous and base a
thing to him; and that he never was in any design to alter the Government.

That if he had been tried, he could have proved the Lord Howard's base
Reflections upon him, to be notoriously false -- He concluded, that he had
lived and now dyed of the Reformed Religion, a Protestant in the Communion of
the Church of England, and he heartily wished he had lived more strictly up to
the Religion he believed: That he had found the great comfort of the Love and
Mercy of God, in and through his blessed Redeemer, in whom he only trusted, and
verily hoped that he was going to partake of that fullness of Joy which is in
his presence, the hopes whereof infinitely pleased him. He thanked God he had no
repining, but cheerfully submitted to the punishment of his Sins; He freely
forgave all the World, even those concerned in taking away his Life, though he
could not but think his Sentence very hard, he being denied the Laws of the
Land.

I shall here (for the Readers more full Information in this matter) subjoyn
the Sense of our Present House of Commons of this Proceeding against Sr Thomas
Armstrong; and the Censure they have most justly passed upon it.

Martis 12. November 1689.
A Petition of the Lady Armstrong and her Daughters, was Read; Whereupon a
Commit was appointed to examine the matter, and make their Report to the
House. Resolved,

That it be an Instruction to the Committee, That they examine who were the
Judges that gave the Sentence against Sr Thomas Armstrong, and who were the
Prosecutors of him; and who had his Estate; and how the Petitioner: may have
Reparation; And also to examine what Proceedings were in order to a Writ of
Error by him desired, and how it came to be denied, and by whom: And they are
to make their Report with all convenient speed.

Martis 19. November, 1689.
Mr Chrisly reported from the Committee to whom the Petition of the Lady
Armstrong and the Daughters of Sr Thomas Armstrong was referred; An account of
the whole Proceedings against him; And that thereupon they had come to these
Resolves:

1. That Sr Thomas Armstrong's Plea ought to have been admitted, according to
the Statute of Edward 6. and that the Execution of him upon the Attainder by
Outlawry, was illegal, and a Murder, by pretense of Justice. 2. That the
Executors and Heirs of Sr Thomas Armstrong, ought to have a Reparation of their
Losses out of the Estates of those that were his Judges and Prosecutors. 3.
That a Writ of Error for the Reversal of a Judgment in Felony or Treason, in
the right of the Subject, and ought to be granted at his desire, and is not an
Act of Grace or Favor; which may be denied or granted at Pleasure.
To all which Resolves the House agreed. Resolved,

That leave be given to bring in a Bill, to Reverse the Attainder of Sr Thomas
Armstrong, and to make Reparation to his Widow and Children, out of the Estates
of the Judges and Prosecutors: And the same to be without Fees.

Monday the 20th of June, 1689.
Mr Chrisly reported from the Committee, to whom the Bill for the annulling the
Attainder of Sr Thomas Armstrong was recommitted; some Amendments to the Bill;
as also who were his Prosecutors; and also what Losses Sr Thomas Armstrong's
Family had sustained, by reason of the Attainder; and thereupon it was,
Resolved,

That Sr Richard Holloway, Sr Francis Wythens, the Executors of the late Lord
Jefferies, and of the late Justice Walcot, Mr Graham and Mr Burton, do attend
the House on Saturday morning next, to answer to such matters, as are charged
against them touching the Proceedings against Sr Thomas Armstrong.

Then Mrs Mathews, Sr Thomas Armstrong's Daughter was called in, and examined
what she knew of the Prosecution against her Father; And Sr Robert Sawyer (then
Attorney General) being named by her, as one of the Prosesecutors; After she
was withdrawn, he was heard in his place to what was objected against him, and
then he withdrew, and upon debate of the matter it was Resolved, That Sr Robert
Sawyer 's name be put into the Bill, as one of the Prosecutors of Sr Thomas
Armstrong. Resolved,

That Sr Robert Sawyer be expelled the House for the same.

Saturday the 25th of January 1689.
The House being acquainted, that according to their Order, Sr Francis W^thens,
Sr Richard Holloway, Mr Graham, and Mr Burton, attended at the Door, they were
severally called in, and examined, touching the Prosecution and Proceedings
against Sr Thomas Armstrong.

And also the Executors of the late Lord Jeffryes, that were attending at the
Door were likewise called in, and asked what hey had to say why Reparation
should not be made out of the Lord Jeffryes Estate, to the said Sr Thomas
Armstrong's Family.

No Persons appearing as Executors to the late Justice Walcot; the House was
acquainted that he dyed Intestate, and had not left an Estate sufficient to pay
his Debts.

After the Persons beforementioned were heard and withdrawn, Mr Blaney was
called in, who gave the House an Account of the Proceedings in the Court of
King's Bench, upon the Awarding Execution against Sr Thomas Armstrong.

And then the House proceeded upon the Amendments made by the Committee to the
Bill, for annulling the Attainder of Sr Thomas Armstrong: And after having
inserted the Name of Sr Robert Sawyer, as a Prosecutor, and resolved, That the
sum of five thousand Pounds should be paid by the Judges and Prosecutors, to Sr
Tho. Armstrong's Lady, and Children, as a Recompense of the Losses they had
sustained by reason of his Attainder, the Bill was recommitted (upon the debate
of the House) to the same Committee.



Notes upon the Trial, between Sr William Pritchard Alderman of London, and
Thomas Papillon, Esquire. at Guildhall, upon the 6th day of November 1684. before
Sr George Jeffryes Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench.
THat Mr Papillon was second to none in his zealous and undaunted opposition,
to the wicked attempts of introducing Popery and Arbitrary Government, is very
well known; and deserves to be for ever remembered with honor; None out did him
in a diligent and faithful discharge of his Trust in several Parliaments.

In the Year 1681, there appeared a Race of Men, fond of Vassalage and Slavery
to that degree, that they made Addresses of Thanks to the King, for breaking
two Parliaments, in the compass of three Months; merely upon the score of their
steady Resolution, to extirpate the Popish Plot and Popery; One of these
fawning Addresses, with promise of venturing their Lives and Fortunes, to
maintain this Violation of the Constitution of the Government; having been
presented to the King by Sr William Pritchard, Sr George Jefferies and others;
Mr Papillon, in abhorrence of it, promoted and personally prosecuted a Petition
to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council; praying, that the Thanks of
the City might be returned to Sr Robert Clayton, Sr Thomas Player, Alderman
Pilkington and Alderman Love, their worthy and well deserving Representatives
in the Oxford Parliament; and showing, That as matters then stood, the Papists,
being animated in their Bloody designs, by the hopes of a Popish Successor; a
Declaration to have frequent Parliaments, could not attribute to the safety of
the Kingdom, and the composing the minds of Protestants; but that it must be
the sitting of a Parliament, so as to search the Plot to the bottom; to
Prosecute the Conspirators, and provide suitable Laws, against the impending
Evils; and that nothing else could be effectual. Further,

This Gentleman, having in the same year, 1681. greatly added to his guilt, by
baffling the Popish designs, upon the Lives, Liberties and Estates of all
Protestants, in the attempt upon the Earl of Shaftesbury; He exerts himself in
the year 1682. in the defense of the great and undoubted Right of the Citizens,
to choose their own Sheriffs; but now, arbitrary Power being, by the aid of ill
Men, become rampant and uncontrollable, he must be sacrificed to their Revenge.

Mr Papillon having been duly elected one of the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex; he brought a Writ of Mandamus out of the Court of King's Bench, to
command the Mayor and Aldermen to swear him into the Office; that being
disobeyed, he is advised by his Counsel, that he is entitled to an Action at
Law for the wrong done him; he sends in a respectful way, to the Mayor and
Aldermen, requesting them to give voluntary appearances to his Action; that
being refused, he proceeds by a legal process to bring them to answer him at
Law, whereupon Sr William Pritchard, being arrested by the Coroner of London,
to whom the King's Writ was directed, and detained some hours, upon his refusal
to give an appearance to Mr Papillon's Action; Sr William brings an Action
against him for thus arresting him; and demands 10000 l. damages, wherein he
committed a great oversight, for had he asked 100000 l. (the usual damages
given in that day) he had not failed of it, with the following Jury, which
tried the Cause.

Bartholomew Ferryman (an old Informer, one of the Jury of the Guildhall Riot.
Thomas Blackmore (One of Dr Otes's Jury, and also of the Riot Jury) Thomas
Symonds. William Whatton, (One of the Riot Jury.) John Green, Thomas Amy, (One
of Sr S. Barnardiston's Jury.) Joseph Baggs. Daniel Chandler. John Reynolds.
John Allen. Joseph Caine, and Will. Wythers junior, ( Fathers own Son.)
Mr Mundy opened the Declaration, to this effect, That the Plantiff being Lord
Mayor, and to attend that Office in the diligent Government of the City; The
Defendant, envying the happy Estate of the Plantiff, and contriving unjustly to
disturb him, in the Execution of his Office; did, to vex him, ( not having any
probable Cause of Action against him) maliciously prosecute the King's Writ out
of the Court of King's Bench against him; directed to the Coroner of London,
commanding him to take Sr William Pritchard at Mr Papillon 's suite, in an
Action of Trespass; and did procure Mr John Brom, The Coroner, to arrest him,
and that he was detained in custody six hours; To the disgrace and scandal of
the Plantiff and of his Office; Whereas in fact, he had not any just Cause of
Action against him, to his damage 10000 l.

Then, the Attorney General told the Jury, that the action was brought to
vindicate the honor of the Chair, from such Affronts, as these, which in no
Age (till our times of faction and confusion) it ever met with: and he said, We
shall show you, that there lay a further Malice in this case, and that there
was a design in it against the Government; This design was laid to carry on the
great Plot, against the Lives of the King and the Duke; and for subversion of
the Government -- The end of this business was, to have had a commotion, for
the accomplishing their great Conspiracy; but Parturiunt Montes, For after this
Tragical Outcry, their own Witnesses only proved, that Mr Brom the Coroner,
went to my Lord Mayor, and told him that he had a Writ against him, at the
suite of Mr Papillon, and another at the Suite of Mr Dubois; and prayed him,
that he would please to give an appearance, and that upon his refusing to do
it, his Lordship went in his own Coach to the Coroner's House.

Mr Sergeant Maynard, then offered to the Jury, That my Lord Mayor, if he
mistake in his Office, and does not that which belongs to him to do, he is as
much subject to the process of the Law, as any private Citizen; That, the
question they were to try was, Whether Mr Papillon had probable Cause of Action
against the Mayor; That the Case was thus, Upon the contest about the choice of
Sheriffs, the Judges of the Election, certify to the Mayor and Aldermen, that
Mr Papillon had most Suffrages; thereupon he conceived himself rightly chosen;
and that surely, gave him a probable cause to proceed upon it; and if so, no
doubt he might well take the course he did; here is no Arrest without legal
Process; nay, their own Witnesses say, there was an offer to take an
appearance, without an Arrest; but, that being refused, the process of the Law
was executed -- He had no other course to take, but to bring his Action against
the Mayor; This course he took; here is a great deal of stir made that a
Coroner of London, should Arrest my Lord Mayor; he might do it lawfully; does
this prove, that this was maliciously done? Have they proved any particular
discontent and malice, that was between them? No, the quite contrary appears;
did he Violently Arrest him? That he might do, and no offense in Law; no, but
he did it not, but only desired from time to time, that he would give an
appearence, that would have put a Conclusion to this dispute -- Besides, the
Sheriffs having made a return of Mr Papillon's Election to the Aldermen; they
being of another opinion, gave order that those who thought themselves
agrieved, should take their remedy at Law; which has been pursued, in the
regular course, the Law prescribes -- Here is a great noise of Damage and
Disrepute and Disgrace; and the Plaintiff has been pleased to reckon his own
Damages at 10000 l. -- We say, he has sustained no Damage -- The very Court of
Aldermen and the Lord Mayor, bidding them take their course at Law; We, sure,
shall not be punished for doing it.

Mr Williams then insisted, that the Plaintiff's Action must fall, if they
showed, that it was not Malicious, and that Mr Papillon had a probable cause to
bring his Action.

Mr Ward then observed to the Jury, that Mr Papillon had been greatly reflected
upon; That by way of Crimination against him, there was a most unjust
reflection, as if he were privy to an intended Insurrection and Conspiracy
against the King's Life; and procured the Mayor to be Arrested, to promote an
Insurrection; That this was only insinuated for Reflection sake, and not one
word of any such thing proved; He then added, that the Case before them
depended upon this point; Whether Mr Papillon had a reasonable cause or
probable ground to bring an Action against Sr William Pritchard; If so, all
that was desired, was only an Appearance, but that would not be given. -- That
the Jury had been told, of the great dangers in the Case, as to the Infringment
of the Peace, etc. but had Sr William Pritchard complied, with the reasonable
and often repeated request, of ordering an Appearence, the Peace of the Kingdom
had been in no peril from such a design as this Arrest.

Here, the Chief Justice told Mr Ward, ( a Person never esteemed to come short
of Sr George Jefferies, in any thing but Insolence and Impudence) That he had
made a long Speech, and nothing at all to the purpose; and that he did not
understand what he was about; and that made him ramble in his Discourse; and
did then, in a raving and most impetuous manner, repeat his expression six or
seven times, that Mr Ward did not understand the Business.

Mr Brom the Coroner (being called to give an account of the manner of his
Arresting my Lord Mayor) testified; That he had a former Writ in Hillary Term,
and went to my Lord Mayor, and desired him that he would appear to it, but he
said, he would give no Appearance; That he gave his Lordship a week or ten days
to consider of it; and then waited upon him at the Court of Aldermen, and had
his answer, that he had considered of it, and would give no appearance.

That, a little before Easter Term, the Attorney brought him another Writ, and
threatened to complain to the Court of him, for neglecting the Execution of two
of the King's Writs; That thereupon he went again to my Lord, and told him
that the Writ was renewed, and he was pressed to make a return; and desired,
that his Lordship would please to give an Appearance; and that he told him that
he was ready to submit to the King's Writ, but would not give an Appearance;
and thereupon the Officers named in the Warrant, Arrested him by his Command.

Then, Mr Crisp the common Sergeant, (aiming at Alderman Cornish) falls to
interrogating Mr Brom, who were present at the meeting, when the Arresting the
Mayor was agreed upon; he having named two or three, the Common Sergeant
further pressed him to name others; and then, the Chief Justice explained the
Common Serjeant's meaning, by demanding whether Mr Cornish was there?

Alderman Cornish and Mr Sergeant testified, That Mr Papillon and Mr Duboi^,
being at the Alderman's House; their At orney came to them, and told them, that
he had addressed himself from time to time to my Lord Mayor, to get him to give
an Appearance, but he would not; and that thereupon they told him, it was fit
the matter should be brought to an Issue; and ordered him to get an Appearance
if he could, and to remember that the Lord Mayor was the Chief Magistrate of
the City; and that he should carry it with all imaginable respect and regard to
him.

Here, the Chief Justice and Attorney General, made long and extravagant
excursions, running upon Alderman Cornish, with abundance of Questions, wholly
foreign to the matter in Question; and Jefferies told him, that he had as much
cause as any Man to remember the manner of his own being chosen Sheriff, for
several reasons that he knew. [A pl^ Indication of what he designed against
this honest Gentleman.] And then his Lordship added; that he only asked things
by the by, to satisfy the World what sort of Men these are, that pretend to
Saintship; and with his wonted blustering Impudence, said, Do you think the
Government will ever suffer it self, to be snivelled at, and overthrown by a
Company of such Whining Fellows? -- Do you think to sham People into Offices?
No, I tell you, Villainy was the Foundation of it, and Knavery the
Superstructure -- Neither Bethel, nor that very Fellow that stands there,
Cornish, would have taken the Oaths and Sacrament, till they found it would
contribute to the design of subverting the Government, then these Rascals could
qualify themselves for an Office, only to put the Kingdom into a Flame.

Mr Gilbert Nelson then testified, That upon the holdling up of the Hands, at
the Election of Sheriffs the 24 th of June 1682. there were upon the view, most
for Mr Papillon and Mr Dubois; and that upon the casting up the Poll Books,
there was the greatest number for Mr Papillon. Mr Wightman added, that in the
Poll-Books, there were 2400. and odd, for Mr Papillon and Mr Dubois.

Mr Leonard Robinson added, that by the Hands, the majority was much more for
Mr P. and Mr D. than for the other two; and the Sheriffs did so declare their
opinion; and a Poll being demanded, and granted, after it was closed in the
Evening; the Sheriffs declared the Numbers upon the Hustings; Mr P. and Mr D.
had above two thousand, and Mr North and Mr Box some hundreds under two
thousand.

Mr Baker testified, that the Action was brought by the advice of Mr Wallop, Mr
Pollexfen and Mr Thompson.

Then, the Chief Justice comes to sum up the Evidence, and after a most tedious
Introduction proceeds to discharge his Spleen thus; Come, Gentlemen, it is
best to be plain; Though it is true, a Man may lawfully sue for such an Office,
and it is no offense, yet it looks somewhat extraordinary, it is for some
strange purpose or other -- It is notoriously known, that for several Years the
Government has been beset, and, which is a baser thing than ever was thought
of, or acted in the highest times of Villainy; the very Methods of Justice have
been corrupted; and all to serve the main design of subverting the Government.

Gentlemen, this is so black a Wickedness, that no honest Man, that has any
sense of Loyalty, Religion, or common Justice; but must tremble at the very
thoughts of it: When we see such Fellows as are common Reproaches to the
Government; shall get into Office, to make Ignoramus Juryes -- When men begin
to take Oaths to sanctify Villainy, what shall we say? And all this you, all
of you, Gentlemen, know to be true -- Was it not more safe to conspire the
death of the King and his Brother, than to give the least frown upon one of
these snivelling Saints? Did not we know, that Men were sanctified to be
Jurymen, that before, were never thought fit to be trusted, with the common
Society of honest Men?

Mr Papillon knows all this to be true eminently: When packed Jurys were grown
to that height, that when seven or eight Witnesses swore downright Treason,
The Traitor could not by these Men so much as be accused by an Indictment; To
that stupidity in Villainy, were things brought by these Fellows; So far were
the proceedings in Courts of Justice tainted, that cropp'd Hair and a demure
Look, were the best signs of a good Evidence.

Gentlemen! There was not a pursuit of right in this case, It was a designed
piece of Villainy, on purpose to affront the Government, nay, to destroy it; and
if he were ten thousand times Mr Papillon, I would tell him so.

It is plain, Gentlemen, that the design, from the beginning to the end, was to
cause a tumult and confusion in the City; in order to put that damned hellish
Conspiracy, for destroying the King and his Brother, and every man, that was
honest and loyal, in execution; This Gentlemen, is plain English.

We all know Mr Papillon to be a wealthy Man; one that had rather have minded
his Affairs, than the expensive Office of Sheriff; but, that something was to
be done, to wreak a damned Malice and Revenge upon the Government -- This I
tell him openly, and let him and his party make their Remarks upon it as they
please -- There was questionless, a devilish Malice, fixed in his heart and
mind; and he wanted an opportunity to effect it, and he thought it best for his
own security, to take this course, and nothing else was in it. -- Alack-a-day
(as Mr Pilkington said) I am for the preservation of the Liberties and
Properties of the Subject; but I find the City is strangely run down, in their
Rights and Privileges, I will rather take a troublesome Office, than let all
run thus, and immediately sets himself a Cock-a-hoop, as if there were none to
take care of the City, but himself -- He, and Mr Bethel and Mr Cornish
forsooth, are the only Men of the times, the Men; Men for the Liberties of the
Subject, and the Rights of the City.

Gentlemen, the Government is infinitely concerned in this Case; that puts a
weight upon your enquiry into the damages; your severity in this Case, will
deter all People from entering into Clans and Cabals to affront the Government.

That I may not further nauseat the Reader with the foul Language and venomous
Malice of this Insolent, arrogant and intolerable Slanderer, I shall transcribe
no more of his virulent discourse, though he run on to a strange length, at a
most wicked and infamous rate of Falsehoods and Defamations, against the best
Men of the City, without any manner of color for the truth of what he said.

The Jury thus directed, found for the Plantiff, and assessed Damages to 10000
l.

The Chief Justice said, Gentlemen, you seem to be Persons that have some sense
upon you, and consideration for the Government, and I think have given a good
Verdict, and are to be greatly commended for it.

By this extravagant and most unrighteous Verdict, was this upright and Wise
Citizen, Mr Papillon, drove into Exile, till Heaven vouchsafed him, with the
Nation, a most Miraculous and happy deliverance, by the glorious Undertaking of
our now Sovereign then Prince of Orange.

That it may not be forgotten, how this Plantiff Sr William Pritchard, came to
be Lord Mayor; I shall subjoyn the Account of the Poll, taken, when he was
brought on.

Sr Thomas Goold had 2257 Votes. Alderman Cornish had 2227. Sr William
Pritchard had but 2144. Sr Henry Tulse had 236.
Being conscious, that in the foregoing Account of the Trial of the pretended
Guildhall Riot; I forgot to intimate to the Reader, that Lieutenant Colonel
Quiney had a Warrant, for what he did, though he did not condescend to show it to
such Men as Sr Robert Clayton and the other Aldermen, upon whom he put the
Indignity before mentioned; to do him right (and to show that though he might
act too headily, 'twas not upon his own Head) I shall in this place insert the
Names of those who ordered him, and the Forces he then commanded, to that Post;
They were, The Lord Mayor (Sr John Moore.) Sr George Waterman, Sr James
Edwards, Sr Will. Pritchard, Sr Hen. Tulse, Sr James Smith, Sr John Peak, Sr
John Chapman, Sr Sym. Lewis, Sr John Mathews, Sr Benj. Newland, Sr William
Dodson, Sr John Buckworth, Lt. Colonel John Steventon, Thomas Cowden, Edward
Beaker, John Wallis, John Nicolls, William Parker, Henry Loads, Peter Aylworth,
John Short, Richard Aily, Benj. Skut, Humphrey Stroud, and William Carpenter,


Remarks upon the Trial of Alderman Cornish, at the Old-Bayly, upon Monday the
19th of October, 1685. Before the Lord Chief Justice Jones, the Lord Chief
Baron, Justice Wythens, Justice Levins, Justice Street, Baron Gregory and
Jenner the Recorder.
WHen the Reader remembers what part this Eminent and Worthy Citizen acted, in
the mighty Struglings between Christianity and Popery; English Liberties and
Tyranny; he will not be surprised to see him overwheml'd; when by the Aid of
the worst of men; the Banks of our Security were broken down, and the Torrent
of Popery and Arbitrary Power carried all before it.

That from the time of the discovery of the Popish Plot, the Conspirators, did,
with indefatigable Industry, apply themselves to shift it off to the
Protestants; is most undoubtedly and beyond contradiction true. This alarming
the City, and it being well known, that the Lives, Liberties and Estates of
Englishmen, against Arbitrary Attempts upon them; Lay in Trials by Juryes; The
Citizens, in the Year 1680, roused out of the Lethargy in which they had long
lain, and bethink themselves how to secure substantial, honest Juryes; knowing,
that that could only be accomplished by proper Sheriffs; They pitched upon and
elected, Mr Bethel and Mr Cornish, to serve in that Office; By so doing, and by
a like Election of Mr Pilkington ( now deservedly Lord Mayor) and Mr Shute, in
the succeeding Year 1681, the Popish design, of murdering Protestants under
color of Law, was Post-poned; until the Ancient Right of Electing Sheriffs,
was ravished from the City in the year 1682.

However, the Conspirators, impatient of delay, made their attempt in the
Sheriffalty of Mr Bethel and Mr Cornish; The Earl of Shaftesbury, and diverse
others are now clapped up, upon pretense of a Plot; and an experiment is made
upon Mr Stephen College, a Man of great Honesty and who wanted nothing but a
Figure to make him every way valuable; But these Sheriffs not furnishing a Jury
to cut him off; The Earl of Shaftesbury, and the rest who were imprisoned, are
reserved for the next Sheriffalty; When they hoped ( though as Heaven would have
it, without ground) to get Sheriffs and by them Juryes, for their purpose: And
the Conspirators being enraged at the disappointment and baffle put upon them
by an honest City-Jury, in the Case of Mr College, They hurry that poor man to
Oxford, and there, by most unpresidented illegal Practices, basely murder him.

Further, it cannot be forgotten, that the honest endeavor of these worthy
Sheriffs (Mr Bethel and Mr Cornish) to have the Sham-Plot of Fitz. Harris,
thoroughly searched into, did greatly contribute to their future Sufferings.

The mentioning this Wretch, forces a Remembrance of the Stratagems then used,
to present his discovery of the Authors of his Traiterous Libel, and of the
design for which it was framed; That that matter might not be pryed into by the
Magistrates of London, he is removed from Newgate, to a most close Confinement
in the Tower; Then, he being Impeached in the Oxford Parliament, in March 1680,
to hinder the Examination of it there, that Parliament is dissolved: Quickly
after, he is tried and condemned in the Court of King's Bench; Then, though a
Papist, he is left solely to the management of Dr H. of the Tower, and without
controversy, was held to the last Moment of his Life, under the hope and
expectation of a Pardon, if he would confess, ( or to speak more properly say)
as he was directed; But being deluded, and his Mouth stopped; The Doctor in his
Name emits to the World, a Mock Confession, inconsistent in it self, and most
notoriously void of truth; but most wickedly contrived to render these
Sheriffs, and also those worthy Gentlemen, Sr Robert Clayton, (an Alderman) and
Sr George Tr^by ( Recorder of London) infamous and odious to the highest
degree; and all this with design to create a belief of a Protestant Plot;
particularly, the Doctor's Paper charged the Sheriffs, that they came to Pitz.
Harris in Newgate, with a Token from the Lord Howard, which he knew to be true,
and told him, nothing would save his Life, but discovering the Popish Plot; and
gave him great encouragement from the Lord Howard; that if he would declare
that he believed so much of the Popish Plot, as amounted to the introducing the
Roman Catholics; or if he would find out any that would criminate the Queen,
or the Duke; or make so much as a plausible story to confirm the Plot; that the
Parliament would restore him to his Father's estate, with the profits thereof,
since his Majesty's Restoration. How idle false, groundles and villainous soever
this Story was; it highly irritated the Conspirators against these Gentlemen.

About this time, God for the Scourge of the Nation, had sent into the City,
that common Nuisance to Mankind; a Race of blind senseless Creatures, who hardly
deserved to be called Men, and therefore took to themselves, the Name of
Tories; These Animals, seeming to delight in Fetters of Iron, rather than
Chains of Gold, were the Champions for Arbitrary and Despotick Power; They set
themselves to betray the Rights and Liberties of the City; and to bring all
Freeborn Englishmen, to live at the Will of an Absolute Prince; These, by
Addresses of Thanks for the Violation of the Laws; and of Abhorrence of those
who endeavored to maintain them; invited the Conspirators to attempt the
overthrow of the Ancient Privileges and Government of London; Nay, their
Solicitation ( Backed with assurance of a Surrender) procured the bringing a Quo
Warranto against the City Charters; But the Wretches failing their Principals
herein; as they ever did in all things, but Noisy Huzza's; and a Committee of
Aldermen and Commoners (true Englishmen) being appointed to guard the City
Franchises against the Quo Warranto Attack; New Measures must be taken;
hereupon,

The Tories, (now perceiving that their Quo Warranto, must pass the Formalities
of Westminster Hall) witb bended Knees, supplicate the aid of that Tool of
State, Secretary Jenkins; He readily espouses them, and having the Ascendant of
Sr John Moor, at this time most unluckily Lord Mayor; directs him to constitute
Mr North and Mr Rich, Sheriffs of the City; which he as obsequiously as
daringly undertakes.

Many worthy Citizens (whose names deserve eternal remembrance) boldly
withstood these Arbitrary and Illegal Attempts; Amongst them Mr Bethel and Mr
Cornish were not the last; and they felt with the first, the rage of the
Conspirators and their Adherents; Their honest, innocent and peacable
appearing, to Vote for the Election of Sh^riffs in 1682. according to the
undoubted right of the Citizens; was termed a Riot, and (in Mr Cornish's Trial,
now before us) a Branch of the Plot. ( and most certainly is was the greatest
Plot and Treason, in which these most deserving Gentlemen ever engaged
themselves) For this imaginary Riot, they were, with others, brought to Trial;
The Sheriffs made by Riot, Force and Arms, returned upon them some of the true
Rioters for Jurymen: Others of them were made the Witnesses, and so they were
found guilty, and most extravagantly Fined.

Mr Bethel, after about two years Imprisonment, for non-payment of the Fine,
against all Law and Reason imposed upon him, Obtained his Liberty, by payment
of his Fine; he having wisely observed, that the Juries of that day, did Kill
as sure as Death, every Man whom the Conspirators marked out to them; and being
thus at Liberty, and also at leisure, resolved for a time to take his leave of
England, as he did; and so very happily lives at this day, to be further
servicable to this famous City, and his Generation; But

Mr Cornish's Family and great Occasions, having detained him, within the reach
of the Conspirators; The wise disposer of all things, now permits him to be
made a Sacrifice to the Tories Rage.

They charge him with an Indictment of High Treason, for Conspiring the death
of King Charles the second, and the raising a Rebellion:

The Jury sworn upon him were, Thomas Rawlinson, Thomas Langham, Ambross Isted
(of Fleetstreet.) Thomas Pendelton, John Grice, Thomas Oneby, (of
Aldermanbury.) William Clowdesly, (of Fishstreet, of whom it is generally and
very credibly reported, that he was killed about three years after, with a
piece of Wood called the Cornish of an House, upon the blowing up some Houses
at the Fire at Paul's-VVharfe.) Richard Holford, (of Breadstreet-Hill,
Cheesemonger) William Longboat, Stephen Colman, (of Leadenhall-street, at the
Corner of Limestreet) Robert Clavel, (Bookseller in St Paul's Churchyard) and
William Long.


The King's Council, were, The Attorney General, The Solicitor General, Mr
North, and Mr Phipps.


The Attorney General, aggravated the matter charged in the Indictment, thus,

Gentlemen of the Jury; the Prisoner stands Indicted for Conspiring the death
of the late King; and for raising Rebellion; and consenting to be assisting to
the Rebellion then designed -- I need not tell you what part he acted when he
was Sheriff, that that was the groundwork of the Rebellion, setting the
Commonality against the Government of the City.

Hereupon Mr Cornish said, that he was as Innocent as any Man in the Court, and
the Attorney ironically replied; So was my Lord Russel to his Death, Mr
Cornish; do you remember that?

Then Colonel Romsey ( who to the certain knowledge of the Judges and King's
Council, had perjured himself in the Trial of my Lord Russel) testified, that
about October or November, 1682. he went to Mr Shepherd's House, to the Duke of
Monmouth, my Lord Russel, Lord Gray, Sr Thomas Armstrong and Mr Ferguson; That
they were just going away when he came; That before they went, Alderman Cornish
was brought in by Shepherd, and made his Excuse that he did not come sooner,
and said he could not stay with them: That thereupon Mr Ferguson opened his
Bosom, and pulled out a Paper, and read it to him, Mr Shepherd holding the
Candle; and after it was read he said he liked it well; That he the said
Romsey, did not hear all the the Paper read, but it was a Declaration to have
been dispersed when the Rising was to have been.

That there were, as he well remembered, two points in it, One was Liberty of
Conscience, and the other, That all, who would assist in the Insurrection, that
had any Lands of the King's or Churches, in the late War, should have them
restored.

Mr Goodenough, ( who to capacitate him to be a Witness, brought a Pardon for
one Treason, for which he had been Outlawed, and stood awed with the guilt of
another) He testified, that being with Alderman Cornish in the beginning of the
year, 1683. He said to him, Now the Law will not defend us, though we be never so
innocent, some other way is to be thought on and that upon this, the Alderman
said, he wondered the City was so unready, and the Country so ready; That he
thereupon told him, that something was thought of to be done here, but in the
first place the Tower ought to be seized; That the Alderman, after a little
pause, said, I will do what I can, or what good I can.

That some time after, the Alderman met him upon the Exchange; and asked him
how Affairs went; which he understood to relatc to what they had discoursed;
and that he answered him, Well; But he acknowledged that he had other matters
with him, about the defense of the Riot.

Upon this mention of the Riot, Justice Wythens reflected, saying, Mr. Cornish,
I tell you that was a branch of the Plot, take that from me; and quickly after
he told him something as true, ( viz) Mr Cornish, you have this Happiness, that
you will be Tried by your Fellow Citizens, of very good Quality and
Understanding, I must tell you.

On behalf of Alderman Cornish, there appeared Sr William Turner, Alderman
Love, Mr Jekil, and Mr Gosfright who testified, that the Prisoner had great
aversion to Goodenough, and did oppose his being made Undersheriff; but the
Chief Justice slighted their Evidence; and Wythens, said Mr Jekyl was in a Limb
of the Plot, one of the greatest of the Rioters. Note, a Person under the guilt
of Treason is allowed for a good Witness, but this Learned Judge seems to doubt
in the Case of a Rioter.


Then Sr Thomas Lane testified, that in my Lord Russel's Trial, Romsey swore
that he did not hear the Declaration read, it being done before he came.

Dr Calamy Mr Carlton Mr Cook Mr Knap and Mr Smart, then spoke to the Life,
Reputation and Loyalty of the Prisoner.

It deserves to be noted, that after the Evidence given, Mr Solicitor did here
omit the drudgery ( which in all other Cases of this nature he underwent) by a
long florid Speech, to impress the Jury in the matter: here it sufficed that
Judge Wythens had just before passed his word, that this Jury was composed of
Citizens of very good quality and understanding; therefore they might be
trusted, well enough; knowing what they had to do.

The Lord Chief Justice Jones, who had in the whole proceeding of the Trial,
discovered sufficient tartness; sumed up the Evidence to the Jury. Then,

The Jury being withdrawn, the Prisoner informed the Court, that he had omitted
to call one material Witness, whereupon the Jury being returned,

Mr Shepherd testified, That Mr Cornish came into his House to speak with the
Duke of Monmouth, or some other person, he could not positively, after so many
Years, say whom; and did not stay half a quarter of an Hour; That Shepherd went
up Stairs, and came out of the Room with him; and that there was not one Word
read, or Paper seen while Mr Cornish was there; That he was not looked upon to
be one of the Company; But before he came, Mr Ferguson had pulled off his
Shoe, and took the Declaration out there, and read it; and Mr Cornish knew
nothing of it.

[Note, This evidence to a tittle stands with what Romsey swore at my Lord
Russel's Trial, which was, that about the latter end of October, or the
beginning of November, my Lord of Shaftesbury told him of the meeting of the
Duke, Lord Russell, Lord Gray, Sr Thomas Armstrong, and Mr Ferguson at
Shepherd's and sent him to them; which evinces that Mr Cornish was not looked
upon, to be one of the Company, for if he had, the Earl of Shaftesbury would
undoubtedly have named him also: Romsey then also swore posuively that he was
not there above a quarter of an hour, and that he was not at the reading of the
Declaration, for it was done before he came.]

However, the Solicitor General, and also the Recorder affirmed this evidence
of Mr Shepherd's had cleared the matter against the Prisoner, which before
seemed dark; if so, what need now ( the Solicitor having before left it without
any Address to the Jury) of varnishing the matter? But it is evident, they were
now pinched, and therefore Mr Solicitor's Rhetoric was found requisite to
secure a Verdict, and he thus uttered it;

Gentlemen, there has been a very great Indulgence given to the Prisoner; After
a full evidence, you were again sent for, to hear what he had to offer to you;
I cannot but observe, this looks like a subtle contrivance on the Prisoner's
part; when you are withdrawn, Shepherd sends intelligence to him, that he had
something to say, that might excuse him; Truly I am very glad Mr Shepherd has
been here, he is so far from in validating any part of the Testimony, that by
all the Circumstances you can collect from this Evidence, it is a Corroboration
of it: It hereby appears that Mr Cornish was in that Company, and came when
they were met in private -- No Man almost but must believe that he was privy to
the Conspiracy; therefore, though this Witness seems to forget some part of the
Evidence, the reading the Declaration, and holding the Candle; yet these are
such Circumstances, that in themselves do carry a proof of the Charge, and do
confirm ( He should have said contradict) all the rest that Colonel Romsey has
said; and this must be a great satisfaction to you, that he was there present
and privy to that Design.

Then the Jury withdrew for a short time, and returning, brought the Prisoner
in Guilty. Thereupon the Recorder Jenner (a Person made up of Malice, Noise and
Nonsense) spoke in this manner;

Mr Cornish, your Crime is for Treason committed in the time of his late
Majesty; being one of those notorious Conspirators, that designed to raise
Rebellion; and it was carr^ed on sometime, it may be a year or more, under
color and pretense of Law; for so they did invade the Government, first of all
by packing Juries; there was the foundation laid, to bring on that business,
which they had at last designed, when they could bring it to a ripe head -- I
must tell you, whatever apprehensions you have to the contrary, and may please
your self in: I am sorry to see such a sort of Just as good sense as one
handful of Grief and the other of Sorrow.
pleasure in your Countenance, as if you had had no Favor showed you.

I am glad Shepherd was called, for I think it has That which puts out some
Men's Eyes, must here be thought to enlighten others.
cleared the thing, beyond all manner of contradiction; before it looked
something dark for want of Shepherd, and so it is an Happiness that the Man was
called. ( It would have proved so, before conscientious Judges and Jurymen.)

Thus, having told him the true Reason why he must dye ( viz.) his having been
Sheriff, and returned Juryes to the disservice of the Conspiracy; He pronounced
Sentence of Death upon him.

Upon the 4th day following (the 23d of October) to terrify all Citizens, from
asserting their Rights, and to put it out of doubt for what Treason he dyed,
Whether for being at Shepherd's, or at the Election of Sheriffs, in 1682, He
was executed in Cheapside; and was fixed upon Guild Hall, There being now a
Vacancy, it is pity another Head is not found to supply that place.
in ken of the place, where Sr John Moore committed that Riot, from whence the
Death of this good Citizen, and many other accursed and nefarious Mischiefs
sprung.

There wanted not a sort of Men at this time, who would have persuaded the
World, that Murder was a Royal Sport; for one Hindmarsh, a Bookseller, printed
a Ballad, which he called, Advice to the City, sung to the King at Windsor;
wherein are these entertaining Lines.

Then London be wise, and baffle their power,
And let 'm play the old Game no more,
Hang, hang up the Sheriffs,
Those Baboones in power,
Those Popular Thieves,
Those Rats of the Tower.
The Instruments of sheding this Blood, may do well to reflect upon the fate of
Clowdesly, one of the Jurymen; And also to consider, whether the Judgment of
Heaven was not proclaimed against that days work, by the violent and most
impetuous Tempest of Wind, Rain, Thunder and Lightning; which was sent upon the
sudden, and most surpri^ingly, to close that Fatal Day.

FINIS

