The only way of Subscribing Land, so as to make it really useful, as well for
the Supply of the Money to be now Raised for the Public, as for the Advantage
of the Subscribers of it, is to let it be Enacted,

THat the Land to be Subscribed (suppose 200000 l. yearly) by the present
possessor of it, shall from the time of Subscribing be charged with the Annual
payment of one fifth of its yearly Value, (for Example, 100 yearly Subscribed
with 20 l. yearly Rent) payable to the Bank, in Recompense whereof the
Subscriber for every Hundred Pounds yearly, so Subscribed, and so charged with
20 l. yearly, to have the same Benefit as if he had Advanced and Paid in 500 l.
in Money to the Bank, to attend the Inheritance, and to always belong to
whoever shall be possessed of the same; and then the present state of the Case
will be

Thus; for Example: Suppose to be raised for the Public two Millions, and that
there be for it given by Parliament a Fund of yearly -- 140000 l. And suppose
subscribed of Land yearly 200000 l. and out of that, as aforesaid, to be paid
to the Bank more yearly -- 40000 l.


This will make the Fund to raise Money on 180000 l. yearly; upon which suppose
two Millions in Money subscribed, the Public may so be supplied with that
Money, and the 180000 l. will at 6 per Cent. pay the Interest of three
Millions; whereof the Money-Subscribers will have 120000 l. yearly, which is 6
per Cent. for their Money; and the Land-Subscribers the other 60000 l. yearly
instead of the 40000 l. yearly by them paid, besides their share of all other
accidental Advantages that do attend all Banks, if not cramped with Proviso's;
and if the Bank to be settled may not be left as free in all Points as the Bank
of England is, it cannot do what is desired.

Note, If more than 200000 l. is required by the Public, the Fund must be
greater, and a greater proportion of Land may be Subscribed to it; as for
Lending of Money on Land; Note, When the Bank has Money enough to that way
employ it, and finds it its Interest on Land, 'twill then, and not sooner be
done.


