THE CHARACTER OF A Good, and Bad, Subject: OR, THE Duty of the PEOPLE OF
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND;

Manifestly proved by the word of GOD; wherein is made appear the fatal
Consequences of REBELLIOUS PRINCIPLES: IN A SERMON Preached by Constant Oats,
Preacher of the Gospel.

1 Epist. Pet. chap. 2. ver. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man,
for the Lord's sake: whether it be unto the King, as Supreme, or unto
Governors, as those that are sent by Him.

1 Pet 5. 5. Likewise, you younger submit your selves to the elder: yea, all of
you submit one to another, and be clothed with humility.

London: Printed for the Author, 1682.

TO THE PEOPLE Of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.
UNto You, my fellow Contrymen and Subjects, (or which ought so to be) I,
who am not under those capacities of Gifts as some Learned you may meet
withal; yet, not meeting with the like Discourse, I now think it convenient to
present to public view this small Treatise, which indeed is, The Duty of all
good and faithful Subjects, which love to live in Peace, both in Families and
Nations: I have therefore here laid down the Duty of Subjects to their Prince,
and of Children to Parents, and Servants to Masters; And herein, I am
persuaded, lies a great part of Christiantity; and I am sure, the Peace and
Safety of a Nation, and ease to all Governments, both in Nations and Families;
for what disquiet is that Family in, where there are ill Servants, or Children!
And what Peace has that Nation, which is full of Rebellious and ill men! Sirs,
The weal of a Nation lies in good and quiet Subjects, and to live peacably and
quietly, is every man's Duty; therefore, the Apostle (in Heb. 12) enjoins all
men to that very duty of Peace and Quietness; Follow Peace with all men, (says
he) and Holiness, without which none shall see God; And therefore, I recommend
this Treatise to you, to show you, so far forth as a good Subject and an
English man ought to do, not questioning but it will be well accepted by some
good Subjects; But, if it meets with any resistance, I shall not think it to
be, because what I have here asserted is not Truth; Nevertheless, that person
that ill resents it, is not a good Subject, and cannot bear with the Doctrine
of Obedience and Subjection either to God or Mam. I am sure here is nothing but
what the word of God does hold forth, and maintain; Therefore I shall be the
less concerned at the opposition it may meet with from Disloyal or ill men; but
where it meets with a good Subject, and an honest Heart, I fear not but it will
be acceptable; And as for all others, I leave it to God and their own
Consciences to judge, whether this be not their Duty. And now, my good
Brethren, Contrymen, and Fellow Subjects, wherein I am short in stirring you
up to the duty herein asserted, make You it up by your own ingenuity, and
Loyalty both to God and Man: which that you may do, is the Prayer of

Your fellow-Subject, C. O.

ROMANS 13. verse 1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is
no Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God; or, as the Margin
has it, ordered of God.
BEfore I enter upon the words themselves, I think it not amiss to let you
understand what sort of people I am like to meet with, for it is impossible to
please all men: peradventure this small Treatise may meet with some
discontented Dissenters, rather than Phanaticks, because I will give it a more
sober term than madmen, which, we know, the name implies; Therefore, I will
not say, madmen may meet with this; but some dissatisfied Dissenters may meet
with it, who, upon the first view of the Text, will be apt to reflect on the
Author, and say, that he is a Papist, Royallist, Tory, or suchlike; But let
them say what they will, they may be sure he is no Dissenter, nor one of those
who will neither obey God nor Man; But, if this small Treatisemeet with any
such, all that I shall say, is, that word of the Apostle, and one of the
greatest of the Apostles, in the verse following my Text, (viz.) Whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. And this is all I shall say to
such at present; and now I shall fall to the words themselves, wherein are
these five things observable: 1st. an Exhortation. 2dly. the persons exorted.
3dly. the thing exhorted to. 4thly. the persons to whom this duty is due.
5thly. the reasons or argument of the whole. As 1st. the exhortation, and that
is, let; 2dly. the persons, and that is, every soul. 3dly. the thing exhorted
to, that is, be subject. 4thly. the persons to whom this duty is due, that is,
the Higher Powers. 5thly. and lastly, the reason and argument of the whole, for
there is no Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Let
every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God:
the Powers that be, are ordained of God. The Text being thus divided into five
branches, or heads, I shall raise these five Doctrines severally from them, and
speak something to each; The first Doctrine is, That it is the duty of every
Gospel-minister to teach the people to be in due subjection, and not in
Rebellion. The 2d. Doctrine is, That it is not only the duty of Ministers so to
preach, but of every one so to be in due subjection. The 3d. Doctrine is, That
subjection does become all men. The 4th Doctrine is, That the Higher Powers
ought to be submitted unto. The 5th. and last Doctrine is, That God is the
great Ordainer of all Powers. I shall treat of these in order, and will begin
with the first of them, which is this, That it is the duty of every
Gospel-minister to teach people to be in due subjection, and not to sow the
seed of Rebellion amongst them; which Doctrine I will handle thus; first, prove
the Doctrine by the example of Apostles; Secondly, lay down the reasons of this
point; Thirdly, show you the ill consequences of non-subjection; Fourthly and
lastly, wind up the Doctrine with the Application. First, I prove the first
Doctrine, That it is the duty of every good Minister to teach the people to be
in subjection; for which take these Texts of Scripture, with the example of so
good an Apostle, and Minister of Jesus, as Paul was. I shall not multiply
Texts, but these few, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing
may be confirmed; The first Text is, Titus 3. verse 1. Put them in mind to be
in subjection to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, and to be
ready to every good work; which Text does plainly confirm this Doctrine; as if
the Apostle should say, or at leastwise did know, that there would be some
Rebellious Ones in the world: Therefore he exhorts them to this Duty,
especially pointing at Magistrates; which to obey, he counts a good work; being
ready (says he) to every good work. That is the first Text I shall give you,
to clear this point. I need not stand to give more; but however, take one or
two more, for the further manifesting this Truth, and this Text is very
pertinent to our purpose, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance
of man, for the Lord's sake: whether it be unto the King, as Supreme, or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. The Apostle has this duty two or
three times in this Epistle; as, in verse 17. of the same chapter, where he
enjoins this duty with the fear of God; saying, Fear God, and honor the King;
and then surely there is subjection, or ought to be, to that Person, whom (with
the fear of God) we ought to honor. Thus you see how clear this Doctrine is,
by the practice of the Apostles; for the Apostles did so preach and teach this
Doctrine; and as they saw it was their duty, who did it by Divine Inspiration,
then surely it is the duty of Ministers now so to teach; but how few do thus
teach, I leave to God and their consciences; For instead of preaching
submission to Government, we have such nowadays which preach little else but
Rebellion; But farther, one Text more, for the clearing and confirming of this
good Truth, because I would have none reflect upon the Author, for laying down
every man's duty, and say, he has taken that in hand which he cannot prove,
take Heb. 3. 17. Obey them that rule over you, and submit your selves. Thus you
see this Doctrine clearly proved by the example of the Apostles, who thus
taught the people to be subject to those that had Rule and Authority over them,
and are not forgetful (as some are) of their duty to Principalities and Powers;
and therefore in the words of my Text the Apostle so Preaches, Let every Soul
be subject to the Higher Powers. Thus having proved the Doctrine, by the
example of the Apostles who were the immediate Ministers of Christ, and spoke
by Divine Authority, and immediate Revelation: I hope none will stand to oppose
the Author in this great Truth, which is both for the benefit of themselves and
Posterities; the settlement of Affairs, and the troubles they now bring upon
themselves. So much for the confirmation of the first Doctrine: I shall now
come to the second thing propounded, which is this, Why Ministers ought thus to
Preach; The first reason is, because the eyes of the people are much upon their
Teachers, and are too apt to suck in ill principles; which is plainly
demonstrated by Achitophel, who had no sooner councelled young Absalom to raise
Rebellion against his Father David, but presently the poor inconsiderate
multitude began to Associate; (But (thanks be to God) the Council of our modern
Achitophel being defeated, he is fled;) wherefore I would advise our Ministers
not to go this way to work, to raise feuds among their Hearers; but, on the
contrary, rather exhort them to Submission and Obedience, to the Fear of God,
and to the Honor of the King, and to persuade them from Rebellious Murmurings,
which is much for their Peace and Advantage; but otherwise, is unavoidable
Destruction; that is the first Reason. A second Reason is this. Ministers ought
to teach people to obey Man, especially Magistrates; because they do duly teach
people, or at leastwise ought so to do, their duty toward God. And as there is
a duty toward God, so there is a duty toward Man, and more especially to
Government; for they which will not obey man whom they see daily, how shall
they obey God, whom they have not seen? Besides, God requires this duty of us,
and his word injoyns us to put people in mind of those that Rule over them;
this is a second Reason. A third Reason is this. Due subjection to Government,
produces Peace, Safety, to a People and Nation; pray what has been the ill
consequences of of non-submission in most parts, but Destruction, and Ruin
both of Families, Towns and Nations, where Prince and People do not agree? But,
I know who ought to submit, Servant, or Master; Prince, or People? Reason tells
us, that Servants ought to obey, for then surely People ought to submit to
their Prince. Therefore the Apostle says, Servants, obey them that are your
own: Masters. So much for the reasons of the Doctrine.

Now to the third thing propounded, and that is, the ill consequences of the
neglect of this duty of thus teaching people their duty of being subject. The
ill consequences are these; First, it tends to the disquiet of the people,
whose minds are stirred up to Feuds and Animosities one amongst another; for
there are some turbulent Preachers abroad, who, instead of preaching
Submission, preach contrariwise; instead of preaching from Texts which should
humble people, preach from those Texts that tend to nothing but stirring them
up to Feuds and Fears, and suggesting into their minds evil things against
Government, preaching from Texts which please their own fancies, as Psalm. 149.
ver. 8. Let us bind their Kings in Chains, and their Princes in Fetters of
Iron; and other Texts, as Acts 4. ver. 26. The Kings of the Earth stand up
against the Lord and his Christ. These Texts men are too apt to preach from,
which are of ill consequence, and tend to nothing but strife, as they handle
them. There be many, let them take what Texts they will, they will have a fling
at the Government, and incense people with one passage or other; and will be
sure to find fault with both Prince and Government, which is of very ill
consequence; who, instead of such preaching, ought otherwise to preach, and to
preach from such Texts as tend to Peace; as that of the Apostle, which counsels
to follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see God:
Instead of railing against Government, should support it, which has far better
consequences in them.

2dly. The neglect of not teaching people this duty of subjection, but on the
contrary to unsettle the minds of people, it has this ill consequence in it,
as, murdering one of another. What were the consequences of our former
Contentions in the late Times of Rebellion, but murdering of one another? Pray
God keep us from it now, in these our days, and let not Rebellion, that Sin of
Witchcraft, be sowed amongst us now, as it was amongst those which our former
good Prince had, who took the Government by violence into their own hands; Men
which were very ill-minded, that neither would obey God nor Man, but would be
all Masters, and no Servants; all Kings, and no Subjects; from which sort of
Pretenders to Religion, good Lord deliver us.

So much for the ill consequences, which was the third thing propounded; Now I
come to the 4th. and last thing, which is the Application of this Doctrine, in
which I shall do these three things; First, speak to pretended Ministers;
Secondly, to young men; Thirdly, to all in general.

First, to pretended Ministers; If it be so, you are much too blame; and for
shame leave off preaching Contention, and preach Peace and Subjection to
Government; for God has called you to this. Besides, the Apostle presses hard
to this duty of Subjection, Rom 13. ver. 5. Wherefore, you must needs be
subject; not only for wrath, (as if he should say, not only for fear,) but for
conscience sake. How can you pretend to be Ministers of Christ indeed, when
you, instead of preaching Peace, preach Rebellion? or, (as the Apostle says,
Philip. 1. ver. 10.) who preach Christ more out of contention, than sincerity.
Sirs, for shame leave off this preaching Christ; for it does not only hinder
your own Liberties, but the Liberties of others, who may and would live in
Peace, and sit under their own Vines in safety; since you have so good a Prince
to rule over you. But secondly, I will say to you young men, who I would advise
to be subject to your Prince; and, as God in his holy word in another sense,
sense, Remember your Creator in the days of your youth: As God does require
your youthful submission to himself, so in your youthful days be good Subjects
to the Government you live under, and be not led away by ill-minded men. 3dly.
and lastly, One word in general, and so I conclude this first Doctrine; Be
persuaded to submit to the Government we live under, fear God, and honor the
King, and be loving Subjects; Serve him in Love, and not for Fear; in so doing
you will be rewarded both of God and Man, and other Nations will admire at your
Love and Loyalty to your Prince; Therefore now let us strive to stir one
another to fear God, honor the King, and love as Brethren; so shall we live
in Peace and Union one with another. So I come now to the second Doctrine, That
it is not only the duty of Ministers so to preach, but of people to be in
subjection: Lest every soul be in subjection. In the handling this Doctrine, I
shall but just hint at some Texts of Scripture, and so pass to the rest of the
Doctrines which remain: intending only to prove the Doctrines, because it is
the Application of the whole I intend to aim at. For the proof of the second
Doctrine, take these Texts; 1 Pet. 5, 6. Wherefore ye younger submit your
selves to the Elder; yea all of you be in subjection one to another. Thus you
see the Apostles all preached this duty of subjection and humility one toward
another: How much more then ought we to be subject to Authority, and to give
unto Caesar that which is Caesar 's; Honor, to whom Honor is due; Fear, to
whom fear is due; Fear God, and honor the King; which is but your Duty so to
do? So I pass to the third Doctrine, which is this, That subjection becomes all
men; for proof whereof take these Texts; Jam. 4. ver. 6. For God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble. Coloss 2. 18. With all humbleness, of
mind. Ephesians. 4. 2. With all meek-long suffering, forbearing one another in
love. And our Lord Christ says, (Matt. 23. 12.) He that humbles himself shall
be exalted. So that here we plainly see, that Subjection and Humility are
Virtues becoming all men; and now I pass to the fourth Doctrine, Who is that
Higher Powers ought to be submitted to? For which take these Texts of
Scripture, Matt. 22. 17, 21. and Romans 13. 7. Render therefore unto all their
dues; Tribute, to whom Tribute is due; Custom, to whom Custom; Fear, unto whom
Fear, Honor, unto whom Honor is due. And if you do but cast your eye upon the
forementioned place of Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 17. the Apohle tells you to whom
these things are due: Love the Brotherhood; fear God, and honor the King. Thus
I have proved the fourth Doctrine, and now I come to the 5th. and last
Doctrine, which is this, That God is the great Ordainer of all Powers and
Authorities; which if I make appear, (as I question not) surely then these
Powers ought to be obeyed; for God does not give us Princes to Murder, nor
Kings to Rebel against; But take these Texts for the proof of the 5th. and last
Doctrine, Act. 10. 42. and 13. 48. 1 Cor. 19. 14. and 15. 24. Matt. 28. 18. All
Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, Matt. 6. 13. Thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power. 2 Cor. 4. 7. For we have this Treasure in Earthen
Vessels, that the Power might be of God, and not of us. Thus then we see that
God is the Author of all Power, and that it is from Him that all Power and
Authority is; He then that will not obey the Authority that God has set over
him, does not obey God. Thus I have proved all the five Doctrines; now we come
to the Application, which take as follows; The first Use we make of these
Doctrines, shall be of Examination, and Characters of a good or bad Subject;
The second Use shall be the motives to press you to the duty of Subjection; The
third Use shall be of Reprehension and Reproof. The first Use is of
Examination: Is it so as we have heard, that every soul ought to be in
subjection to the Higher Powers? Then let us examine our selves, whether we are
good Subjects, yea, or no; which if we be, we are under these Characters;
First, He that is a good Subject, does not only fear God, but honors and loves
his King, and will not see Him abused, nor will do Him any hurt. This was the
Case of David; though he might have destroyed his Lord, he would not; saying,
How dare I do the Lord's Anointed any harm? 1 Samuel 26. 23. For the Lord
delivered him into my hand, but I would not stretch forth my hand against the
Lord's Anointed. This is the first Character of a good Subject.

The second is this: A good Subject does not only love his Prince, but will lay
down his Life for his Prince, and stand by him in all streights, and will hate
his Enemies. See what Subjects David had, when he was forced to fly from
Rebellious Absalom: here is the Trial and Love of a good Subject. See 2 Samuel
15. ver. 30. And David went up by the ascent of Mount Olivet, and wept as he
went up, and had his head covered; and all the people that were with him
covered every man his head, and went up, weeping as they went up. Here, Sirs,
you see true Subjects will not leave their Prince in streights, but will rather
suffer with him, weep with him, live with him, and die with him.

The third Character is: A good Subject will not only live and die with him,
but will, to the uttermost of his endeavor, destroy the King's Enemies, and
lay out his Life, his Estate, and his All, for his Lord and Prince. Do but see
how they came to the King to tell him of his Enemies; see 2 Samuel 15. 31. And
they told David, Achitophel is amongst the Conspirators. Sam. 16. 15, 16. This
is the third Character.

The fourth Character is this: A good Subject is of a good and willing nature,
ready to bring, and run with good Tidings to the King. Do but see what good
Subjects David had in his streights, when his Rebellious Son, (as some
nowadays would do) even pursued him to death: No sooner Joab, like a good
Subject as he was, had destroyed the King's Enemies, but they ran to bear the
King Tidings, 2 Samuel 18. 19. and almost to the end of that Chapter, you may see
how ready they ran to bear the King Tidings; ver. 19. tells us to this effect:
Then said Himaaz the son of Zadock, Let me now run and bear the King tidings
how the Lord has avenged him of his enemies; And again (in ver. 22.) he says,
I pray thee let me run after Cushi; Nay, when Joab denied, yet he (ver. 23.)
presses one to persuade him, and says, But however let me run; and Joab said
unto him Run: From whence it is worth observing, that a good Subject will not
take any repulse, but will, and is always willing to bring his Prince good
Tidings. At the close of this Chapter we do not only see their willingness, but
the care they had of their message to the King, for fear of displeasing or
grieving him; Therefore Cushi, when the King asked him, (ver. 29.) Is the young
man safe? he, to mitigate the King's grief, answers him prudently, and with
great care, (putting him in mind of his Enemies) and makes him this reply, The
enemies of my Lord the King, and all that rise up against thee to do thee hurt,
be as the young man is. Thus now we see not only the willingness of a good
Subject running to bring the King Tidings, But also the care and tenderness
they have of him. This is the fourth Character.

I now come to the fifth Character of a good Subject, which is the last I shall
give at this time: A good Subject is troubled and grieved at the Exilement of
his Prince, and will not be satisfied till he is returned to his Throne; Nay, a
good Subjects voice, as the voice of Israel, (1 Samuel 18. 19.) We will have a
King to reign ever us; they were not satisfied till they had a King to submit
to, and they are not willing to part with him, much less then would they murder
him; No, but on the contrary would mourn for their King's Exilement, 2 Samuel 19.
24, 30. And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came to meet the King, and had neither
dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day
the King departed, until the day he came again in peace. Thus you see how a
good Subject does sit in a disconsolate condition while his Prince is in
Exilement; and is not only thus sad for his Exilement, but will rejoice at his
return: see ver. 30. where he utters these words, Yet let him take all,
forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace unto his own house. These
are the Characters of a good Subject; Therefore let us examine our selves which
of us loves our Prince as these did.

So much for the Characters of good Subjects. I come now to the Characters of a
bad Subject, Therefore, because he cannot be called a Subject that is
Rebellious, I will put it into these terms, The Characters of the King's
Enemies.

He is an Enemy to the King and Government he lives under, that, like Shimei,
curses the King, and takes advantage to do it when the King is in streights. Do
but see that wicked Enemy of the King, when he saw his Lord forced to leave his
own house, goes and curses him, and reviles him, 2 Samuel 16. 5, etc. And thus
said Shimei when he cursed, Come out thou bloody man, thou man of Belial; and
in the 8th. verse, he tells the King, Thou art a bloody man: So that you may
see what the King's Enemies will do, when they see their King in streights.

I come now to the second Character of an Enemy to the King, which is this;
They will not only be Enemies to the King, but all that belongs to him. Do but
see how they chased this present Prince from his Father's house, and made him
fly to an Oak for refuge, and sought his Life too if they could have found him,
for his Fathers would not do, as late experience has made manifest to us, whom
God preserve from the hands of such Enemies. But take Scripture for this
Character, that they hate not only the King, but his Friends; for I am resolved
to say nothing but what experience and Scripture makes appear; see 2 Samuel 17.
12. it is Hushai's Counsel to defeat Achitophel; but how ready we see the
King's Enemies are to hearken to it: So shall we come upon him in some place
where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falls on the
ground; and of him and all that are with him there shall not be left so much as
one man. Now see what the King's Enemies reply to this; And all the men of
Israel said, The counsel of Hushai is better than the counsel of Achitophel.
Thus you see how ready they are to take counsel against the King; so we end
with the second Character of an Enemy to the King.

The third and last Character is this: He that is an Enemy to the King, will
not stick to abuse him, as we have heard already; but would, like that wicked
Enemy, slay him at once; see 1 Samuel 26. 8. Then said Abishai to David, God has
delivered thine Enemy into thine hand this day: Now therefore let me smite him,
I pray thee, with this Spear, even to the ground, at once, and I will not smite
him the second time; But David, like a good Subject, said, Destroy him not; But
this Murdering King-killing Enemy pretends Religion for his work, and tells
David, The Lord has delivered him into thine hand, and calls him David's
Enemy, to heighten his hatred against him. Thus you see men that are Enemies to
the King, will rather then miss of their intent, do any thing; and they have
Religion for a Cloak and Hood-wink for their Violency; and therefore says he,
The Lord has delivered him into thine hand, therefore, I pray thee, let me
slay him. Thus I have done with the Characters of those black Enemies to Kings
and Governments, and shall say no more but these words of David, Can any man
smite the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? This is the first Use, which is a
Use of Examination, and Characters of a good or bad Subject: I now come to the
second use, which is of those motives I promised to give you to press you to
the duty here enjoined; The first motive is this: Consider, that Subjection is
commanded and required of you, both by the Law of God and Man; Besides, look
and see what Rebellion has done; It has murdered a good Prince already;
therefore when your Ancestors have been Disloyal, be you the more Dutiful, and
part not with one grain of your Loyalty; Consider, what becomes of Rebellious
men, but Death and Destruction; be not of those whom the Apostle speaks of, 2
Pet. 2. 10. That walk after the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness; despisers of
Government; Pernicious are they; they are afraid to speak evil of Dignities.
What a sad thing is this! And what an age we live in, when there needs so much
Loyalty and Love! Therefore be persuaded to love God and honor the King, and
be not of a Rebellious mind, but be of the mind of those in 2 Samuel 16. 15, 16.
These were men of a good and loving nature to their Prince, and were ready at
all turns to serve him. And therefore be persuaded to be of those that will lay
down their Lives and Estates for the King.

Consider what Rebellious persons bring upon themselves; nothing but Death and
Destruction at one time, or place, or other. You may read how Absalom was
caught up by the hair of the head for his Rebellion. Sirs, God hates Rebellion,
and Rebellion is worse than the Sin of Witchcraft; it breeds nothing but
Destruction; Therefore be persuaded to this your duty, seeing God calls for it
from you.

Thirdly* The third motive is this, and that is to you young men. Learn to know
your Prince; for as there is a duty to a Parent due from you, so there is a
Duty and Allegiance to your Prince; and I hope I may say, that there is not One
in Ten thousand in England, Scotland or Ireland, but what are loving Subjects;
If not, I wish they were known; for it is a shame to England to have a bad
Subject, since they have so good a Prince, who loves to see his People in Peace
and Quiet; for herein lies all our happiness, that we can say in reality what
others did say fainedly to Absalom, God Save the King.

The third and last Use is a Use of Reprehension and Reproof to those that dare
be so bold as to be Disloyal, and speak against Government; I dare be bold to
tell ye, You deserve death here, if you have it not hereafter; Therefore I
shall close with the words of the Apostle, and then let any be bold if they
dare; which words are these, Romans 13. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinonce of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

FINIS.

