THE Female Gallant OR, THE WIFE'S THE CUCKOLD. A NOVEL.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, over against Will's Coffee-House, in
Russel Street, in Covent Garden, 1692.

TO My much Esteemed FRIEND, Mr. Cardell Goodman.
SIR,
I Would fain say something new to you in this Dedication; but our Great
Masters in Wit, have already so far outdone me, that I must despair of
Entertaining you as I would. To say I do not pretend to make you any
acknowledgements here, of the Favors I have already received; because it looks
as if I designed to pay a Debt, by borrowing a much greater Sum of the same
Person; is Old, though it is True. And for me to attempt here to give the World a
Character of You, would extremely lessen you; and you would appear like a Great
Beauty drawn by a House-dawber: And that part of Mankind, which has the
happiness to be truly acquainted with you, would throw stones at me for my
Ignorance, and Presumption. Some of that happy number who have needed it, have
sufficiently known your Generosity, nor have I wanted my share of that
Knowledge.

Your Sense and Judgment have been too Evident to be questioned by any Man
that pretends to either: And they are such as I ought to dread upon this
Occasion. You have adorned the Best, and Highest Characters, and have sometimes
helped Heaven to make a Poet.

I shall say nothing in defense of the Discourse I Am going to make you; because
it wants more than I can pretend to offer for it. Only thus much, that it was
really designed to please YOU, and all that read it; as well as to oblige the
Bookseller, and my self.

In short, I fear Sir, you will find your Entertainment but Rude, and Homely; But
I hope, not Ill-natured, nor Uncivil. You have your Bill of Fare in the Title
Page, and if I have dressed any one Dish to your Palate, I wish you may make a
Hearty, but not a Nauseous meal of it; and then I Am sure I shall be the most
satisfied. You are my Chief Guest, Sir, and for your sake, Mr. Briscoe and I
are in hopes, that we shall have the Greater and Better Company. Who, if they
bring as much Candor, as I beg you now to be guilty of; with you, will pardon,
Sir,

Your Obliged, and Humble Servant, Alexander Oldis.

THE London Iilt: OR, THE Female Cuckold.
SIR Beetlehead Gripely lived in a great, ugly, old-fashioned House, somewhere
in the City; in a Place almost as Obscure as That of his Birth, and as dark as
his Deeds; and was a Money Scrivener, which (as I am told) is a devilish good
Occupation. In this he got, within the Space of Seven Years, an Estate of near
12000 l. and purchased him a Wife of his own Household, worth twice as much for
her incomparable Qualities, had she been exposed to Sale at a more convenient
Market. Her Unmarried Names (I will not say her Maiden Names, though she was his
Chambermaid) were Winny Wagtail, of the Great and Notorious Family of the
Wagtails in Castle-street, near Long Acre, not far from the Square, where, at
present, I have an Apartment: But, upon her Marriage to Sir Beetlehead, she was
Dignified and Distinguished by the Name and Quality of The Lady Gripely; by
whom the Knight had Issue only Philandra; a Lady of most Prodigious and Various
Qualifications.

When she was about Eight Years old she went twice a Week, besides Sundays, to
hear either the Painful Mr. B..... Mr. D...... or Mr. F..... where she would
Sigh and Weep as heartily, as if she were already in Love and Despair; and
would sing Psalms till she was even Black in the Face again for want of Breath.
-- (Is not that better than to say she sung like a Nightingale? for I never
heard a Nightingale sing Psalms.) These Acquisitions (doubtless) she had from
her Observation of the Pious Lady her Mother, who (possibly) had been one of
the Sweet Singers of Israel. At least, we cannot doubt that she was always one
of the Family of Love. At Twelve Years of Age, the Beautiful and Zealous
Philandra could tell who was the Fairest, who the Strongest, and who the Wisest
Man, which I hope she has not yet forgot; since they were all for her Turn,
especially the last; for he had most Love, most Money, and most Honor. At
Thirteen she could say all Perkin's Catechism by Rote, both Questions and
Answers; and could give as good an Account of all the Sermons she heard, as any
of those that preached 'em. Besides, she had a most Rapacious Apprehension, and
Tenacious Memory of all the newest Jests and Songs about Town and Court; could
quote you any part of the Academy of Complements, as readily as her Teachers
did the Scripture, and apply it more properly, and with less Abuse. At Fourteen
she was sent to the Boarding-School at Hackney, not without the Tutelage of an
Old Aunt by her Father's side, who died in less than a Twelve Month's Time of a
Surfeit of those Vanities she daily saw there. After which, the Niece improved
to a Miracle in all the Arts of Gallantry: Though, to give her her due, she was
at First a very good Proficient in either of 'em; but now, all on a sudden,
she became most perfect in all, in each, and singular of 'em. When she sung,
the Angels would stand listening to her with their Fingers in their Mouths:
What then do you think poor Men would do? Why (Faith) nothing but hold their
peace, that they might the better hear her; and silently wish, that they had
the spoiling of so good a Voice. When she Danced, the Sparks have sworn that
she was Begotten by Mercury: And I am apt to believe it; for, Men say her
Father was a Thief by his Vocation, -- But their Reason was, because she moved,
as if she had Wings at her Feet. When she Writ a Billette doux, she did it with
more Elegancy and Tenderness than Madam Scaron [or Maintenon.] When she
Dictated to Madam Montespan, the Letters she writ to Louis Le Grand. In short,
she had an abundance of Grace in all her Words and Actions, but the Devil a bit
in all her Thoughts. Yet this I am obliged to say for her, that,
notwithstanding all these Egregious Acquisitions, and Extraordinary
Imbellishments, she was not Spiritually Proud, though the World may believe, by
the Sequel, that she was Carnally Proud; witness the several Intrigues she had
at the Chaste Boarding-School, before she came to Converse in this Lewd Town
and Court: Not that she ever finished one, till about the Eighteenth Year of
her Tyranny. As to her Person, she was really very Beautiful, being extremely
like our late Famous Duchess now in France, as nearly resembling her as the
Knight of Tunbridge, or my self, resemble the Figure of the late Incomparable
Scaron; and she was as Cunning as the other for the Heart of her.

While she was under Education, among the rest, Sir Blunder Slouch was her
daily Votary. A Spark every way accomplished to bear the Marks of his Wife's
Kindness to another Man; of a most easy and credulous Nature to the fair Sex;
a tall, heavy, cold, phlegmatic Booby; a great Coward, and very Rich; by
Profession a Norwich Factor; a great Favorite of Sir Beetlehead's, so like him
in his Intellects, Religion and Morals, that Gripely was resolved, since he was
not his own lawfully begotten Son, he should be his Son by Marriage; which
(doubtless) he had brought to Perfection, had the Old Man lived but a Quarter
of a Year longer.

Besides this Slouch you may be pleased to observe, that in the long and
tedious Catalogue of her Adorers, there was found, as Ringleader of all those
her well-affected Subjects and Slaves, the Lord Bellamant, a Beau of the First
Rate, a young, beautiful Spark, of true Courage and Gallantry, and of near 5000
l. a Year Estate; of Wit and Humor enough to accomplish any thing he
undertook. He and his Sister were Twins, wherefore (as I am told) they were
born much about the same time. At most (as I am credibly informed by the
Learned in such Cases) there could not be a Quarter of a Year's Difference in
their Age: And they were so passing alike, that one of his Legs was not more
like the other, than she was to him, though his Legs were both equally
proportionable and handsome. Their Stature was equal, their Complexion the
same, being exceeding Fair; the Tone of their Voices alike soft and charming;
each had a Mole on the Right Cheek, but his was not so obvious to Sight,
because of his Perruke, and therefore rarely taken notice of. Their Thoughts
and Passions proceeded as from one Soul; only Nature and different Education,
according to their Sexes, had given Arabella (for that was her Name if you will
believe me; or, if you don't, I cannot tell how you will be better satisfied) a
greater share of Modesty and strictness of Virtue than her Brother.

On this Extraordinary Man Philandra thought she had bestowed her deceitful
Heart: Nay and, I dare say, at sometimes she did most passionately and entirely
love him. Letters past daily between 'em, while she was under her yet innocent
Exercises. But -- as the Devil would have it, (who owed her a spite, though I
cannot tell for what; for, I Will be sworn, she never disobliged him wittingly in
all her Life) one Day, as she was Dancing, she dropped a Letter which she had
written in Answer to one of the Lord Bellamant's; and who should take it up but
that damned, eternal Coxcomb, Sir Blunder, who was most plaguily Assiduous in
his Visits to her, especially on Dancing Days. The Booby (it seems) could Read;
and finding it Inscrb'd To the Lord Bellamant, whom he had seen there Twice or
Thrice, began to be troubled with a swelling at his Nose, having some
reasonable Jealousy, that Bellamant dressed and talked somewhat finer than he;
though he could not allow him to be half so proper a Fellow -- The witty Dog
concealing his Resentments, clapped the Letter into his Pocket, as rightly
imagining she would never look for it there: Nor truly did she miss it, till he
had the Opportunity of Reading it as he was going for London in his Hackney
Coach; when, releasing it from the fulsome Company of his Bills and Bonds, he
found under Hand and Seal these Words following: MY LORD,
IF your Lordship could assure me, that what you have said and written to me,
were not a piece of Gallantry natural to you, and in Course to all young
Creatures of our easy Sex, I should certainly have Reason to think my self the
happiest Creature breathing in your Lordship's Esteem; however, be your Address
real or feigned, it appears so Advantageously for you, that I cannot choose but
wish, that you did sincerely Love

PHILANDRA.




Uds Fives and Nines! (cried Slouch aloud) here is fine work! Are you taken with
your fine Show! A poor, young Fellow, hardly Nineteen, with never a hair upon
his Chin; and because (forsooth) he can Dance! Soft and Fair! This Pace will
never carry it. -- Yet how shall I prevent it? -- Oh! -- I think I Have found it
out. -- He Is a Rank Papish, and Sir Beetlehead hates a Papish as bad as I do;
which I do as utterly as Plain-dealing and Poverty. But if she Loves him, what
then? -- Why let 'em Marry in the Devil's Name, so I can but get her Father to
disinherit her; (which I should not despair of in the least were it not for her
Mother; who is as Wanton, and altogether Vain, as she. In this perplexity he
got at last to Gripely's old Enchanted Castle, where a great many Widows and
Orphans lay Bound in Vellum and Paper so fast, that it is not expected they
should ever get loose till Doom's-day, when, it is thought, they may Hamper Him:
But the old Fellow thinks it is a great while hence, and means to make all the
present use of his Money that he can. Just at the Hall Door the Two Villains
encountered; Slouch accosted the old One with a Face full of Concern, contrary
to what he was wont coming from Philandra, insomuch that Sir Beetlehead himself
took notice of it: What Is the Matter Sir Blunder? (said he) How does my
Daughter? Not so well as she should, (replied the other) or as you would have
her, I fear. How! how! (cried the Father) what mean you, Sir Blunder? Explain
your self, ('pray) for I am in the Dark. (Which, no doubt, he was in any part
of that cursed Fabric, without the help of Artificial Lights.) This Paper your
Daughter dropped (said Sir Blunder) and I took it up unknown to her; out of
which if you can pick any thing to your Satisfaction, I pray do. Sir. The old
Man, taking the Letter, was forced to go into the Back-Parlour, that looked
into a Neighbor's Garden; where, by the help of Four Eyes, he made a shift to
read it aloud in his Lady's hearing. At the end of it he raved out, Uds
precious, my Lady! These are wicked Times indeed, when our Children are
plotting the Ruin of their Parents, and contriving the Infirmity of their
Families. The Infamy, you mean, (interrupted she.) But where is the hurt of
this? For I understand the Business. What if the Lord Bellamant have a Passion
for her, and she for him? Where Is the danger of it? He is a Person of Honor,
he has a good Estate, and is a rising Man at Court. For my part, I could wish
'twere a Match. How, Madam, (cried Slouch rudely) Why he is a Papish! Ay, he is a
Papish, my Lady! (echoed the old dry Trunk) What of that? (said the young Lady
of about Forty) Is not King James our Sovereign a Papist? No, no, my Lady
(replied Threescore and Twelve) he is a Roman Catholic. That Is the same Thing
(said she.) You Will pardon me, my Lady (returned Gripely) for every Subject who
is that way given, though he were a Duke, is a Papish; and the King and Queen
only are Roman Catholics. Well but (interrupted she) what danger do you
apprehend from your Daughter's Marrying to this Papist-Lord? What danger?
(cried the old Knight, straining his Voice; which threw him into a violent Fit
of Coughing, that forced out one of his Nine Teeth.) Uds precious, my Lady!
why; Fire, and Faggot, and Gunpowder, and Squibs, and Crackers, and Serpents,
and Devils, and Papists, would continually be Buzzing and Sputtering about our
Ears; and not a Corner of our House would be free from a Dark Lanthorn. No, no,
I Will have no Papish Son-in-Law I can assure you, my Lady. Therefore Reins our
Butler, Porter, Groom and Coachman shall make ready the Coach, and I Will fetch
her Home to Night before to Morrow. Indeed, Madam (said Slouch) it is the only
way to prevent the Ruin both of her Soul and Body. Why of her Body? (asked the
Lady-Mother) good Sir Blunder! may not a Papish Lord Do as well as a
Presbyterian Knight? But -- no matter -- if my Lovy Sir Beetlehead is resolve t
have her home, I hope I may bear him Company to fetch her. With all his own
poor Heart, (replied Gripely, chucking her under the Chin.) Thou art my dear
Bird, and my most Kind and Dutiful Lady-Wife. Sir Blunder (said the Lady) I
suppose you may spare your self the Trouble of a second Visit to my Daughter
this Day. She will have time enough to thank you for your Care at her Return.
Slouch was not altogether such a Booby, but he perceived it was a kind of
Reprimand by the manner of her Address to him: Wherefore he only made a silent
slovenly bow. And they proceeded in their short, but tedious Journey. You may
believe 'twas tedious to the Lady-Mother, because Reins was obliged to drive
very slowly and gently, for fear of breaking, or at least disjointing, his Aged
Master's Bones.

No sooner had Sir Blunder had his Audience of Conge at the Boarding-School,
than Philandra was accosted with the most profound Respects of a strange
Gentleman, who fell passionately in Love with her there that very Afternoon;
who, though he was not Dignified with any Title of Honor, or Quality, above
that of a Gentleman, yet was eminently distinguished from most of his Degree,
by an Estate of near 6000 l. a Year; and add to this the Advantages of his
Person, Mind, and Education; which were all very extraordinary; and you will
conclude he must certainly succeed in any Amorous Attempt. You must be
acquainted with him by the Name of Worthygrace; which Name his Family had born
time out of mind. -- (Faith) I cannot particularly tell you how long, but you
may assure your self 'twas ever since they were so called. He had inquired (it
seems) of her Birth and Fortune: The last of which (possibly) he liked as well
almost as her Person. Their Circumstances was most agreeable in every point,
but one; and that was in Age: For he was near Thirty, and she not Seventeen.
Madam (said he, approaching her with Mr. Stepwell her Dancing Master, who had
the Honor of his Acquaintance) I come to make my most humble Acknowledment to
you, of the greatest Obligation that you could possibly place on a Person,
which is yet so perfectly miserable as to be altogether unknown to you. Sir,
(replied the Fair False One) your Discourse is absolutely as strange to me, as
your Person; yet, though they are both surprising, I will not call 'em
troublesome; nor shall I be yet Curious to know what the Obligation is you talk
of: Yes, Madam, (Interrupted he) it is but necessary you should be sensible,
that you are the sole occasion of my making the best use of all my Travels;
since, for your sake alone, I return most passionately in Love with my own
Country. I see, Sir, ( returned Philandra) you take the liberty of a Traveller;
and I hope, I shall not hazard my Salvation in not believing you. If you would
make more use of your Reason, Madam, (rejoined he) and less of your Modesty, I
am confident you would be of my Faith: However, if you will not, I shall
endeavor by all the most constant and Religious Respects of your most Faithful
Adorers, to let you see, that I must Dye in this Truth, without a possibility
of being convinced in my Persuasion of it. I am sorry, Sir, (replied she) that
you are so obstinately resolved to Dye in a Heresy, though it should be really
at present, your unhappy Opinion. A great deal more of such stuff passed
between 'em; but I hope, I am not obliged to remember it all: At the end of
which, or (unhappily) before, the Old Gray Puss, or Governess of the House,
called her aside; for she watched her as narrowly, as a Cat does a Mouse. At
this unexpected interruption, our good Friend Worthygrace had like to have lost
himself and all Patience, and was about to have made some Outlandish Prayers
for her; that sound as loud as our English Curses, and might have signified as
well no doubt, but he paid her with thinking. Yet, to speak truly of him, he
was not so revengeful as Amorous: So that, he thought it more necessary to
apply himself to Stepwell for a second interview, than to an Apothecary for
Arsenick for the Old Cat.

He had not been a Traveller for above Ten years together, without having
Learned what was the best Speech, wherefore he Addressed to the Maitre de
Dance, in the most Elegant Dialect of an Hundred Guineas, which did his
Business to some Tune, as far as it lay in Monsieur Coupe's Talent. Let us
leave 'em then, hatching their Egg for this young Cockatrice; who was now
retired into her Chamber, where she began to search for her Letter to the Lord
Bellamant, in order (perhaps) to Examine and Correct it. -- But (Ah,
unparrallell'd Misfortune!) she might as soon have found the Epistle to the
Romans in her Bosom; which I dare say, never came nearer her Dainty, White,
Smooth, Downy, (what shall I say!) Skin, than her Pocket or Glove, unless it
were at her fingers ends. -- She caused her Attendant to undo her Gown, unlace
her Stays, and she her self peeping down her Shift, exposed such Beauties to
the God of Day, as had he then been as young as when he pursued Daphne, he had
certainly left her for the Fairer Prize Philandra; nor (I fancy) would she have
been half so skittish. -- What do you call this now? A Flight? -- It Is a fine
thing to have Read! -- A Flight let it be then, because one ran away. -- But
all this Beauty and all these Charms, could not charm back her Letter to her.
No, I cannot tell, whether Gadbury, Partridge, or Coley, could have Conjured it
from Old Gripely; for he was surely a greater Devil than any they deal with;
supposing, they piss in a Quill with Satan himself: And now were the Stars
called to account for their inadvertency, in a matter so nearly concerning her;
but whether they heard or not, I will not positively say; though it is my
opinion, that her Sister Venus sent it to her again, by the hand of Saturn; yet
contrary to my expectation or desire; for just as he was in the height of
Despair and Rage, Enters Old Gripely, and her own Dear Lady Mother: Daughter
(cried the Old Testy Knight) (I cannot say Gentleman) look you, here is a Letter
for you, it is worth your notice, but you must stay to Read it till you come
home. -- In the mean time (pursued he, turning to her Servant) Maiden, pack up
your young Lady's Trumpery and your own; that we may take 'em along with us in
the Coach. Upon sight of the Superscription, Philandra soon guessed how it
dropped from her Bosom into her Father's hands. O base, Unbred, boobily Fellow,
(cried she to her self aside) to betray this unfortunate Paper to more unlucky
hands. Nay, rather (Interrupted her Mother who overheard her, and spoke softly)
most unmindful and regardless Creature, so to Dispose of what might for ever
Oblige or Ruin thee: But no more, restrain your Passion: I Will see to compose
all this to your Satisfaction. Come ( cried Old Gripely) we'll take a fair
leave of your Mistress, and you may bid farewell to your School-fellows; by that
time Mariana will have got all things ready. Just at these words, in came the
Old Beldame, with her shaking Head, and her Heart trembling, for the loss of so
good a Scholar; which she learned from Reins, was to be the ungrateful
Consequence of this unseasonable Visit; and while the Parents were making their
Apology, for so unexpectedly taking home their Daughter; Philandra made sh^ft
unperceived, to convey a little Cabinet Crammed with Epistles of her Lovers, to
a young Lady sometimes her Bedfellow and Confident, whom she instructed, how
and when to dispose of it; returning time enough to receive her Governesse's
Sage Advice and Prayers; to whom she returned thanks in Gales of Sighs, and
Floods of Tears; to think, she must now lose those dear opportunities of
Hearing and Relating with several of those pretty young Creatures her
School-fellows, how often, how near, each of 'em were only like to have been
undone, through some malicious disappointment of their Cruel Stars, which had
more care of their Happiness than they themselves; besides a thousand other
such advantages, which now she feared she must forego.

But to be short, -- home they got about Nine at Night; where her Father gave
her a round rally, which she took so much to Heart, as she went to Bed, and
resolved not to see the Sun, as long -- as -- she stayed within doors. (which
Resolution she could not avoid keeping, unless she got to the top of the House
in a fair day; and then you will say (perhaps) she was not within doors.) But she
really kept her Bed for three or four days, and affected a deep Melancholy,
which was at length attended by an ugly Distemper, called the Itch of Gadding
Abroad. In the Cure of this, her Pious Lady Mother was very instrumental; for
after having caused her to be let Blood, (which then was not very unseasonable,
the Summer being very moderate) and after one Dose of Pills, with some Good,
Costly, and Comfortable Cordials, she easily prevailed with Mr. Physmacary,
(who was both Doctor and Pothecary in Ordinary to that Blessed Family) to agree
agree with her, that it was most expedient her Daughter should take a little
fresh Air. This was easily accorded to by Old Gripely, for he knew that ten
miles of the best Air, would not cost him half so much, as two Ounces of the
worst Cordial; and the next day was prefixed for it.

During the Malignancy of her Distemper, which reigned chiefly in her Head,
(where it does in most People of her Youth, Humor and Circumstances) the Lord
Bellamant had been to pay his Devoirs to her at the Boarding School: There he
heard of her sudden removal; which though at first, it startled him, yet on
second thoughts he proposed greater advantages to himself by it. And his last
Design was to get his Twin-Sister Arabella, to Accompany Aurelia, Philandra's
sometimes Bedfellow and Confident, in a Visit to her; which she received the
Afternoon. She was once again, at least, to be blessed with the sight of the Gay
World, and the Scent of the Court Air, intending for St. James's Park. You may
imagine, she was not a little pleased at the sight of her Dear Confident, and
of the Lady Arabella; which last brought the Beauties of the Lord her Brother
so fresh in her Memory, that Philandra had like to have fallen into a fit of
Sickness indeed: To think it was not that Substantia* Figure she would have
seen at her Bedside, or rather have Embraced in her Bed. After the two young
Ladies had condol'd with the Lady Gripley, who was still present, the cruel
Malady of her Daughter; the indulgent Mother, knowing by her own past
Circumstances, that the presence of a Parent might cause some restraint in
their Freedom of Discourse, very Modestly and Kindly withdrew; Philander's
Attendant waiting on her to the door, she not permitting her Daughter the
trouble of that Ceremony: By which means Arabella had the opportunity of
presenting Philandra with a Letter, which her Brother had trusted to her
discreet mannagement, to deliver to Philandra's own fair hands; which, though at
all times they were exceeding fair, yet, now, by this white, -- as -- (Ah!
would my Shirt, ay, or my Crevat, were as white!) the falling Snow, for she had
used a peculiar Ointment, and lay in Dog-skin-Gloves, with her Arms extended
over her Head all this while, unless when any Visitors came. -- (I believe, I
can procure you a Receipt of the Ointments to oblige you, Ladies; for I know
Mr. Physmacary very well) But now she pulled off one of her Gloves to receive
the Billett doux; which yet she could not Read, because of the sudden return
of her Attendant: Wherefore she concealed it in her Bed, till a more convenient
time. However she sent as proper an answer to it, as if she had perused it a
hundred times over: Telling the Ladys, that she was advised to breath a little
fresh Air; and, that on the Morrow her Lady Mother and she designed for St.
James's Park; where she should be happy to meet such excellent Company as their
Ladyships about four in the Afternoon. The Lady Arabella soon took the hint;
and promised she would endeavor to divert her by the best means in her
Capacity: (Which, she knew, was by bringing her Brother,) And immediately upon
this, she and Aurelia Kissed her fair Cheek; and so Commending her to Heaven's
Care, quitted the Room; why Fair Cheek now you will say (perhaps!) Why: let it be
soft, Rosy, or Fair, I care not which, it is not a pin matter, but one of 'em it
must be, in my Opinion. -- No sooner was Mariana, her Attendant, gone to wait
on the Ladys down Stairs, but Philandra Ravished the Letter from between the
Sheets; and, after having thrice Kissed it, she saw on the outside these words,
To the Charming Philandra: In the inside she found he expressed himself thus,

YOU cannot think (Madam) nor I express what dreadful Apprehensions I had at
first, of your hasty, and, I fear unvoluntary Retreat from Hackney; which had
like to have terminated in an utter Despair of ever seeing you more. And had
not Love inspired me, beyond my own Dull Capacity, to engage my self to deliver
my Soul with this into your Dear Hands, I had certainly left all the Pleasures
of this World, and, which is most valuable in it, your self, for a Monastic
Life Which though it may suit with Religion; (I fancy) will hardly ever agree
with my Complexion. If then (Madam) you will preserve me from being Buried
Alive; let me, I beseech you, know by her, where and when I may see and adore
that Divinity which alone gives Life and Relish to all the joys of (Madam)

Yours Eternally, BELLAMANT.


After she had again Kissed it thrice; she fastened it, by an Engine very much
in use among Ladys, to the Veil of Love's Temple; In plain English, to her
shift: Thinking she had now secured that from all possibility of an escape from
her: And, that she had it as fast, as she held the Heart of him that sent it.
Soon after she had thus placed the Copy of my Lord's Heart on her left side,
next her own; her Lady-Mother ushered in Sir Blunder, who of all Men, except
her Father, had the privilege to visit her in her Bedchamber; and whom,
except her Father, she hated above all Men. (For to say truth, Slouch was not
so Old, by near forty years) At the sight of him she began to look as Pale as
the Moon; when, just before, she was as Ruddy and Glorious as the Sun. Madam
Philandra (said he) I come to condole the tedious Fit of Sickness you have had:
And (truly) had it not been for troubling you; I would have visited you oftener
and sooner. It Is now too soon, (returned she) unless you design to complete by
your presence, what you had but begun by your Curiosity: I mean, my Death. I
complete your Death (interrupted he) I profess, I never thought of such a
thing, days of my Breath. No matter (returned she, mocking him) I profess,
there is never another Letter for you. -- (How if she should mistake now?) why,
Madam Philandra (replied he) I thought no more harm when I gave Sir Beetlehead
your Letter; than an Apple's like an Oyster. At this Simile she could hardly
forbear laughing aloud: while he went on much to the same tune. In good truth,
I delivered it to him because you were not at home; that he might send it to
you again, or to my Lord Bellamant: For, upon my Truly now, Madam Philandra, I
am as ready to serve you, as an Arrow out of a Bow. And whom could I better
entrust with your Secrets than your own dear Father? One would think you were
in the right on it, in trusting my own Dear Father with a jeasting piece of
Gallantry of mine that I would not have had him see: But I must needs own,
'twas an excellent contrivance, and much like your own Dear Worshipful self, to
carry my Letter from me, that it might be sent to me. Say, was not this for
Expeditions sake? In good Faith (answered the Booby) I thought to have given it
you again, as soon as I had read it; but forgot it. -- In good Faith I did. --
(Now Pox upon him, for an unhappy silly Dog. For he makes my Heart ache. Since
just so used the Reverend Old Gentleman at Westminster to say to me: -- In good
Faith (Child) I must whip thee.) But with a scornful smile (she returned) in
good Faith Sir, I thank you, that after you had exposed to all the Sense you
had, what I would have concealed to you and almost all Mankind beside; you
would have vouchsafed to have returned it me, had you not forgotten it. O,
Admirable piece of Civility and Breeding! So Generous an Act, sure was never
committed by any Villain that takes your Purse, sure! What! My Lady (said he)
does Madam Philandra call me Villain! -- I am afraid, she is not in her right
Maidenly Wits. Indeed I fear so too (replied the Mother) she has been delirious
all along since she kept her Bed: These kind of Distempers make 'em all so.
Wherefore I would advise and entreat you to leave me alone with her: Happily, I
may help her to compose her strangling thoughts. Your Servant, my Lady:
Goodnight, sweet Madam Philandra (said he) and made a Leg, going out. So; --
Heaven be praised! my worst Distempers gone: (cried the young Lady) not Poverty
with all it is worst Attendants is half so bad, as to be yoked to thee.

Can you, my Honored Mother, suffer it?

When e're you see me Bedded with this Slave.

Say, He Is my Monument, the Bed my Grave.

Here our Sappho let loose whole floods of Briny-Salt tears, as Round and Clear
as so many Pearls: But (Pardon me, Ladies!) not altogether so Precious, in my
poor judgment. At the sight of this inundation, which were enough to set any
Young Man's Heart a Fire, (and that is strange you will say) the Lady-Mother
dropped an April-shower; which was not of long Continuance: And, after they
both had wept, they both smiled: The Pious indulgent Mother assuring the
Angel-like Daughter, (I mean, for Beauty) that she would never suffer it; nor
could ever live to see it. Philandra proceeded then to make an ingenuous
Confession of the Passion she had for the Lord Bellamant; begging her pardon,
that she had hitherto kept her a stranger to it. Who told her, in that only she
was to blame, for (said she) I like his Person and Estate very well. But above
all his Title: For, if you Marry Him; you will be a better Woman than my Lady
May'ress: And you shall take place of her any where on English Ground; unless
in the City, I fear. -- The Bellamants (continued she) are as Ancient and Great
a Family as any in the four Kingdoms; when I was about your Age, I was
Intimately acquainted with above a score of 'em: And, I remember, they were all
fine Gentlemen: Some, very Proper, Handsome, Lusty Men: Others, Midlesiz'd and
Brisk Men: Some again little Pretty Spritely Creatures: All of 'em, Brave
Generous, Active, and High-mettll'd Men. -- Ay; ay (added she) I am clearly for
a Bellamant, and I warrant thee (my Dear) we'll carry the day: Therefore
satisfy thy self, and take a hearty repose: This Kiss and a good Night to
thee: A thousand good-nights to my Dear and Honored Mother, (said Philandra,
as her Mother left her.) All this while that Treacherous Jade Mariana had
overheard their Discourse; which she was to repeat to Slouch, having been
retained by him with five Guinea's and several Nights Lodgings; which, at long
run, cost him a heavier Sum. A little time after her Mother was gone,
Philandra fell asleep Hand over Head; never Dreaming that her Attendant had
such true Ears, and so false a Heart: But 'twas no wonder; for, Sir Blunder had
had the managment of her for above a Month before he preferred her to
Philandra; whom she had not served longer than four Months.

About twelve a Clock the next day the Lady Gripely thought it convenient her
Daughter should rise: Allowing two hours for Dressing, an hour for Dining, and
about as much for their journey for the Park: So, Philandra called for fresh
Linen, and up she got. Her thoughts were so wholly intent on the Adventure she
was like to have that Afternoon, that she quite forgot the Letter which she had
fastened to her Shift, and after Dinner took Coach without it. For, this Damned
Maid Woman (Whore I was going to say) taking the Shift, to lay it aside;
pricked her Finger with the Pin that held it there: Which when she had taken
out, the Letter fell on the Ground before her. She immediately took it up, and
gave it to Slouch, who came presently after he had Dined to Sir Beetlehead's,
as was his Custom: And withal made him a repetition of what she had overheard
in Discourse between the Mother and Daughter; soon afterward she was called to
wait on her Lady to the Park. There were only those four who went in that
Coach; the Lady Gripely, Philandra and Mariana, (I warrant you think that I
cannot count four as I should do) but you may be pleased to take notice, that
Mariana was with Child of a Slouch; and more than half gone. Well; to the Park
they got, just as the Guards were relieved; and, in some few Minutes after, Sir
Blunder arrived there, in his own Hackney Coach; (for he was too miserable to
keep one: Though he was as Proud as any Beggarly upstart-Citizen in Christendom)
when he was got through the Horse-Guards, (which (no doubt) he cursed in his
Heart, because they were King James's, and the Lord Dover's Troop too that were
then upon Duty.) He took the Walk on the Left Hand by the Bird-Cage; which (as
it happened) was the right way to meet the Ladys; who were gotten by this time
about the middle of the Mall, just over against St. James's House, when they
met the Lord Bellamant and the Lady his Sister, Attended only by her Women and
two Footmen. After the first Salutation, Bellamant addressed himself to the
Mother. Telling he that that Part of the World did bretter suit with Ladys of
so Great Beauty and Gallantry than the Dull, Precise, and unmannerly City,
which they only made happy and valuable by their Residence in it, more than
it is Wealth and Traffic in the World. To which the Lady Gripely replied, that
it was therefore the most advantageous place for them to live in, since there,
their want of Breeding and Humor was the less observable. I never thought,
Madam (returned the Lord Bellamant) that I could have been so unhappy as not to
subscribe to every particular Opinion of your Ladyship's, till this unlucky
Moment: But, Madam (continued he, applying himself to Philandra) I am yet more
unfortunately mistaken, if you don't think this Air more agreeable to the
Sweetness of your Complexions, than the Smoaky Climat of that, still
unsatisfied, and unhallowed, though pretended, Sanctified Place. And I fear,
Madam (added he) that your apprehensions of such a retreat from the Gay World,
threw you into a Melancholy, which might have been no less fatal to me, and
all the admiring World, than to your Ladyship; had not Heaven preserved the
nearest Copy of it self in you, to be adored by all Mankind -- My Lord (said
Philandra) I did really Arm my self against all Modesty, e're I came abroad,
expecting, indeed, to receive such Volleys of your Wit and Gallantry. -- She
had gone on still; had not Stopwell, approaching 'em with Mr. Worthygrace, and
his Equipage, prevented her. -- My most Honored Lady! (cried he out aloud) and
my Divine Mistress Philandra! How happy am I to see your Ladyship so well
recovered in your Health and Beauty, as to adorn this Walk with what it so long
has wanted in your absence? -- Madam (interrupted Worthygrace) Mr. Stopwell
wrongs the Court-Ladies; some of which are really Great Beauties, who
frequently do bless this Park. But, pardon me, Madam I beseech you, if I think
you have done 'em the greater injury; in appearing h^^e so much to their
disadvantage, -- 'Sdeath! -- what Spark's this? (cries Bellamant to himself;
with a jealous frown and an angry blush) but straight recalling himself (said
he to Worthygrace aloud) Sir, the Lady is out o'danger of being Flattered; and
you may go on at the same rate, if you please. But (interrupted Philandra) you
may assure your self (my Lord) it will not altogether please me: And I could
wish, the Gentleman would spare himself the trouble of a second thought. At
this they both bowed very humbly, and were silent: And (then said the Lady
Gripely taking up the Discourse) but, in the name of Wonder, (Mr. Stopwell) how
came you to find us here? Madam (replied the Coupe. Merchant) heaving that my
Divine Mistress was taken Sick upon her return to Town, I thought it my
indispensible Duty to pay my Respects to her, in enquiring of her Health, if I
might not have been permitted the Honor and Happiness of seeing her; and this
Afternoon I had the good Fortune to learn from Sir Beetlehead, then at home,
that your Ladyships were gone toward the Park; whereupon, as I was going to
call a Coach, this worthy Gentleman, my Honored Friend prevented me, by taking
me into his own Coach; he designing for a Walk in this place. While they were
thus discoursing Worthygrace happened to fix his Eye on the Lady Arabella;
where (perhaps) he discovered as much Beauty and Goodness as ever was confined
to one Person And (no doubt) he had thought so had he not been prepossessed
with a Passion for Philandra; however, at the same time, he could not but be
somewhat touched with Arabella; and was not a little surpised to see two
Persons so exactly alike as the Lady Bellamant and Arabella. Mean while, on
the other side Bellamant taking Philandra's hand, and walking some few paces from
the Company; asked her if she knew that Gentleman, she answered, that this was
the second time she had ever seen him; giving him an account withal of what had
passed between 'em at their first sight, the day before she came to Town.
Indeed (Madam, said my Lord) he makes a very Graceful Figure, and speaks well;
-- Pray Heaven and you, Madam, it prove not to my disadvantage: No; no (my
Lord, said Philandra) your Lordship does not conquer by halves. -- I fear I
have said too much (added she with a blush) but make the best and kindest use
on it you can for both our Interests. Ah Madam (replied he, in a transport) you
have almost taken away from me the power to thank you for this mighty Blessing,
and to assure you, that I can have no Interest but what must Center in yours.
-- But I don't like this same Dancing Master; I fancy he helps to play the Game
against me. No matter my Lord (said she) since I deal, you are safe. -- But,
come let us join Company; for the Lady your Sister is at a loss for us. Alas,
my Memory! (cried Bellamant) I had forgot till now to tell you, (Madam) that
she came with me hither particularly to Kiss your hands, e're she goes to a
Relation of ours who is a Lady Abbess in France; with whom she designs to stay
near a Twelvemonth; beginning her journey about three days hence: By this time
they were come up with the rest of the Company, when Philandra told Arabella,
that she was sorry to hear she must all on a sudden lose the happiness of her
Charming Conversation, which she had as well promised to her self, as wished to
enjoy all the days of her life. Madam (replied Arabella) I have had so great a
desire of seeing some part of France these many Years; that I could no longer
defer giving my self that satisfaction: Especially, since my Lady Abbess is now
so pressing in her Invitation: And, unless your Ladyship will lay your absolute
Commands on me to the contrary; I must leave England within these few days: Ah
Madam! (returned Philandra) I can pretend to no such influence in your
Ladyships Actions: Besides, if I might, with Reason, you may assure your self,
that, I would rather wholly disquiet my self, than give the least least
interruption to your Ladyships pleasure. That were too great a Condescension in
you, Madam, to me; (replied Arabella;) since you may be confident, that you
have an Arbitrary and Dispensing power in every thing relating to my Brother.
During this Discourse between 'em, Worthygrace was examining the difference of
their Beauties; and found much more of Modesty and Sweetness in Arabella's
Face, than Air and Gayety, which did chiefly reside in Philandra's; who yet had
a Languishing cast with her Eye at some times; when she designed an Absolute
Conquest; which did not a little denote her cunning: And 'twas this had
vanquished him more than the noise of her thirty thousand pounds Portion: For
he was truly Generous, and loved for loves sake; and, that most passionately.
-- But now, removing his Eyes from their beloved object, and turning 'em on
the other side; he found the Lord Bellamant surveying him from Head to Foot:
Which made Worthygrace as nicely examine him. At last, after a short encountre
of their Eyes: -- Well, Sir (said my Lord) what have you observed about me to
my Advantage? I fear, nothing at all, (continued he) but what makes wholly for
yours. So much on the contrary; (replied he) that I assure your Lordship, I
would not have you for a Rival of all Mankind: And I could wish, with your
Lordships Pardon, that you were not only like that Beautiful Lady (added he,
bowing toward Arabella) in outward Figure alone, but even in her very Sex. I
must avow to you, my Lord, 'twou'd give me a great deal of ease. Methinks, Sir
(said Bellamant) you look on me already as one that is a Disturber of your
joys. If I do, my Lord, (returned Worthygrace) you are too secure in your own
Merits to fear any attempt from me. As they were thus entertaining one another,
Sir Blunder passed 'em on one side of the Mall, close to the Walk that leads to
St. James's House, observing them most narrowly; but unobserved of them. It
seems, he was near enough to take notice that Bellamant led Philandra, and
whispered very frequently with her: That Stepwell ushered the Lady Gripely; and
Worthygrace, as yet a stranger to him, was fain to take up with the Finest
Creature there: I mean, Arabella. What Bellamant and Philandra whispered seemed
to Slouch at that distance, to be some Assignation, or some Damned
Love-Intrigue, or other, not at all in favor of him. An hundred times did he
wish that he had been in my Lord's Heart; or (...) least, that he had had his
Ears: he durst not venture to go near enough for either of 'em, for fear of a
Reprimand from Bellamant, who by this time was acquainted with the whole story
of his Villainy: At last, all on a sudden, clapping her hand on her left side,
Philandra missed the Letter she received from my Lord the day before. This made
her stand as fixed as the Statue at the end of the Canal: But in a more
defenseless posture. For, she had already received a second blow from Fortune;
and there was no guarding her self against what was past. By her looks on
Bellamant, she appeared strangely mortified at something; which all the Company
took notice of, upon that sudden motion of here is with her hand. Art not well,
my Dear? (cried the Lady Gripely, running hastily to her) yes, Madam (answered
she) pretty well now; I humbly thank your Ladyship. 'Twas only a stitch that
took me on the sudden; and as quickly has left me. Ha! (thought Slouch, all
this while watching every particular motion of the whole Company; especially
Bellamant's, and Philandra's) I can tell your Distemper better than Mr.
Physmacary himself: For I have the occasion of it here in my Pocket, which I
will so improve, that you shall either marry me, or dye of the Pip, and so lead
Apes in Hell. I Am now going to your Father, and consequently every step I make
is toward her Bad. Saying so, he left the Park, and them to follow him, which
they did in less than an hour after, fearing the Air might be too sharp for
Philandra's longer stay there the first time; every one expressing their real
grief for the apprehension they had of the return of her Distemper. At the end
of the Mall they were obliged to part; Philandra and her Mother for the City,
the Lady Arabella with her Attendant and one Footman returned to their Lodgings
in Soho-Square; for my Lord would needs take a Bottle with Worthygrace at the
Blue-Posts in the Hay-Market, where they did very pleasantly with Stepwell,
drinking to Philandra's Health, and discoursing of their Travels; in which,
Worthygrace had much the advantage, having stayed some time in most of the
Princes Courts in Europe. Bellamant having only made the Tour of France, and
some short stay at Rome, and Venice. After which, he spent somewhat more than a
Twelvemonth in the Court of France, and the Campaign. Having drank and talked
their heads pretty empty of further thought, and eaten their bellies full, they
took a very obliging farewell of each other, both extremely satisfied with one
another merit, but not a little dissatisfied that they found they were Rivals;
however, they Conversed, and parted like Persons of Honor, expecting from
Philandra the fatal determination of their happiness, or misery.

In the mean time, as they were making homewards, Philandra, looking very
earnestly on Mariana, asked her if she had not met with a Letter among the
Linen which she had put off that day? To which she replied, That indeed she
took up a Paper that lay on the ground, and because she could not read it, she
gave it to Sir Blunder, who told her that 'twas only a new Song which her
Ladyship had transcribed; and that therefore she took no farther notice of it,
but left it with him. O thou Screcch-Owl, (cried Philandra, all in a flame)
what do I hear? Oh! thou have betrayed me to the greatest of misfortunes,
exposing me to the base practices of that Eternal Booby Slouch. O most
unfortunate accident (cried the Mother) another Letter fallen into his hands!
Madam, (said Mariana, about to justify her self.) Be dumb, be dumb for ever
here on Earth, (interrupted Philandra) or if thou needs must yell, howl out
inevitable Damnation to Despairing Souls! Oh! It were Charity to what thou have
done! what! Sacrificed a second time to that Slave's Interest? 'Twere merciless
I Am sure, in Humanity, to act thus, but Heaven I hope has kinder ends in it.
Ah! Madam, (pursued she) how shall we meet my jealous Father, who is biased in
every thing by that hated Fiend. No doubt (returned the Mother) the Greeting
will be very extraordinary: Fools that we were (pursued she) not to perceive
'till now, that this sly Minks is a mere tool of his! his Creature; foisted
upon us, to serve his hated ends. All this while the plaguey Gypsy sat sobbing
and blubbering, and staining with her Crocodile tears her Handkerchief, which
before was as white as innocence: At last, with much difficulty she sputter'd
out, Madam, if your Ladyship thinks that I have designedly injured you in this,
I humbly beg your Ladyship to dismiss me your Service, for I had rather be
robbed of that Happiness and Honor, than live under your Ladyship's
Displeasure, and Suspicion. Ah! would to Heaven (cried Philandra) you had
proposed this some weeks ago, it might perhaps for ever have established my
Peace and Quiet, which now I fear is utterly ruined. However (continued she)
your Request, though much with the latest, is very grateful to me, and you may be
confident you shall not be long without your wish, if my honored Mother has no
further Commands for you Little did she think that this dismission would be as
welcome to Mariana, as it was obliging to her: But I can assure you, it had
been of equal advantage to all three, had it not been for a slippery Trick that
Fortune played this unluckie Damsel. -- No, no, (returned the Lady Gripely) my
last Command to her is, that she continue in the Resolution of leaving us, and
that by to morrow this time. At these words they found themselves just at their
own door, which the Mother and Daughter entered, but with aching hearts,
fore-boding but a sorrowful reception, which was reserved (it seems by the two
ill-natured Blockheads agreement) to a more convenient time. For Slouch
immediately upon his leaving the Park, came and found Gripeley at home, and
took him to the Coffee-House, where he recounted to him all the Discourse
between the Mother and Daughter, as he had learned it from Mariana; showing
Bellamant's Letter to Philandra; and withal, gave him an account of the
Honorable Company he had seen with them in the Mall. He chose rather to take
him to a Coffee-House, there to distract him with this Relation, than his own
House, fearing the Ladies might return, and surprise him as he was doing 'em
that signal piece of Knight's Service. The Ladies had just time to quit
themselves of that part of their Dress which was unnecessary in the House, when
Old Gripely and Slouch came to 'em; the last of which (as it was contrived
between 'em, over a Cup of the Devil's Communion-Wine) after having paid his
Respects to the Ladies, came up closer to Philandra, and taking the Letter out
of his Pocket, conveyed it into her hand, as it were unperceived of the Old
Gentleman; who began to welcome home his Lady Wife with all the
Sugar-plum-words he used to feed her with at his first Courtship. This was
surprising, and kind; and, I am apt to believe, it was one of their last
Honey-Nights: but for a fortnight after Philandra was under a severer restraint
than ever; During all which time, she could not receive one Billet-Doux from
either my Lord, or Worthygrace, though they both had endeavored to supply her a
hundred times, and a hundred ways, with those Paper-Refections; especially the
Lord Bellamant: Who meeting Stepwell one Day about Noon, desired him to ^ake
one Bottle with him at the Rose in Covent Garden: So to Long's they came,
where, after a Glass or two, Bellamant inquired of Worthygrace's health, and
drank to the continuance of it. Then he proceeded to ask Stepwell when he had
been at Mr. Beetlehead, and how Matters went with Philandra, since they last
saw her in the Park? Of which Stepwell could give him no further account, than
that he understood she was now more strictly confined than ever. My Lord then
taking him by the hand, presented him with Fifty Guineas, and told him withal,
that he must thence forward beg his Friendship; at the same time assuring him
of his, and that he would use his interest at Court, or any where else, to
serve him at any time. To which he very obediently replied, That his Life, and
all his Circumstances, both Present, and Future, were, and should be always at
his Lordship's Devotion, except his Reputation, which he was confident my Lord
would never engage him to hazard. Mr. Stepwell (said the Lord Bellamant) had I
thought that you had not had a true value for that, I should not have asked
your Friendship; and to show you that the favor I would entreat of you is
Just, and Honorable; I only desire you to endeavor to deliver this Letter to
the hands of the Charming Philandra. My Lord (returned he) that I will
endeavor it, I do engage my Reputation to your Lordship, and that within these
two hours, for I am just going to Sir Beetleheads, to propose a Business that
will be of no little advantage to him; but, that I shall succeed to your
Lordships, and my own Wishes, I dare not promise. Your Endeavors are all I
ask, Sir, (replied Bellamant) only this further I could wish, That you would
let me know by to morrow this time what success you have had. Your Lordship
shall find me most punctually and sacredly Obedient in what you have Commanded
me, (said Stepwell.) I cannot doubt it, Sir, (returned my Lord) though I am
sensible that Honorable Friend of yours, has justly a greater interest in you
than my self: However, at the same time, I am assured you will oblige me in
this, if he has not already engaged you to the contrary. Be confident, my Lord,
he has not (replied the other) only I beseech your Lordship to let me know, if I
may entrust this Paper to any Person, who I am certain may and will present it
to my Divine Mistress her self? By all means, use your own discretion in that
(answered my Lord) for I wholly rely on your mannagement in this matter. Thus,
after having again consecrated their Glasses with the Fair and Divine Lady's
Health, and Stepwell being well satisfied with the Fifty Guineas, as Bellamant
was of his Integrity in this Affair; they parted; my Lord to the Court, and
Stepwell to the Den of a Thief -- I don't mean to Ch -- though, for all that; for
he had had no business that way of a long season; but to Gripeley's he went,
whither he got just at Dinnertime. There he desired the Coachman-Butler-Porter
to present his most obedient service to Sir Beetlehead; and withal, to let his
Worship know, that he had some Business of great moment to discourse him about,
wherefore he humbly begged the honor of some few minutes Conversation with him
at his earliest leisure. Reins delivered his Complement in the hearing of
Philandra, who from thence began to conceive some hopes of an Amorous Intrigue
with Worthygrace at least, or with some body or other by his means. The Old
Jealous Knight had like to have forgot himself at first, and said, desire him
to walk in; 'till looking on his Daughter, he cried out aloud in haste, Sirrah,
desire him to walk into the outward Parlour, I will but dispatch a bit or two,
and then I Will come to him. Stepwell had not expected above a quarter of an
hour, but Gripely came, and desired him to speak to the Business. Stepwell then
told him, that an honored Friend of his, who had near Six Thousand Pounds a
year, was in a present necessity of Four Thousand Pounds; which, if he pleased
to furnish him with, the Gentleman his Friend would Mortgage an Estate to
Gripely, which he had in Gloucester-shire, of Five Hundred Pounds a year, for
his Security. Well, Mr. Stepwell (cried the Old hungry Wolf) what is his Name?
His Name I beseech you, and where lies the rest of his Estate? To which,
(the other replied) his Name, Sir, is Worthygrace, of the Ancient Family of the
Worthygraces, Originally of Yorkshire; though the Family has spread it self into
most of the Counties of England, Scotland, and Wales; some of the other parts
of his Estate lay in such, and such, and such Shires and Counties; giving him a
more particular account than at present I am able to make you. Besides, Sir,
(added he) I beseech your Worship to take notice, that he is no Swearer, Whore
Master, Drunkard, nor Gamester. Pish, pish, (said the other) it is not a pin
matter to you, or me, whether he be or no; yet (perhaps) I could wish he were
all these: But since you say he is so fine a Gentleman, I pray you good Mr.
Stepwell how comes he to have such an urgent occasion for this Sum, or be
obliged to a Mortgage? Why, Sir, (replied Stepwell) he is unwilling to expose
his necessity to any of his Acquaintance, because (possibly) he designs to
marry one of their Daughters, wherefore he entreated me to assist him in this
matter, since I have no knowledge of any of his Relations, or Country
Acquaintance, more than your Worship has. Ay, but Mr. Stepwell (interrupted
Gripely) you must give me leave Mr. Stepwell, you must give me leave to be
better acquainted with him, and his Concerns, before I part with such a Sum of
money to him; for it is my custom so to do, it is indeed, Mr. Stepwell -- Though I
suppose (proceeded he) this money is to carry on his Design on the Lady. It is
so, Sir, (answered the other) and he desires by all means, that you would give
your self the satisfaction of enquiring into the Circumstances of his Estate,
but at a distance, and with all possible caution, lest his Reputation should
any way suffer. You may have a sufficient Character of him, and certain
Information of the posture of his Affairs in Yorkshire, Gloucester-shire, and
Hertford shire, from any of the Worthy Gentlemen of those Counties. No, Mr.
Stepwell (said he) I shall not need I believe to give my self any great trouble
in this matter, if this be the Rich Worthygrace of Yorkshire. The very same,
Sir, (said Stepwell.) That Is enough (Replied Gripeley) but tell me, Mr.
Stepwell, is he already engaged to this Lady? Is she a Beauty? Is she a Wit?
Or, what is chiefly to be considered, is she a Fortune? Sir, she is worth some
15 or 16000 l. (Replied he.) That Is but a small Portion for so great an Estate
as this (returned Gripely) and, if he be not already too far Engaged, I believe
I can recommend him to a young handsome Lass, worth at least Thirty Thousand
Pounds. On my word, Sir, (said Stepwell) that would be an extraordinary favor
indeed, and I fancy he has not made his approach so close to her, but he can
make an honorable retreat when he pleases. When may I see him then? (asked the
Old Knight.) To morrow morning, if you please (replied the other) in the mean
time, I will prepare him to receive your kindness with the greater readiness,
for (possibly) he will do something this Night, in order to his disengagement
from the Lady he is now in pursuit of. Do so ( said Old Gripely) and let me see
you both here to morrow at Eleven precisely. I shall, Sir, ( Returned Stepwell)
and took his leave.

When he left Old Dry-bones, he went immediately to Worthygrace, whom he found
at his Lodgings in Bloomsbury-Square, where he repeated every particular of his
Discourse with Gripely, to his honored Friend. Telling him withal, that it
could be no body else but Philandra, whom her Father intended to propose for a
Wife to Worthygrace; who was enclineable enough to believe it; and Rewarded the
Care and Cunning he had shown in the management of his Interest, with a Diamond
Ring from off his finger, worth 40 l. which the other received with as good a
grace as any Coupe-Merchant in Town could do. Sir, (said he) your Present is of
much greater value than the Gold or Stone could make it, forced from embracing
your finger to adorn mine; which shall be no longer part of my hand, than it is
able to serve you. Then Stepwell presented him with the Lord Bellamant's Letter
to Philandra; acquainting him with the promise he had made my Lord, to deliver
it to her own hands, or to some other Person who should assuredly do it; nor
did he conceal the 50 Guineas he received from Bellamant. Worthygrace was a
little surpised at that Letter, and at Stepwell's Relation of their
Rencounter; and, though he had almost a Woman's Curiosity to see what it
contained, yet he had too much honor to gratify that foolish itch of his
humor; and taking the Letter from Stepwell, You shall be as good as your word
to my Lord, (said he) for I will present it to her my self, though never so much
to my disadvantage. I mean, if I have the happiness to see her to morrow. You
will not, I hope (cried Maitre de Dance) be so far far accessory to your own
ruin there, as to attempt it. Pardon me, my Friend, (replied Worthygrace) but
I will. I beseech you then (said Stepwell) read it first, Sir. Not for the
purchase of my happiness in her (returned this Honorable Lover) I could then
never hope it, because I Am sure I should not deserve it. No, (continued he)
inviolate as it is, and teeming with all the most Beautiful and Charming Ideas,
and Expressions of his passion that it may be; she shall receive it from my
hand the very first opportunity I have to offer it to her. Saying so, he wrapped
it up in a clean sheet of Paper, and put it into his Scritore. At which ( cried
Stepwell) Forgive me, Sir, I beseech you, if I think this the oddest method of
making Love for a Man's own self, that I ever yet have heard of. Call it
Knight-Errantry if thou will ( returned Worthygrace) but I have my satisfaction
in it. -- Enough of this -- To morrow by Ten in the morning, I expect you here.
I shall then pay my duty to you, Sir, (said Stepwell) and left him to give
orders for the morrows Expedition; which he took care should be as splendid as
that little time would permit.

At Ten the next morning Stepwell waited on him at his Lodgings, and soon after
they made for Sir Beetlehead's; who, the preceding Night told his Daughter,
that now he hoped he had provided her a Husband whom she could no way except
against: For (said he) I have inquired of him of several Worthy Gentlemen, and
Eminent Citizens, who all give me a most extraordinary Character of his Person,
and Humor; and which is above all, of his Estate, being worth near Six
Thousand pounds per Annum. And now (my dear Girl) I prithee do not stand in
thine own light: No force, (Good Sir said she) and I will stretch my
Inclinations as far as may be, to embrace one of your choice, that I may
reccommend my duty to you. Then he ordered her to appear as Gay and Glorious as
she could, to receive him the next morning. Near a quarter before Eleven,
Worthygrace got to Old Gripely's, who entertained him very Courteously, and
Generously; calling for a whole Bottle of Canary, which he himself loved best,
to drink to him. After which, the Devil's Casheer, old Gripely (who only got
and disposed of his money in the Devil's name, and for his use) fell upon the
Business, and proposed his Daughter to Worthygrace, with Thirty Thousand
Pounds, Who told him, that the Overture was, so much above his Merits and
Expectation, that he feared he did but motion such great advantages on purpose
to evade doing him that smaller obligation which he had entreated of him by Mr.
Stepwell. Nor can I have reason, Sir, (said he) to think otherwise, since I am
yet absolutely a stranger to you. I confess, Sir, (returned Gripely) you was a
Stranger to me 'till now; but your Circumstances, I am, and have been before so
well satisfied with, that I shall think both my self, and Daughter most happy,
if you will accept her for your Wife. But it is not fair to oblige you to a
promise of that, before you have seen her; wherefore you shall each of you have
the satisfaction at the same time. We'll wait on you presently (added he) and
went to fetch her. Now, Sir, (said Stepwell) will you take my word another
time? Did not I say 'twas his Daughter, my Divine Mistress Philandra, whom he
would propose to you? Ay, Philandra's the Charm; (cried Worthygrace) his
Daughter, and Thirty Thousands Pounds were otherwise but dull music, but
indifferent sounds to me: Philandra! That Philandra whom I first saw at the
Boarding-School, whom I love! -- No matter whose Daughter, or what Fortune she
is, so she may be my Wife. It Is the very same, Sir, I dare assure you (said
Coupe) Then for my Lord's Letter (said Worthygrace) O! I have it with me, I
find. After some little further Discourse, Gripely led in the self same
Philandra to 'em, accompanied with her Mother. Here, Sir, (said Gripely) Look
you, this is my Daughter, as my Lady-Wife tells me, (and that was well put in)
tell me how you like her, (pray?) Hah! you stand as if you were frighted at the
sight of her. I am amazed, Sir, (cried Worthygrace) at so much Beauty; and I
beg the Lady will pardon the astonishment, of which she is the Cause. I protest
that was spoken like your self, Mr. Worthygrace (said the Old Fool) like a fine
Gentleman, and a Courtier: Nay, nay, I love to hear these Complements in an
honest way -- Perhaps it is not the Court fashion to kiss, or (it may be) you
are ashamed to do it before my face, therefore I Will be gone, and leave my
Lady-Wife, and Daughter with you. No (Sir, replied Worthygrace) I dare do it in
the face of Majesty, of Heaven it self, since my thoughts are Just and
Honorable. And I am sorry, Sir, I gave you the occasion of instructing my
duty. Saving so, he Saluted both the Lady-Mother, and Daughter. 'Uds precious
(cried the Old Daddy) this puts me in mind of my wooing my Lady-Wife there;
which I cannot remember without tears of joy: (And then (I think) he squeezed
as much moisture out of his eyes, as might have made the tittle over an j, had
it been Ink. But (continued he) I Will leave you together, and shall expect to
find you and Mr. Stepwell at dinner with me here to day. I have a little
business -- a little business, your Servant, Sir -- Daughter (pursued he) this
is the man for my money. With that (clapping Worthygrace on the shoulder, and
going out) he eased 'em of a great deal of impertinence. I hope, Sir (said the
Lady-Mother) you will pardon the infirmities of Old Age. And the defects of an
Old Citizen's Education (added Philandra). It looks hearty and kind, Madam
(returned Worthygrace) and I could wish, Madam, you would receive me with as
true a welcome. Assure your self, Sir, (replied Philandra) a Person of your
merits cannot want a due reception. We plead no merits from Heaven (returned he)
but (Madam) if self-denial, and other the greatest mortifications be any way
grateful, I am in hopes that this Present from me may give you a testimony of
some of my weak Endeavors that way. And then he gave her the Lord Bellamant's
Letter. At last, (added he) I persuade my self I shall not fail of a welcome
for his sake that sent it. She immediately knew the hand, and blushed to
receive it from Worthygrace. But recollecting her self, (said she) this I guess
is some new piece of Gallantry from the Lord Bellamant; which, howsoever, shall
not rob me of the honor and satisfaction of your Conversation, Gentlemen. Nay,
Madam (said Stepwell, who all this while had been entertaining the Lady
Gripely) we are but two to two, and, for my part, I decline any sort of dispute
with your Ladyship. I beseech you, Madam (said Worthygrace) rob not your self
of the pleasure that Paper may afford you, for my sake. For assure your self, I
had rather suffer all the anguish of despair and jealousy, than you should
want the least satisfaction. Pardon me, Sir (returned she) this will serve to
entertain me, when I want the advantge of better Company. Then, Madam (replied
he) you must arm your self to receive a discourse of much the same nature, I
fancy, with what that happy paper contains; which will (undoubtedly) be more
troublesome to you, coming from me -- I Love you, Madam (pursued he) with such
a passionate sincerity, that I fear I could almost part with you to my Rival;
if it might advance your happiness -- say, Madam, have you decreed that I
shall eternally be miserable in your indifference; and have you determined that
I must quit my pretensions to my happy Rival? Blast, Madam, blast all my hopes
with one cruel and irrevocable word, and let me dye by your Thunder. If, Sir,
on me depends your happiness, or misery, be confident I wish you the First: And
in a greater measure, than I can possibly create it to you. This indeed, Madam
(said Worthygrace) is an obliging manner of Condemning me to the last, since
you exclude me Paradise, and leave me all the lower World to range in -- But be
assured, Madam, That if all the Beauties of the Universe were divinely put
together into One, by their Great Creator; That stupendous One could not bless
me, were it not, as it is, your own Beauteous self; who will not receive me
into those joys you have entirely reserved to the Lord Bellamant. Certainly,
Sir, (said she) this Tempest cannot be of long continuance. This is such a
volley of Love as I never before received. Ah! Madam, (cried he) you rally and
play with my earnest passion -- Forgive me, if I say this is a little inhumane
-- But it is the effect of your Divinity that sports it self with my
misfortunes. Doubtless (returned Philandra) such another storm of the other side
from my Lord, would give me such another surfeit, that I should swoon at the
very name of Love ever after. Thus she evaded giving him any direct answer,
either to make him hope, or despair; for she thought 'twas convenient to keep
him in play, lest she should miss of Bellamant. Their Conference lasted for
near two hours, at the end of which, Old Gripely returned. -- Well, my new, but
worthy acquaintance (said he to Worthygrace) what progress have you made in
your Amors with my Daughter? Why, Sir, answered Philandra, (by way of
question) Do You think the Gentleman is used to boast of a Lady's favors? Ah!
Madam (cried Worthygrace) you have taken care that I shall have no such
occasion from you -- But I can suffer. 'Uds precious, Noble Mr. Worthygrace,
(cried Old Gripely,) suffer me no suffers, I Will have no suffering here, unless
it be, that I suffer you to make much of my Daughter, and that she do the same
by you -- Come (continued he) Dinner wait's us in the other room, and there we'll
make much of our selves. 'Twas about two of the clock when they sat down, and
the last Course was served in about Four, (for they had a Miser's Feast) they
all eat heartily, and were as pleasant as their several Circumstances would
permit 'em.

In the mean time the Lord Bellamant having expected Stepwell 'till Three, who
(you know) was otherwise engaged, grew impatient, and on a sudden thought of a
design not much unlike Worthygraces; commanded his Coach man to drive him to
Gripely's; where, just as he got out of his Coach, he found Sir Blunder
enquiring for the aforesaid Worshipful Cent. per Cent. The Boobily Knight was
strangely surpised to see my Lord at that place, and could hardly Salute him,
but with a malicious leer, and awkward bow. But my Lord knew how to make his
advantage of such an opportunity; and said to him (returning the Compliment of
Hat and Cringe,) that he was happy to see him there, as well as to hear that
Sir Beetlehead was at home: to whom, he desired Sir Blunder to lead him the
way. The Lubberly Booby had yet so much of pretended Good-manners, as to tell
him he knew his duty better than so, and that it would be an honor to follow
his Lordship. No (replied my Lord) Sans Facon good Sir Blunder, you are better
acquainted here than I am, therefore pray take upon you for once the trouble of
my Guide, and Leader. So in they went directly to the latter end of a Feast,
which (perhaps) was the beginning of a Fray. But had not my Lord arrived just
at that moment, when the Servant told Sir Blunder that Gripely was within, he
had certainly returned unedify'd as he came, as to the knowledge of his
Mistresses Concerns -- 'Uds precious (cried Sir Beetlehead) Sir Blunder, we
have wanted you all this while to complete our mirth, but you are now very
welcome -- Ha, what fine Gentleman have you brought to my poor habitation?
(pursued he, seeing my Lord) An humble Servant of yours, and of those fair
Ladies (replied Bellamant) Mr. Worthygrace (added he) we are happy to meet
here. Ay, my Lord (returned Worthygrace) we are so, in the sight of these fair
Ladies. 'Uds precious, my Lord, (cried Old Gripely) your Lordship is welcome,
if you don't bring a Pope in your Belly. No, Sir Beetlehead (replied Bellamant)
but I brought an Angel in my heart, I mean your Daughter, Sir, who fills it
with all the Ideas of Beauty that Humanity is capable of conceiving, and much
more than it can express. 'Uds precious, cried the Old man, (a little mellow)
you are a fine Gentleman, my Lord, a fine Gentleman indeed; therefore pray sit
down, or you will tire me with standing. I do so, Sir (said my Lord sitting) To
make you easy, and to make my self happy, I Will place me just opposite, and
most remote to what I most love in this World, and to what you hate I should
make any nearer approaches to. Come, Sir Blunder (continued he) though you have
been blessed in the enjoyment of the pretty Marianna; yet you are almost in the
Circumstances with me, as to the Beauteous Philandra. This, he said, putting
Slouch into the next chair to him. My Lord (said Philandra, who thought it no
more sin to grieve the Spirit of the zealous Sir Blunder, than he did to lie
with the Maid Marianna,) I fear your Lordship forgets that his Worship has been
already so happy in his first Love, that he need not doubt his success against
another, especially, when Aided, Abetted, Comforted and Assisted by a Father's
Good, Pious, and kind Instructions and Intentions; which yet he could not have
wanted, but for your Lordship's and this Honorable Gentleman's Address, and
more plentiful Estates. But he may thank his Stars that there is one obstacle
removed, for it seems your Lordship is a Roman Catholic. And for my part, Sir
Blunder (interrupted Worthygrace) I am so far from having received any
particular favor from this our adored Lady, that I must utterly despair,
unless her unparalled and matchless Duty prevail against her inclinations,
and his Lordship's Merits. Sir, (replied Bellamant) you have always the good
Fortune and Intention (it seems) to make me Debtor to your kind Opinion of me
-- would to Heavens your Wishes were as much to my advantage. But, Sir Blunder
(pursued he, changing the Discourse) How does the poor Titt? Has she yet taken
her Degree in Bethlehem, or Bridewell? It must be in the first; for certainly
none but a mad thing would have laid a miscarriage upon an Alderman's Fellow: It
looks as if you had not been wicked, or able enough to get a Bastard; when (no
doubt) your Prentice might have done you that piece of service, had you been
Married. But since your Worship is a Bachelor, I suppose she has been Flawg'd
(as they call it) for putting the Saddle on the wrong Horse's back -- Ay, my
Lord (returned Slouch) the Wench did afterward confess it was my Apprentice;
for which (as your Lordship says) she was Flawg'd in good faith. At which, they
all laughed aloud: And (said the Lady Gpipely) this is as happy and full a
discovery as any Criminal could make of himself. You're in the right, my
Lady-Wife, (replied Old Gripely) 'twas a silly Wench, a silly Wench -- But no
more of that, if you please. No, (said Bellamant) I must remind my self of my
Friend's business, about which I now come to solicit you. There is a Friend of
mine (continued he) that wants five thousand Guineas, now I cannot spare him
above two thousand; wherefore, if you will oblige him, Sir, with that Sum, I
will Engage, or Mortgage some port of my Estate for his payment of it Why, look
you my Lord (cried Gripely) this Engaging must be Mortgaging, and I don't like
any of your Church Lands. Hark you Sir Beetlehead (cried Bellamant) I fancy
that among all your Mortgages, you have one or more of our Church Lands; that
is, of Papists Church Lands, as you style 'em; and yet I find there is no great
danger of their infecting you with Popery. But I mean some of those Lands that
my Lawful Father and Mother left to me (for perhaps she was an Heiress) those
will I dip unto thee. This requires farther thought, my Lord (said he) and you
shall have your answer to morrow this time. Nay, (replied Bellamant) if my my
business, or my Friend's be not done by Six in the Morning, we shall have no
further occasion of yours, or any other assistance. Six a Clock is early
(returned the Old one) but I Will see what may be done, my Lord, after I have
discoursed this Honorable Gentleman: So, my Lord, I beg your Pardon (continued
he) taking Worthygrace out of the Room with him, to contrive the hastening his
Match with Philandra. 'Twas then Bellamant began to show the violence of his
Love in his Jealousy. Ah, Madam, said he, approaching her, while the
Coupe-Merchant, and the Booby Knight diverted the Lady-Mother; it is now high
time for me to despair, since here I found my happy Rival; seated next to you,
and feasting on your Eyes; happy he is in every Circumstance, in his Person, in
his Sense, in his Estate, and, no doubt, happy in your Love. By your Father's
approbation encouraged, received by you with a just opinion of his
extraordinary Qualifications; how long, Heaven knows, I Am sure I know not --
This he spoke somewhat low however, that they might not hear him; which they
perceiving, were so civil as to entertain each other with their own
impertinence. Nay, my Lord, said Philandra rising, I find you are hot, we must
walk. I thank you, Madam, returned he, that you seem at least to take as much
care of me, as my Grooms do of my Beasts; though they never ran such hot Courses,
as I do in pursuit of you. You fly me, Madam, now, continued he, you have
shunned me these fourteen or fifteen unaccountable days; for so they have been
to me; since in all that time I have not once been blessed with the sight of you,
'till this hour. O Heavens! Madam, pursued he raving, where are all your vows?
where are all your tender expressions of Love to me? Some indeed I wear about
me, under your Hand and Seal; and all of 'em where you have fixed 'em in my
heart. Whence not you your self can remove'em, unless you bid me despair, and
dye -- This is all wondrous fine, indeed my Lord, replied she, and since I find
you love me, even to Jealousy, I Am resolved to give your Lordship farther
occasions of that passion -- And look you, my Lord, she continued, I suppose I
wear about me some of your Lordships tender expressions of Love in this Paper;
which I received from your happy Rival, as you think him: This he delivered to
me, un-open'd I dare believe -- Unopen'd as it is! interrupted he; now, by all
my hopes on Earth, which terminate in you, Madam; my Love is not more sacredly
inviolate, than is this Paper; I know the Seal, and find it is not abused -- Oh!
this is more dreadful to me, than his pretensions to you, Madam. And did he
give it thus, without a scoff? Just as you see it, my Lord, and with respect
(answered Philandra) Ah, would he had softened the hard faithful wax, and
ravished wide the innocent Contents! I then might justly have returned the
wrong, and from his breast have torn a Villain's heart, teeming with Sacrilege
against you -- But now, now it appears so Gloriously adorned, with your Bright
Form in every corner of it, that I must fear to touch it. Oh, that Love should
rob me of so generous a Friend -- I mean, whom I could wish mine -- Make him
so, returned she, I shall not hinder such a happy union. Nothing but you on
Earth could do it, Madam, replied Bellamant. Assure your self I will not, said
she -- Here, my Lord, take your Letter, I beseech you, and own the obligation
he designed you -- 'twill be a good beginning of your Friendship -- Now did
this fair Devil desire nothing less. -- No, Madam (replied he) I will not rob
you of what He presented to you: Besides, if ever you had any regard of my
Passion; I could wish, you would keep it: For, I fear, it is the last you will
ever be troubled with from me. Troubled I would have you, Madam, when you read
it; to think how faithful and how Passionate a Lover you have thrown away. It
seems my Lord ( Returned Philandra) you are at length grown weary of feigning a
Passion; and would now persuade me, that I am displeased with your pretended
services: But, assure your self, my Lord, Be it real or counterfeit; it has
already given me a very pretty entertainment. You will e're long I doubt not,
Madam, be judge of its truth or falsehood. -- In the mean time, Madam; enjoy
your self, with the Thoughts of your new Lover! perhaps they will prove your
only satisfaction. Philandra did not know what to make of this last part of his
discourse; and was about to beg his Lordship to explain himself, just as her
Father re-entred with Worthygrace. The chatt then was continued among 'em, for
upwards of an hour; the Rivals plying their Mistress very warmly; who returned
their Volleys with equal heat: In which she took accasion to tell Worthygrace;
that she must have better proofs of his Love and Service, than a bare
Tongue-Devotion: And, in order to that, he should wave the advantage he had in
her Father's opinion; and pay her no more Visits, than he would to an old,
doting Relation of his, who lived most remote to him in Town; if any such he
had. To which Worthygrace replied, that he would obey her, though to the hazard
of his Life, and certain loss of all his quiet. Madam (said my Lord) if this
worthy Gentleman's Fate be so Rigorous; what severity has your Ladyship
reserved for me! How often, I mean, how seldom may I be permitted to pay my
Devotion to you in an Age? The seldomer the better (Returned she): once more
will satisfy for your whole Life. So, (said Bellamant) this comes of inquiring
into a Man's own destiny. Some farther prattle they had; at the end of which
they took their leaves of the fair Ladys and the two Knights. As they were
going out, my Lord told Worthygrace, that he had a Curiosity to show him at his
Lodgings; and therefore desired, that he would give him the favor of his
Company thither. Your Lordship (said Worthygrace) shall Command me in any
thing. But one; (Interrupted my Lord,) showing Worthygrace into the Coach. Mr.
Stepwell your Servant ( said Worthygrace) you had best make use of my Coach to
your own House. Adieu, Mr. Stepwell (said Bellamant.) He humbly made his
Obeisance to 'em both, and Rolled home in State: But not without some suspicion
of what might happen between 'em.

There were now no more in the Coach, than my Lord and Worthygrace; when my
Lord, with a sigh, began thus to him. -- How strangely does Fortune now at last
begin to treat me! I mean, how severely! since, it is the first most sensible
Affliction that ever touched me, to have you for my Rival. You, Worthygrace
(continued he) whom, above all Men my Soul would choose for its dearest
Companion in all things; but in a Mistress. I know the greatness of your mind;
have seen a little of the sweetness of your Temper; have received an obligation
from you this day, in delivering my Letter to Philandra, sealed as I sent it,
by that Trifle Stepwell, from whom you had it. And, after all this, is it not
hard, that I must own to you, I cannot be happy if you live? At least in your
pretensions to Philandra! This, my Lord (replied Worthygrace) is certainly the
greatest of my Misfortunes, since, (give me leave to own this sacred truth to
you!) your Lordship is the only Person among all Mankind, with whom I could
have contracted a most Religious Friendship: As, on the other side, That
Charming Creature, created to our Misery, is she alone in whom I must be happy,
as in a Wife. O! Pardon me! (returned Bellamant) you must not; while I live:
You must therefore force your happiness through me; as I will attempt mine from
you. Though Heaven knows with what regret! To morrow, Sir, (continued he) I shall
expect you on the backside of Southampton House. The Field is near your
Lodging, and not far from mine. Bring with you, two of your best Friends, as I
will of mine; whom I beseech you engage to be no farther Active, than to
endeavor the escape of the survivor. For, (happily) we may not both fall. Nor
either of us, I could wish ( returned Worthygrace) but (ah, my Lord!) these are
but wishes. No more (said Bellamant) but thus I have contrived it, if you
please: -- our Chairs shall wait us at convenient distance; and our Friends
shall prevent the unseasonable kindness of our Servants. And now, in the mean
time we'll pray for one another. And, if it be my Fate to fall by you; Heaven
forgive you, in its sweetest Mercy! And, if from you (my Lord) I meet my Death;
Heaven grant you happy life, here and hereafter; so Worthygrace returned; and
asked, What hour, my Lord? It Is light enough at four (replied Bellamant) be
that the hour: If it is befitting your convenience, Sir. I shall most punctually
observe your Lordships Commands, said Worthygrace, Till then, let us embrace,
and Think, and Act as Friends, (said my Lord, embracing him) To which the other
returned, and sighed, ah! would to Heaven, my Lord, I might for ever thus clasp
you, as my Soul's Heart!

Having thus assigned the time and place, they came at last to Bellamant's
Lodgings; where, after they had taken a friendly Bottle, Worthygrace left him,
to find and prepare his Friends against the next Morning; which was as well
Bellamant's business that night. How soundly they slept I cannot say: But they
met exactly together at the time and place. Good morrow to your Lordship,
(cried Worthygrace.) A happy one to my Dear and Honored Friend, (Returned my
Lord.) E're we begin this unfriendly dispute (continued he) let me endeavor to
make an acknowledgement and return of the Obligation you laid on me yesterday.
-- I here declare, before these Gentlemen, our worthy Friends, that I am the
Aggressour: That I provoked you to seek my Life, to defend your own. I know
your Circumstances with his Majesty are not so advantageous for you, as I could
wish: I am sensible, you refused to serve him with your interest, for taking
off the Penal Laws and Test. Mine are quite otherwise: This Letter therefore,
pursued he, showing a Letter, is superscrib'd To his most Sacred Majesty, whom
Heaven bless! said the Lord Bellamant; this of my Death will give a just
account; as well as of the manner how I sought it. -- O! this, my Lord, replied
Worthygrace, this is unjustly Generous: since it is Rivaled Love that makes us
both contend for the most glorious prize. No more thy Friend but Rival think me
then! cried Bellamant, as I will look on thee; our Swords will else want
points. No more as Friend my Lord? sk'd Worthygrace. No more, the other a
replied. Philandra is the word: At which they both drew; and fell to it
heartily. Each was an excellent Master in that Bloody Science; and long was the
dispute: Many and large Wounds were dealt on both sides; and the Effusion of
Blood was great on each part. At last they closed; and struggling, fell both
together, with their Swords and Arms over each others back: And both
endeavored to rise, but neither could: Which their Friends perceiving, each
Party took his Man and bore him off to his Chair. But, to give 'em their due,
those Spectators would fain have been otherwise Active; and had been; had they
not engaged themselves most Religiously to the contrary: And it was happy for
the Principals, that they did not Act in the Bloody part of this Scene. So with
Sighs and Tears almost gushing from their Eyes, they took a sorrowful leave of
each other: And, going different ways, they disposed of their Honorable
unfortunate Charges; as they over night had received instructions from them.

The two Worthies were soon wanting to their Friends and Acquaintance;
especially Worthygrace to Stepwell; who, as I said before, had some jealousy of
the design. Whereupon, next day he waited on Philandra, to know, if she had
seen, or heard from him: Who was a little surpised, to hear him enquire of his
Friend from her. I was going, Mr. Stepwell, said she, to ask you concerning his
health. His Health, Madam! (replied he in a melancholy tone) pray Heaven, he
has his life! What means this? asked she. I Will say Amen to that Prayer always.
But satisfy me, I beseech you, why is there a more particular necessity of it
now? He then acquainted her with the Grounds he had for his Suspicion, that
Bellamant and he had fought. Avert it Heaven! said she. She had hardly made an
end of this short Petition; e're her Father and Mother came in trembling. The
first, in a doleful hey (perhaps, in gam-ut or C-fa-ut flat. In which most of
our famous farewells are set,) told her, that the Lord Bellamant had basely
Murdered Noble Mr. Worthygrace. However, added he, it is some comfort yet, that
he first dispatched that Papist Bully; who else would have Cut his Throat, with
Pistols, Fuzees, Musket, Blunderbusses, and all sorts of Firearms. At this
Stepwell could hardly forbear smiling, for all this sorrowful account of his
Friend and Patron: But Philandra and her Mother were almost drowned in floods
of their own Tears. However, Philandra, recollecting her self a little, told
her Father, that she could not believe, Bellamant had basely Murdered
Worthygrace; since he himself was killed before. No, no, Madam, replied
Stepwell, all the World knew my Lord too Generous to do any thing below the
Character of the bravest. But, why, Mr. Stepwell, said the Mother, since you
had but too just a suspicion of their intention; why did you not endeavor to
prevent 'em in it? Alas, Madam, replied he, nothing but Heaven or the King's
Commands could have hindered it. Nor could the last have long obstructed their
fatal Resolutions. O, most unfortunate of Womankind! cried out Philandra: Who
will endure to hear my hated name? Since, for my sake two such brave Men are
lost. My dear Daughter, and only Child (said the old Man) do not grieve so
immoderately! Sir Blunder is yet alive, who will make a better Husband for thee
than either of 'em; and him, I resolve thou shall marry to morrow; or I
profess, thou shall not inherit one hundred pence of my Estate. At this the
Daughter fell into a swoon, and no sooner was she come to her self, than the
Lady-Mother fell into a Fit: Insomuch, that there was a most hellish stink for
the space of an hour and half: In all which time she showed variety of
Postures, and wonderful Agility of Body. The Perfumes with which they
entertained her dainty Nostrils, were Assa Foetida, Spirit of Ammoniac Salt,
Spirit of Castor, Oil of Amber: The next Fumigations were of abount a pound or
two of Feathers, and a blue Apron and half of the Kitchin-Maids; which last
stank so powerfully, that it brought her a little to her self! -- Give me a
little Water (Cried she in a weak Languishing tone) at which her then useful
Husband saluted her on one side, with the wholesome Scent of Spirit of
Hartshorn; which, with a Cup of Flower and Water did her business most
effectually for the present: Tho, when Mr. Physmacary came to look into her
case; he pronounced her a Dying Woman. For she had so strained her self in
acting her part, that there was not a joint about her, that did not most
sensibly suffer in this elaborate Scene. Besides she had been too frequently
busy in her Closet, with her cold Tea and right Irish Usquebagh; so that in
less than a fortnights time she died: And not many days after, the old Skeleton
her Husband cheated the Worms with a mere dry Carcass. However he had the
satisfaction e're he died, to see and speak with his dear Daughter; to whom he
gave the blessing of above 30000 l. Estate. For the other Blessing of his
Prayers ('it is feared) they did her more hurt than good. Philandra, during the
time of his sickness, was very diligent in her Attendance on him; which he
rewarded with all his Worldly goods, except a thousand pounds; which he
bequeathed in Legacies to some of his Piteous Poor near Relations, and to his
menial Servants. Not forgetting his good Friend Sir Blunder; to whom he gave a
Diamond-Ring worth above an hundred pounds; and withal begged his kind
assistance of his Daughter, whenever she should need it: Recommending him to
her once more as the fittest Man for her Husband. -- You may believe, she took
on like any thing, for the death of a Father, whose life robbed her of such an
Estate; and the Pleasure of managing it according to the Gayety of her humor.

The first thing she did then, after the Interrment of her Father, which was
very solemn and sumptuous, was to remove from that dismal Scene of Sorrow and
Villainy; that damned, ugly, old, dark House in the City, whence she had buried
her two best Friends; to adorn a Country House of here is about seven miles off;
where she continued, to every one's thinking that saw her, in deep Mourning
somewhat more than a month: In which time the two Rivals were perfectly cured
of the Wounds they had given each other, by the extraordinary care and skill of
their Friends, on both sides; which however was unknown to each other. But the
Wounds they had received from their false and Cruel Mistress (as Bellamant and
Worthygrace both thought her) were still bleeding fresh, if any body could have
seen into their Hearts, you must think. The news of their Death was still
current all over England, among those who had heard of their dispute; as well
Friends as Strangers: unless, among those who managed this report: which gave
Worthygrace opportunity to slip over into France, in a disguise; where he
thought to find a Brother of his, of about seventeen: But (it seems) he was
gone for Rome about 2 months before the arrival of his elder Brother. Mean
while the Lord Bellamant caused a Coffin to be privately buried in a Chapel of
his in Lancashire, where best part of his Estate lay: The Report of his Death,
which now was no longer doubted, gave him the happy opportunity of Transforming
himself into the habit of his Sister Arabella; the exact likeness he had
before; insomuch, that he might easily have deceived his own Wife, if he had
been married, unless, perhaps, in Bed.

'Twas in this seeming Transmutation of Sexes that he waited on Philandra at
her House (for he had an account of all her motions, as well as of all the
accidents in the Family at the old Dungeon) The counterfeited Arabella
pretended to be just arrived from France, and that she came to enquire of
Philandra, whether my Lord her Brother were alive or dead. Philandra was
strangely surpised to hear that Arabella was come to give her a visit; and ran
instantly, with all the wings that wonder could give her; and add to those, the
haste that her love to the memory of the Lord Bellamant inspired her with, and
you can think no otherwise than that she flew to receive the supposed Arabella,
whom she embraced with the most endearing expressions of Love, and Friendship,
that a Soul like hers was capable of pretending; adding a kiss almost at every
period. And when she named Bellamant, whole Rivers of tears flowed silently
from her fatal, and then most charming eyes; as if she seemed to endeavor with
those, to wash off her guilt of his blood. Bellamant was damnably put to it, to
check and withold himself from a discovery of who he was; so provoking were her
Caresses: But the apprehensions he had of his Rival's death, forbad him to
hazar'd his life in a Woman's hands, though it had almost flown from him whether
he would or no, while she was kissing him. With some difficulty I think he got
loose from the Serpent's embraces; telling her, that the memory of the dear
Lord her Brother was so afflicting, that unless she took a little air, she
should immediately Die away. With that, he withdrew to the window, and a kind
fresh gale pretty well cooled him. Then turning again to her, he presented her
with a Paper. See here, Madam (said he) how passionately and constantly my dear
Brother loved you; this I found among some Papers of his, superscrib'd to you.
Philandra took it, and read, At length Disdain
Has broke the Chain,
And I am no longer your Amorous Slave;
My heart is too great,
For so servile a Fate,
And merely Despair now has rendered me brave.
With equal contempt I behold all your Frowns,
And defy all the scorn which on me you misplace;
For (alas) 'twas my madness that gave my Wounds,
And all my Devotion, Idolatry was.
But (Oh!) my heart,
Still feels the smart,
And Death, I perceive, will the Conquest complete;
Then frown once again,
T'encourage my pain,
And let not your Pity, your Rigor defeat:
For since I must fall a Martyr to Love,
Let every sad Circumstance torture my breast;
That I your Injustice the greater may prove,
And you be Tormented, when I am at Rest.


This, Madam, said he, you may believe was written since his fatal engagement
with Mr. Worthygrace; for the Characters of the Letters seem, as if made by a
weak and tremulous hand. I fear they were, replied she, but his Character is
engraved here in my heart, too fair and deep to be eraz'd by any thing but
Death. The feigned Arabella then gave her his Picture drawn in minature, and
set in Gold, incircled with Diamonds, and other Stones of great value; which
she received with a thousand kisses, and lodged it between her lovely Breasts.
That, Madam, said he, should have been the Throne of the Living and Substantial
Bellamant. And so it should, returned Philandra, could he but live again. In
vain we wish, or suppose that, Madam, replied he, I must therefore divorce my
self from your dear sight, that with the greater freedom I may alone mourn his
hard Fate. 'Twill be performed with the greater Solemnity, Madam, (said
Philandra) if you stay, and see me bear the heavier part; for the loss of a
Brother is not comparable to that of a Lover. However, Madam, replied he, I
shall be the more sensibly afflicted, to see my self outdone in my Grief. No,
Madam, interrupted Philandra, you shall not rob me so soon of your Charming
Conversation, for I did at least flatter my self with the hopes of your
Ladyships stay here this week. You Will pardon me, Madam, said Bellamant, I have
yet lain but two Nights in England, and have not so much as any outward show of
mourning for the loss of so dear a Brother. As soon as I reached the Town, I
went to pay my earliest respects to you, Madam, at the old House; and not
finding you there, I learned from Sir Blunder where I might be so happy. And
now, Madam, added he, you cannot but grant that it is necessary I should make
all possible haste to my dear Brother's Lodgings (whence I came directly to
wait on you) to order what befits my Quality, and present Circumstances. In
this, (returned Philandra) though with some regret, I must submit to your
Ladyship, yet not without a promise of as speedy a return as your Honors
convenience shall present. I do most certainly oblige my self to that
happiness, Madam, Replied the Beautiful Counterfeit, and I am so far provided,
that I have already found, and entertained my Brother's Coachman, and two of
his Footmen, who brought, and attended me hither; but Theodora my Woman, whom I
took with me to Paris, I left there at my coming away, hardly recovered of a
Surfeit she took with eating too many Grapes: Nor do I mean to take any other,
being almost assured of her Recovery. Secure in your goodness of your promise,
Madam, said Philandra, I shall now more earnestly look and wish for that kind
and blessed day, that shall return you to my longing arms, than I should expect
my Wedding Day with the most Beautiful and most Accomplished Man breathing. O
happy, yet happy Bellamant (cried he) if thou knewst how kindly thou art
preserved in her memory, to which, I eternally recommend, and leave him. Madam
(returned Philandra) I am your Honors most humble Servant -- So waiting on him
to his Coach, they bowed, and parted.

While Bellamant was thus successfully personating his Sister Arabella;
Worthygrace, who had been near a fortnight in Paris, one day made a visit to a
Lady of Quality of his former acquaintance; with whom he found the Lady
Arabella, in company with the Lady her Relation, to whom she went over. You may
imagine he was a little startled at so strange a Rencounter, especially, when
her Beautiful Face reminded him so nearly of the Lord her Brother, whom he
believed killed by his hand. He was going therefore to retreat; telling the
Lady, that since he saw her engaged in better Company, and, happily, in greater
business than a bare formal Visit, which he then came to pay her, he would take
an opportunity to wait on her, to obtain his pardon, for having given her a
diversion of happiness she must needs enjoy in the Conversation of those fair
Ladies.

The Lady, his friend, who was of an extraordinary good humor, and had a great
respect for him; ran immediately to him, and taking him by the hand, told him,
that his visit was so surprizingly pleasant, since she had not seen him in more
than a twelve month, and knew not that he was in France; that if Madam
Maintenon had been there, discoursing and consulting her how to make her great
at Court, (which she could not be so vain or fond as to wish) she would
certainly have left her abruptly, to have inquired of his health, and the
present state of his Affairs, if he would not have condescended to join
conversation with them. Worthygrace seeing himself so finely drawn in, set as
good a face upon the matter, as his Conscience would permit him; and after
having made his Baise-mains to all three of them, he sat down, and entertained
'em very pleasantly for about half an hour; partly with some of the late
accidents that befell him in England; giving 'em a little hint of the passion
he had for a Beautiful Lady; but never so much as touching upon any dispute he
had for her, or naming the Lord Bellamant. Arabella, who all this while looked
on him very steadfastly, when ever his eyes were turned from her, which he took
care should not be very often. Told him, after he had given 'em an account of
his misfortune in Love, she fancied she had the honor to be known to that
Beautiful English Lady, to whom he had paid so great a devotion, as well as
the good fortune to have seen him once in the Mall with her, where then was the
Lord Bellamant, her Brother. And I remember, Madam, returned he, that I then
had the happiness to behold those irresistible Charms you bear about you,
without the apprehension of any danger from 'em; since then I was
pre-possess'd: But now I find a greater misfortune attends me; for that I know,
from this moment I must both Love, and Despair. Arabella, who possibly had a
very advantageous opinion of his Person, and Character, the last of which, she
had from her Brother; blushed, and smiled, telling him, that she could not but
commend his Gallantry, though it were so customary to him. She then proceeded to
ask him when he saw her Brother? and whether he were well, or no? To which, he
answered, that it was near two months since he had the honor to see him. And,
added he, Madam, I hope in Heaven he is well. If, Sir, said the Lady Arabella,
you have had such ill fortune in your Love of Philandra, I am apt to flatter my
self, that my Brother may have better; since I have often heard him say, he
valued no Rival but your self. I can assure your Ladyship, replied he, he has
none of me now. But when did your Ladyship hear from him? Not these two months,
returned Arabella, that is, Sir, I have received but one Letter from him since
I left England; which came to me some few days after my arrival hither --
Worthygrace thought it was very odd, that he should have been almost as long
dead, and she not have an account of it in all this time. However, he thought
fit to ask her no more questions for Conscience sake. So that after about an
hours more discourse of the Affairs of the French Court, and of Things
indifferent to them, the Ladies took their leave; and when Worthygraee had seen
'em in their Coach, he returned with his good humored Acquaintance; to whom he
made a solemn declaration of his sudden passion for Arabella; and withal, told
her what reason he had to despair of succeeding in it; not so much as omitting
the Duel, nor the fatal Consequence, as he thought, of it. The Lady was much
disturbed at the bloody part of the story; however, she promised her
assistance, and the interest she had with the Person of Honor, Arabella's
Relation. But by the way, she asked him, how he could so easily quit himself of
Philandra's Chains, and so immediately fall passionately in love with Arabella?
To which he replied, Madam, your last Question is an answer to your first,
because I am fallen passionately in love with Arabella, whom at first sight I
thought one of the most Beautiful Creatures in the world; therefore I have
quitted my self of Philandra's chains. Nor is this all, for I am sensible, that
this Lady was Educated in all the strict, yet generous Principles of true
Virtue, and Honor, though she be a Roman Catholic: Not to speak of the
advantage she has of Philandra, in real Beauty; which, on a review, any
impartial eye may discern; when the other has but a tawdry, wanton, fading
prettiness, which cannot hold above ten years. Nor will I much reflect on the
ill Principles of her Parents, nor the Ill-gotten Estate, that made her Father
the first Worshipful Rogue of his Family; who brought her up in the true
Whining and Canting Principles of a most Famous City, where there are above a
thousand several Families of the Gripley's. But why, asked the Lady, was not
all this considered before you fought? Before we fought, Madam, replied he, I
loved her, and could think of nothing but enjoying her. But, Madam, continued
he, to your discretion I commend all my future happiness on Earth; and I humbly
kiss your hands 'till to morrow. Be confident, she returned, you shall not want
the best endeavors of your Servant.

When Worthygrace left her, he went directly to his Lodgings, and dispatched a
Letter to his Sister Henrietta, a Lady of about Eighteen; being a year older
than her Brother Horatio, at that time in Italy: In which, he entreated her by
all means, to confirm, and continue the Report of his Death; and with all,
begged of her to dispense with her modesty so far for his sake, as to personate
her younger Brother in Man's habit; for in that borrowed shape, she might the
more freely converse with Gentlemen in Town, some of which, might happily give
her a certain account, whether the Lord Bellamant were living, or dead; if not,
possibly Philandra would, whom he advised to deceive with that disguise, unless
she found her a friend to his interest; which would undoubtedly strengthen her,
and all the rest of his Acquaintance, in the opinion of his death, and that
perhaps, was the only way to preserve his life. With this Letter, he sent her a
Bill of Exchange for a Thousand Pounds, that she might appear as her Brother
Horatio, next Heir to the Estate.

Upon perusal of these Papers, she was at first in a dispute, whether she
should act according to her Brother's entreaty, or obey the severe dictates of
her modesty, which seemed absolutely to forbid her to change her Sexes habit:
but at last she was overrul'd, by the necessity of her Brother's Circumstances.
Wherefore leaving Yorkshire in Man's Clothes, with a young Gentlewoman her
Attendant, she came to Town; where she equipped her self, and her Companion with
Mourning Suits; the Mourning Coach and Liveries were soon prepared, and all
things necessary, and decent. And thus accouter'd, she resolved first for
Philandra's, having had a great curiosity a long time, to see that fatally
Celebrated Beauty. Rightly imagining too, that she might as soon learn the
certainty of Bellamant's Life, or Death, from her, as from any one of my Lord's
Acquaintance in Town, to whom she was as yet a stranger. The feigned Horatio
was most kindly received by Philandra, with all the signs of a most sensible
grief, for the death of so brave a Man, and so Generous a Lover as Worthygrace.
Telling the Counterfeit Horatio, that she could not part with so near a
Relation, and so dear a Friend of that Worthy Man, whose Love was his only
fault, and misfortune; without giving him more signal proofs, and ample
expressions of the veneration she had for his Memory; wherefore she must needs
oblige him, and his friend, to stay some few days with her; which, after some
importunity, they yielded to; where we will leave 'em, and make a trip over
into France.

The next day after Worthygrace had entertained Arabella with the discourse of
his unfortunate Love; the French Lady of Quality, Worthygrace's particular
Friend, went with him in his Coach, to wait on the Lady Arabella, whom they
found almost drowned in tears; however, she received 'em with all the evenness
of temper that her afflicted Circumstances would allow of. The Lady asked her,
what could so suddenly overcast the accustomed Sunshine of her face, and
serenity of her mind; with which but yesterday she had made 'em so happy. She
replied, that she had received a Letter not two hours since, that brought her a
certain account, that her Brother was killed in a Duel, about two months ago.

Wherefore, Madam, (pursued she) I hope, you will rather pity and pardon, than
blame these Tears; which seem to give your Ladyship and this Honorable Person,
your Friend, but a rude and untoward Reception. Ah, Madam, (replied the French
Lady with Tears in her Eyes) your Grief appears so beautiful and just on so sad
an occasion; that I Am in Love with it; and must, in some measure partake of it.
For, I have sometimes had the Honor of my Lord your Brothers obliging
Conversation. -- All this (you may believe) was no little mortification to
Worthygrace; who told Arabella, that, though Nature had denied him the relief of
expressing his sorrow in Tears; yet he believed, his Heart was as sensibly
touched with the loss of so Gallant a Man, even as the Charming Arabella's.
(And I am apt to Credit him) And, Madam, (continued he) since we find your
Ladyship under so great a pressure of Affliction we ought to esteem our selves
happy in our visit to you; since we may help to bear some part of its weight,
and break the violence of its fall on so tender a Heart. In my opinion (said
Climane, the French Lady his Friend) 'twere better, we let the torrent of her
Grief waste its impetuosity without any opposition; and leave her, as it were
to Enjoy the fullen Usurper of her Reason. There is a kind of satisfaction in a
silent and interrupted Melancholy. It Is confessed, Madam, (replied he) but to
give place to it at first I fear, may embolden and confirm it. I am obliged,
Sir, (said Arabella) to the kindness of your fears: But, I must needs
acknowledge it a greater Obligation, if you will permit me the Pleasure of this
one days retreat. For these ensuing hours (returned Climane) we shall not
contend with your Ladyship: But to morrow, in the name of good Reason, we claim
as our own. It Is indispensibly due to our Charity. Look therefore you propose
to receive us with as little uneasiness as we can expect from a Lady in your
Circumstances! So, without staying for an answer, or making any Complements,
they took their leaves in an humble and profound silence. She was very glad
they were gone: For though she were extremely troubled at the news her Brother
sent her of the desperate condition he lay so long under, through the largeness
and number of his Wounds; yet she was overjoyed at the certain knowledge of his
Recovery: So that if they had stayed any considerable time, she could not have
maintained that sorrowful Countenance with which she at first received 'em, to
the end of the Chapter: And, if she had not; 'twou'd directly have crossed
Bellamant's design of having his Death believed in France, as well as here: To
which end, he writ to her to put on Mourning, and all outward show of Grief,
for the loss of an only Brother: And withal, advised her, to make what
convenient haste she could to England; all which she most punctually observed:
As Henrietta did her Brother Worthygrace's here; who, in less than a weeks
time, had so well founded the depths of Philandra's Heart; that she perceived,
Philandra was clearly for rewarding the survivor in the Duel; had there been
any, as she supposed there was not; with the enjoyment of her Person and
Estate. Upon which, to make a sure bargain for her Brother, not knowing that
his Heart was now otherwise engaged, she made an ouvert Relation to Philandra,
of the whole Business; not so much as concealing her own Sex. How, ( cried
Philandra, in a transport of joy, not to be equaled or Counterfeited but by
her self.) Does that great and Generous Soul still inform and Actuate the Body
of your dear Brother and my Lover! -- And, are you not Horatio? who are you
then? I am called Henrietta, Madam (replied she) only Sister to Worthygrace;
who is now in France, waiting till the Tide of State turn; or to procure his
pardon: which (alas!) I think, is not in humane prospect. O! might I but see
him once more e're I died (said Philandra) if seeing him must be All, I then
should go contented to my Grave. That Is as your Love or Interest shall instruct
you, Madam, (replied Henrietta) but I rather hope you will consult the first
only. But (possibly) he has forgot me now: Or, which is worse, may have another
Mistress. I doubt not, Madam, (replied Henrietta) to satisfy you of the
contrary within these few weeks; and to show you his most grateful
acknowledgements, under his own hand and seal, of so great and unexpected a
favor as you have promised. In the mean time, I beg your Ladyship will still
receive me as my Brother Horatio, the better to continue the opinion of his
Death. That, Madam (returned Philandra) is but necessary to his greater
security.

As they were thus concluding on matters between 'em, Sir Blunder Slouch led in
the feigned Arabella to 'em: Whom as soon as Philandra saw, she whispered to
Henrietta, This is the Lady Arabella, Sister to the Lord Bellamant. Be cautious
in your Discourse! She then received and embraced the P^^oated Lord, with a
great deal of respect and tenderness: Who returned her Complements and Caresses
with equal Ceremony and Ardour. Telling her, he was now come to be happy for a
week or more in her admired Company. The two Contrefeits then saluted each
other; after which Philandra told the feigned Arabella, that it was Horatio
younger Brother to Worthygrace, whom then she saw: And begged, that the fatal
effects of their Brother's Gallantry might not give them any resentments
against each other. Upon which they renewed their Complements; ending with a
Generous Compassion of each others loss in two such brave Men and so near
Relations. Then they dined together; at that time entertaining themselves at
Sir Blunder's cost; that was in their Raillery on him: which (perhaps) he would
have bought off at the price of half a score Dinners. But however Bellamant
appeared pleasant in Discourse, his thoughts were very troublesome; he never
took his Eyes from Horatio's Face, unless when they encountered his: and then,
with a Woman's Modesty, he would let fall his, and (it may be) with a blush,
which the other could not avoid taking notice of to her self. Now it was not Love
bat Jealousy that fixed Bellamant's Eyes on Horatio, imagining, that the
younger Brother was now come to Rival him in Philandra: yet he rather desired
that she might mistake his Glances for those of Love; which luckily for him she
did. After a modest Grace - cup, they fell into Cabals, Arabella and Philandra,
Horatio and Sir Blunder, Arabella's Gentlewoman and Horatio's Companion,
entertaining each other in Pairs. When Bellamant, to try if he had any
reasonable grounds for his Jealousy, entered on a design the most odd and
least practicable that, perhaps, you have heard of: for, mistaking Henrietta
for her younger Brother, he took occasion to speak so obligingly of the
pretended Horatio's Person, Mien, and Conversation, to Philandra, that she
could not doubt, that it proceeded from the immediate Passion of Love. And, to
speak justly of her, though Henrietta had different Charms in her Face, Person,
and in all her Actions, yet she had as many and as great as Philandra or the
real Arabella. Madam, ( said Philandra to Bellamant,) Your Ladyship speaks so
sensibly of this Gentleman's Perfections, that I have some reason to believe
you could love him most passionately. Possibly, Madam, returned he, if there
were any prospect of his kind return to such thoughts as you seem to entertain;
and that it were not to invade your just Prerogative of Empire over the Hearts
of all the desertful Men, I should not blush to own, that I have no common
Respect for a Person of his Merits. It Is enough, replied Philandra, I humbly
thank your Honor, Madam, for so free a Confession: And shall esteem myself
infinitely happy, if your Ladyship will use me as an Instrument in the uniting
two such generous Hearts. Be confident of me, I beseech your Ladyship,
continued she, and be easy, for I will so manage this Affair, that he shall
make his Addresses to your Ladyship. I perceived and understood the Discourses
of your Eyes on either side, whilst at Dinner. Let not my Modesty suffer, I
conjure you, Madam, said the feigned Arabella, for I had rather die in Despair.
Trust my Conduct, Madam, returned Philandra, it shall not cost you a Blush
more, than what the Discourse of his Passion may occasion. While the Lord
Bellamant was thus pretending a Passion for Horatio, the young counterfeit
Spark's Eyes did often meet Bellamant's; which he observed well enough. And at
the same time was that beautiful Youth speaking very advantageously, but justly
too, of the feigned Arabella's Excellencies to Sir Blunder Slouch; who, tho he
was no great Artist in Love, yet imagined that the Youngster had a Month's Mind
to a Person of Honor; which, at the first opportunity he had, tho desired to
keep it secret, according to the invincible Treachery of his Nature, he
discovered to Philandra: And she, after she had paid her earliest Devoirs to
the supposed Arabella, whom she left in Bed, went directly to Henrietta's
Apartment, and charged her with what she had learned from Sir Blunder Slouch.
She could not but admire the Secrecy and Integrity of that Knight; nor did she
deny, that she had said all she could think in praise of that beauteous
Creature. And all, dear Madam, cried she, comes short of her Merits. Indeed I
have a just reason to thank Heaven that she is not a Man. This is as I would
have it, said Philandra, for she is passionately in love with you: and I must
see your Hearts and Hands united in the Holy Bands of Matrimony, (an't shall
please you, Sir.) Why, you rave Philandra, said she, Do you know who, and what
I am? Yes, you are the Charming Henrietta, replied Philandra, Sister to my dear
Worthygrace, and Womankind. And, interrupted Henrietta, would you have the
seeming Brother of Worthygrace marry with the Lord Bellamant's real Sister?
Why, there is the jest and the earnest on it; replied Philandra, for it will give
the better countenance to the Report of your Brother's Death. But, consider, I
remind you, said Henrietta, that I am mere Womankind. I do so; replied
Philandra, and there will be the pleasure on it, to see how she will bear the
loss of her Expectation in you. Ah, cried Henrietta, but, by your Pardon,
Madam, (methinks) that would be somewhat barbarous, and a great Indignity to a
Person of her Quality. Barbarous! said Philandra, not at all, Child: For, being
both of one Sex, the Marriage is void of course. And as for the Indignity, in
my Opinion, it is none: 'twill only be looked on as a Condescension in you to
pleasure her: Besides, we'll find out some Trick or other to part you, without
discovering your Sex to her. Come, come, (pursued she) it must be done; I am
resolved on it. Well, dear Madam, ( returned Henrietta) to pleasure you, but
(let me own it, with Pardon) more particularly to serve my Brother, I will
begin the Courtship to the Lady Arabella. This was agreed, and proceeded on
that very day: and the fair Counterfeit found he should have no hard Siege of
his beautiful Mistress's Heart. I think at the third Approach he made toward
it, she began a Parley; at the end of which she surrendered on Discretion.
Married then they were, but very privately, and with no Solemnity or Mirth more
than usual, unless it were the addition of two or three Country-Fidles, and the
pleasure of seeing Sir Blunder very bestially Drunk. At night Arabella was put
to Bed, trembling for fear of a Discovery of his Sex; being partly undressed by
Philandra's fair Hands. You may imagine what a fine condition she was in, when
Philandra came to finger her Neck, near the place of her No-bubbies: 'twas then
she was forced to pretend she was ready to swoon away, with a faint and almost
dying Voice, begging Philandra and the rest of the Females, to give her leave
to put her self to Bed; which, with some difficulty, they permitted her: where
she laid her self down close to the Bed-post; a very hopeful Bride. But the
Bridegroom escaped better, for there was no man to undress him, but Sir Blunder,
who had drunk himself out of that Office. The Bridegroom no sooner came into
Bed, but as Philandra had instructed him, he took the Bride about the neck,
and, (as it were) forced a kiss, and then the Company left 'em to themselves,
for that night; and each mistaking the others Sex; after some comical
reflections to themselves, on their odd and hasty Marriage, fell fast asleep.
Bellamant with the pleasure to think that he had now defeated Philandra of a
second Lover; and Henrietta with the satisfaction that this Gordian knot might
be untied when ever she pleased.

Between Seven and Eight the next morning, the fair Bridegroom asked his Bride
how she had slept that night? To which she replied, very well, and quietly, I
thank you, Sir; he wished her then a good morrow, which she returned to him;
and not long after he rose, leaving the Bride the opportunity of dressing her
self; which I can assure you was then very obliging. About half an hour after
came in the fulsom mess of Cawdles, with Potions of Tent, and Malaga; which,
whether she tasted or no, I was not curious to enquire. After Dinner they took
Coach, as they had contrived with Philandra; and seemed to drive for London,
taking their leave of Sir Blunder, who in less than an hour went directly for
the Town, while they returned a contrary way to Philandra. This was done to
prevent the trouble of so many visits from all their friends and acquaintance
that were known to Sir Blunder, whom they were sure he would otherwise have
sent. At Philandra's then they passed two nights more, almost in the state of
innocence; only Bellamant would be now and then reflecting on the mess of
bawdery that Philandra, and the other Women-Creatures entertained him with,
after the Sack posset, while they were undressing him on the Wedding-Night;
mistaking him for the true Arabella; which did sometimes but too well remind
him of his Sex. And doubtless had he known what excellent matter to work upon
he had lying by him, all those three nights, he would have gone near to have
discovered, and so perhaps to have lost himself in search of such treasures.
The third morning when the Beautiful young Bridegroom was taking a walk about
the grounds, Philandra came to pay her respects to the Bride; just as by good
fortune she was dressed, and no body with her, but her Page in Woman's Clothes,
who passed for her she Attendant. Philandra seemed to desire some private
Conference with her, on which, the Attendant withdrew. Madam, said Philandra,
your Ladyship puts me quite out of conceit with marriage; for I have observed,
that ever since you have been more than usually melancholy. I beg your Honor
therefore to let me know what it is that dislikes you in this State, and what
you find more than heretofore pleasant, if any such thing there be. Ah,
Philandra, replied the supposed Arabella, I can easily say what dislikes me. I
have sold my Liberty, Philandra, and to one, who I fear, had before engaged his
heart to another. He Is Young, and Beautiful, it is true, and that he is a Man I
cannot doubt, by outward appearance; but -- I have heretofore dreamed of -- I
know not what -- Joys, that we married folks should be fed with, 'till we even
surfeited of 'em; but I find he has no other in store for me, than a good
morrow, or good night. Or an insipid out 'o bed breakfast of Cawdles, and Sack,
interrupted Philandra. Ay, Philandra, replied Arabella, this is all the
pleasure I find in it. Poor Lady, cried Philandra, this is a heavy doleful Tale
-- Good Heaven guard me from such a fool of a Husband. Why, pray, Madam, asked
the ignorant Bride, what more would you expect from your Husband? Poor Dear
Soul, returned Philandra, what more? why -- At least a thousand kisses eve y
day, and one continued Embrace every night; or so many so suddenly repeated,
that they should seem but one. Alas, Madam, returned the Bride, this were
enough to make any Man's arms, back, and heart ache; besides, I should fear he
would stifle us both. Not to consider the loss of sleep, which would discompose
and unfit us for the next day's Conversation. Sleep, Conversation, interrupted
the other; why, my Dear, sleep ought to be banished, at least, all the first
month, unless, from five or six in the morning, till eleven or twelve at noon.
And no conversation ought in reason or modesty to be expected by any of their
Friends or Acquaintance, but just in a morning's visit, or at Dinner, and
Supper; the rest of the day ought to be sacred to Love, and the Happy Pair in
Lonely Retreats, Pleasant Gardens, Cool Grotto's, and Shady Groves. Bless me,
Madam, cried Arabella, what a Hercules of a Husband must yours be? Nay, Madam,
pardon me, said Philandra, I do not mean that only such a one would satisfy
me, but I suppose this the Spark's duty for the whole honey-moon. I wonder,
Madam, said the Bride, what you would do then, if you had such a quiet Spark as
mine, who never so much as touches me, nor speaks after the first good night,
'till the next morning. Why, truly Madam, replied Philandra, to be ingenuous to
you, I should seek my satisfaction elsewhere. O fie, returned Arabella, I
warrant you would not commit that Sin for the Universe. No, Madam, answered
the other, it is my dull niggardly Husband that starves me at home, who commits
the Sin, in forcing me to seek out for my own sustenance. Alas, Madam,
continued she, the thing is nothing in it self, but pleasure; the Crime lies in
being detected of it. This indeed, Madam, returned Arabella, is to me a new
sort of Doctrine; but I find it very reasonable; how wholesome it may prove, I
am yet to learn. As your food, I Will warrant it, replied 'tother, and as
necessary; and I hope you will put it in practice with the first opportunity. I
cannot promise you that, returned Arabella, 'till I have thought further on it.

Immediately at the end of this discourse the Bridegroom entered; who told
Arabella that he desired to wait on her to her own Lodgings in Town, that
Afternoon, because he expected a near Kinsman of his, a young Gentleman of
about Eighteen, who came from Yorkshire almost on purpose to visit him. And
since her Ladyships Lodgings in Soho-Square, he believed were most convenient,
he would leave word at his own Lodgings, where his Cousin Winlove, for so was
he called, might find him. I Am all obedience to your pleasure, Sir, (replied
Arabella.) After which, they only stayed dinner with Philandra, for the Coach
was made ready before: and when Philandra had obliged her self to visit 'em as
soon, and often as 'twas possible, they hurried away to Arabella's Lodgings in
Town, where he left her, and went to his own, whence he returned, with some
uneasiness, enough observable in his face, and haste. Madam, said he, I must
beg your Ladyships pardon, that I am constrained to leave you for some few
days. I have just now received a Letter left at my Lodgings these three days,
that calls me immediately into Yorkshire, where my presence is absolutely
necessary, to settle some part of my Estate. I do assure your Ladyship I will
be as expeditious in the dispatch of my Affairs as may be, that I may return
the sooner, to the greatest happiness I have on Earth, your Ladyship -- But --
I had almost forgot to beg your Ladyship would receive my Kinsman with the same
kindness and familiarity you would entertain me; deny him nothing, to express
the welcome of him -- For, give me leave to say, Madam, though he is my near
Relation, he is a very worthy, and finely accomplished Gentleman, and indeed
extremely Beautiful; and were his hair fair, as it is exceeding black, you
would easily mistake him for Philandra, in Man's Clothes. -- Once more, pray be
kind to him, Madam -- With this kiss I seal, and deliver thee to the care of
Heaven -- Farewell, my Soul, added he, going out. Heaven keep you, Sir, said
she, pray hasten your return -- Hah! (cried Bellamant to himself) no longer
Arabella, when alone. Must I receive his Kinsman with the same kindness and
familiarity that I would entertain him? and deny him nothing -- I begin to have
'em in the wind -- This is pursuant of that excellent Doctrine I heard preached
to day, by my most Learned Mistress in the Art of Love, Philandra; whom this
Relation of his so nearly resembles; that were it Fair, as it is Black, I could
not easily mistake it for Philandra in Man's Clothes -- I Will put all this
together; and, let me see, what does it spell? -- Contrivance. Ay, that is it.
Now is this little fair Devil grown malicious; and in revenge, that I have
robbed her of the younger Brother, comes to tempt my Virtue, and Debauch me, if
possible, (which was well put in) in the habit of a fine Spark, and then to
betray me to Horatio, mistaking me still for my Sister. And I must needs own,
that I fear I am not Temptation-proof. No, no, it is certain I am not. Alas,
alas, what will become of me then? -- Why, I may thank my Petticoats for all
the lewdness that is like to ensue -- Oh, Petticoat, Petticoat, how attractive
thou art of all Vices? -- Why, faith now, he was much in the right on it; only
in this he mistook, that it was Philandra's Revenge. For, the Design was to
take the supposed Arabella in Bed with the pretended Winlove, to give the
feigned Horatio a seeming just occasion of parting with her. Bellamant was
ravished with the design which he perceived Philandra had of ruining her self;
and with impatience expected when she would begin it. However, he spent that
night very pleasantly, with his two Friends, who carried him out of the fatal
Field, over a Bottle or Two. And the next day, about Eleven, one of her
Servants, for now it is Arabella again; came to acquaint her, that one Mr.
Winlove inquired for his Master; upon which, she sent the Servant to wait on
him in, and came down stairs her self to receive him. The treachery there began
with a kiss too -- Then after having inquired of his Cousin's health, and when
she expected his return? And having highly, though not sufficiently complemented
her Beauty, (at which he seemed as much astonished as she was, at the strange
alteration the change of habit, and other disguises had made of the Person of
Philandra, who had on a Black Perruke, had black'd her eyebrows, and eyelids,
and had left a kind of shadow on her upper Lip, as if she had been newly
shaved) Winlove was for taking his leave, which by no means his Lady Cousin
would permit; (designing a happier Night than ordinary) and in short, prevailed
with him to stay Dinner; when he fell afresh into large Encomiums of her
Beauty; sighing, to think that his Cousin was, and must be the only happy man
in the World, in the enjoyment of such Perfections as her Ladyships, of which,
he was Eternally to be debarred. She told him, she believed it was in his power
to make himself as happy as his Cousin. Winlove was a little surpised at that
answer of hers; yet taking Courage, threw at all; approachng her more closely,
and kissing her, till her Face was all Fever, and her Eyes were all Flame
Then, by a seeming force she got from him, and withdrew into the next room. I
see, said Philandra to her self, my Documents have pretty well taken root in
her, she warms apace, I must not let her Cool. Saying so, he pursued her into
the next Room, where he would have renewed his Caresses. But she in a
languishing tone, and hiding her face, told him, that though her Husband had
desired her to deny him nothing; as indeed she could not deny him any thing;
yet she begged she might have a little respite to bethink her self what she was
going to do. Nay, Madam, (returned he) that is the way to ruin my Hopes:
However, we'll Sup together if you please; and so contrive matters that no
notice may be taken of the Happiness which I hope your Ladyship designs me
afterward. They did so, and things were ordered accordingly; that is, he was
put to Bed in the next Room on the same Floor to her: And Arabella's Page in
Woman's Clothes double-lock'd the Door upon him: About an hour after Arabella
unlocked it, thinking every Moment a Month till the House were silent; so near
did Bellamant apprehend his Happiness; which he would not have let slip that
Night for all hi^ Estate, I fancy. But we must yet suppose him Arabella a
little while, and Philandra Winelove: No sooner then had Arabella got into Bed,
than Winelove was in her Chamber, and had locked the Door; and you may believe
did not stand long on the cold Floor. Madam, (said he, turning to her,) this
Night were worth Immortality, had I not drank too much at Supper: but the
Morning shall pay us the Arrears of the present. -- How, Sir! (cried she) and
do you too deceive my Expectation? -- Nay, then, I Am sure my Husband and you
are of the same Family, and too nearly related. Why, ay, Madam, ( returned
Winlove,) this Conscience makes Cowards, and Fools Eunuchs: Or Women of you, (
interrupted Arabella,) I Am resolved I will know if you are a Man; (pursued she,
embracing her very strictly.) O, Philandra, (cried he, speaking in a more
Masculine Tone,) it is now my turn to play the Man, and revenge my self upon you
for all my Sufferings, that yet were not worth this ravishing killing Moment,
which sure I cannot outlive! -- Then could not he speak one word more for a
whole moment or two: After he called her Philandra, the poor Soul was so
amazed, or overjoyed, that she did not, or (may be) could not or would not
speak one word; till at last he had just liberty to say, Now, Madam, you shall
find that neither Night nor Morning shall be indebted to me. At which, she
cried out, O Heavens! my Lord, are you then resolved to ruin me? -- And now,
both were Tongue-tied again: About 4 a clock in the morning, Philandra, with a
thousand Kisses and tender Embraces, and with Tears in her Eyes, said to him,
Though, my Lord, you have now by my own foolish Intriguing, rifled me of the
greatest Treasure, my Honor, and grasped all those Joys at once, for which you
strove so long, so often, and so fatally: You will not leave me thus naked, and
spoiled of all that is valuable. May not I hope, that you will restore what you
have taken from me, my Honor? I now beg it of you as an Act of Humanity, and
becoming your accustomed Generosity and Goodness. Will you not marry me, my
Lord? Can you doubt it, Madam? replied he, by way of Interrogation. Let me
first be clear of the Death of that brave Man; and then, my Life, we'll be as
Happy as it is possible. She then proceeded to ask his Pardon, that she had
designed to betray Arabella to Horatio, who would have taken that occasion to
part with her, still supposing him to be Arabella. And added, that Horatio
would be there at five that Morning, or soon after. Bellamant smiled, and told
her, he was more obliged to them for their Plot, than he was to his Ancestors
for his Honor and Estate: And, after he had taken a fair Leave of her, she
returned to Bed in the next Room, from the place of Execution; without
discovering the pretended Horatio's Sex, lest he should forsake her, and marry
Henrietta, whose Charms she was but too well acquainted with for her ease. Nor
would she rid Bellamant of his troublesome Apprehensions for the supposed Death
of Worthygrace, till she had secured him to her self by Marriage.

Between five and six that morning Horatio came to his Lady's Lodgings, as was
expected; and went directly up Stairs to her Bedchamber, which he entered very
softly, and found her fast asleep, and all alone; for the Key was left
designedly on the out side. He did not desire to wake her by any means, and
therefore retreated as silently as he entered, locking the Door after him.
Thence he came to the next Room, where Winlove lay, the Door of which he found
double locked, and the Key without, which he turned, and stole in with the
least noise imaginable: coming to the Bedside, he found her in a dead Sleep
too; and being unwilling to disturb her, was returning down Stairs; and going
to lock the Door, made so much noise as wakened her. Who Is there? ( asked
Philandra.) Softly, softly, (returned Horatio, creeping toward her,) -- Will
you rise? I will just now, (replied she,) getting up, and dressing So together
they went to the Park, where they took a round or two, till 'twas about eight a
clock. Thence they went to a Coffee-house, where they drunk three or four
Dishes of Chocolet apiece: then they adjourned to Locket's, where whilst their
little Breakfast or Dinner was preparing, Henrietta began to ask Questions,
more to satisfy her own Curiosity, than to keep the other awake, tho it were
very necessary to talk to her lest she should have slept: Prithee, (said she)
and without any Preface, let me know the success of last Night's Advenventure;
Is she obstinately Virtuous, or are there any hopes of our Parting? Ah! no; (
replied Philandra,) she is Chaste as Ice, and true to your Bed as the Lodestone
to its Point. It Is true, (pursued she) after a whole Day's Courtship, I at last
prevailed; and, as I thought, had reached my end; for I lay with her in her own
Bed, from eleven to four; But -- Nay, that is enough; ( interrupted Henrietta.)
Hold* pray hear me out; (cried the other,) I had no sooner taken her in my Arms,
than she sighed and wept, and cried, Ah me! what do you mean Philandra? you
cannot carry the Cheat on in Bed I Am sure. Heaven, (said I, in my thoughts)
would thou would make me a Man this moment! This I wished, that I might have
served thee, my dear Henrietta. And pleasure yourself, Madam, ( returned
Henrietta.) But (it seems) she knew you then? Ay, ay, knew me, as I am; knew me
Philandra: knew me to be Womankind, or I dare engage I had never come so near
her. But (O!) when I first embraced the poor dear Creature, how it did tremble!
how short it drew its breath! and the poor Heart of it did beat so very fast
and loud, that though the Larum of my Watch beat that very moment, I yet could
hear the Motion of its Heart distinctly above the other. Ay! ( said Henrietta)
that is odd and strange: Prithee, what should cause it? Surprise, I imagine (
replied Philandra) to find me play my part so vigorously and so much to the
life. But ( asked Henrietta) since she knew you to be Philandra, what
occasioned you to leave her Bed before I came? O, Madam, (replied the other) that
was to blind your Ladiship's Attendants, who saw me go to Bed in the Room where
you found me; who would have thought it very impudent in her to find she had
received a young Spark to her Bed; for which she mistook me. I can but smile (
said Henrietta) to think, how finely you had been served, if instead of the
Sister you had met the Brother there. To answer you wantonly to your
Supposition, ( returned Philandra) I must tell you, had my Lord been living,
and there, he would have done me Knight's Service. But, after all this, ( said
Henrietta) I cannot any longer personate her Bridegroom, especially in Bed. You
need not, ( replied Philandra) do you continue at my House, and I will keep her
in her Lodgings, for I have engaged to wait on her every other day till you
return; which you may defer this month, if you please. It must be so, ( replied
Henrietta.) The Table was then covered, and immediately after two or three
Dishes were served in, which were instead of a Dinner: By the strength of which
they ventured to travel seven or eight Miles from the Town in their own easy
Coach. Mean while Arabella, as soon as her Ladyship was dressed, sent for her
two Friends to take a Dinner and a Bottle with her; who came precisely at the
hour: so to dinner they went, and her Ladyship eat and drank, as if she had
been already quick with three Children, and were to feed Them and her self: for
(to say truth) she had taken a great deal of pains. That day and night he
enjoyed himself with his drinking Friends; but the next was Loves and
Philandra's. A very pretty course of life this Loving and Drinking is, in my
Opinion; which he continued for above a Fortnight; consecrating one day and
night to his Mistress, and the next to his Friends and the merry Bottle.

Worthygrace in the mean time had made very considerable Advances in the Esteem
of the real Arabella; he found her inclinable enough to favor his Suit: The
only Obstacle she pretended, was, That she would see her Brother's Death
revenged ever she could be perfectly Happy in any State: And in order to that,
she told them, she would leave France in three or four days. To which he
returned, That he would certainly leave it at the same time; since, when she
was gone, he had no longer any business or pleasure there. And besides, did
solemnly oblige himself to show her the Unhappy Man who killed her Brother, and
to help her in her Revenge upon him. This Overture of his seemed to affect her
very much: And she consented he should accompany her to England; which he did,
after they had recommended all their Friends there to Heaven's Protection. And
on that very day they left Paris there came a Letter from Henrietta, with an
account of all her Transactions, since she had taken upon her the Person of her
younger Brother: but he did not receive this, till he had been near a Fortnight
here. As soon as they set foot on English ground, they made all possible haste
to Town; and happened to come to Bellamant's Lodgings that same day on which
Philandra came to visit him in her own wonted Habit. 'Twas about three a clock
in the Afternoon, when Arabella whispering Bellamant's Petticoated Page in the
Ear, asked, if his Lord were within; who replied Yes, Madam; and knowing her
very well, ran to acquaint Bellamant, who was somewhat busy with Philandra,
that a Gentleman and a Lady desired to speak with her Ladyship. He would not
tell his supposed Lady, that 'twas Arabella, lest Philandra should apprehend
that he knew 'twas Bellamant whom he had seen in Bed with her more than once.
Show 'em into the Parlour, ( said Bellamant) I Will wait on 'em instantly. I
cannot imagine who they should be, ( added he, to Philandra.) The Page led 'em
into the Parlour, and left 'em together. Now, Madam, said Worthygrace, I do
keep the promise I made to your Ladyship, for you see in me the unhappy man
that killed my Lord, your Brother; and I beseech you prosecute me with all the
rigor of the Law, that I may not live in despair. It Is hard, Sir, returned
she, I see your Love, and our unequal misfortunes, but here comes one that may
put an end to 'em, I hope. At that word, Bellamant, and Philandra entered. --
All of 'em at the sight of each other, stood fixed, and looked like their own
Monuments. Bellamant having a presence of mind above the rest, was the first
that broke the Charm; who, crying out, O my Lord, and dear Brother, are you yet
among the Living? ran to Arabella, and embracing and kissing her cheeks,
whispered to her at the same time, that she should own her self Bellamant. My
dear Arabella, said his Sister, embracing him again, how happy am I to see thee
once more. Ah, Philandra, pursued she, I hope you will at last put an end to
our dispute, in your choice of one of us; at which, Philandra blushed, and
wept. Nay, my Lord, returned Worthygrace, I am otherwise engaged, you may
believe; for though I have hitherto mistaken your Lordship for the Lady your
Sister, I must continue my address to her; and I hope your Lordship is sensible
that my passion is real. Ay, Sir, replied Arabella, still personating her
Brother; my Sister has the misfortune to be very like me, and I doubt not that
your passion designed for her is real; Sister (continued she) let me commend
this Gentleman to your dearest thoughts. Saying so, she joined their hands. Do
you consent to make me happy, Madam? (said Worthygrace, to his Rival that was)
I cannot do better Sir, than to follow the advice of my honored Brother, said
Bellamant. Well, Sister, returned Arabella, for your kind complaisance, I will
add 5000 l. to your Fortune, and make it up Thirty Thousand pounds. Your
Lordship ever was my most obliging and affectionate Brother (replied
Bellamant.) Philandra all this while did not know how to behave her self;
sometimes she was ready to burst with envy, to see Worthygrace forsake her, for
Arabella; and sometimes with laughter, to see how neatly the Brother and Sister
played a contrary part. At last she broke silence, and said, I am happy beyond
Expectation, Hope, or Wish, my Lord, to see your Lordship, and this Honorable
Gentleman living, and so happily united. They both Saluted, and thanked her. I
dare say my Lord, said Bellamant to Arabella, your Lordship is horribly
ashamed, and weary of your Petticoats. You may be confident of it, replied she.
To morrow your Lordship will appear like your self, I hope, returned Bellamant.
I wish my Lord, said Worthygraee to Arabella, that your Lordship had so
appeared in Paris. But then I suppose you had lost all the divertee your
Lordship has had with my passion, mistaking you for the Lady your Sister. Ay,
Sir, returned Arabella, you have spoken my thoughts. Sir, said Philandra to
Worthygrace, I believe there is an acquaintance of yours at my Country House,
whom I will wait on hither to morrow. -- Mean while, pursued she, to Arabella,
my Lord, I humbly take my leave. I am your Ladyships Servant, added she to
Bellamant, Mr. Worthygrace, your Servant. They all waited on her to her Coach,
and Worthygrace would needs attend her home, that she might not be alone, and
that he might the sooner see his Sister. Henrietta expressed a great deal of
satisfaction at the sight of her Brother, after so long an absence; nor was he
behind hand in his expressions of joy at the sight of her; Philandra only was
disconsolate, who found she should dye an Vnmarry'd Widow, unless she took up
with Sir Blunder Slouch, or some such Booby of a Hushand.

When Bellamant and his Sister were alone, she would fain have known why he had
obliged her to personate him? Who replied, there are reasons of State, Child,
too dark for thee to pry into. Now it was only generously to preserve
Philandra's Reputation unsuspected. Next morning Bellamant was dressed like
himself, and Arabella was as Glorious as her best habiliments could make her;
and about Ten a Clock Worthygrace, Henrietta, Philandra, and Sir Blunder
Slouch, who went to visit Philandra the day before, came to Congratulate his
Lordship's return to the Land of the Living, as he had welcomed Worthygrace to
life again. To this end came Henrietta, no longer now in Man's Apparel. When
the Complements on all sides were over, Worthygrace led his Sister to Arabella,
to beg her pardon, that she had thus long abused her with the appearance of a
Man. How, cried Bellamant, is this the Beautiful Counterfeit that I have heard
my Sister speak of? It is then in her power to make me the most happy of all
Mankind, in receiving an heart that was made for her to command. In which I beg
your assistance, Sir, added he to Worthygrace; who replied, that he was assured
his Sister would be advised by him in any thing, especially in what would for
ever complete her happiness on Earth; which she confirmed. Replying, I am all
obedience, Sir, you are now both Father and Brother to me. Worthygrace then
presented her hand to Bellamant, who received it with the greatest
demonstrations of satisfaction and joy. Now, Madam, said he to Philandra, we
have made your choice easy to you; for you can now be cruel to neither of us.
I only beg you will not be cruel to Sir Blunder, who has been your old and
faithful Servant. I think indeed he was bound before me, and has served out his
whole Apprentiship of Seven Years; pray Madam make him free at last, we all
make it our Petition to you (said Worthygrace and the Ladies.) I hope, Madam
Philandra, (cried Sir Blunder) you will at last take pity upon me. Ay, Knight
(returned she) But -- It Is for my own sake, you may be confident. I am resolved
I will not be singular, among so many Worthy and Honorable Friends. But first
I beg one word with your Lordship (added she to Bellamant) who approached her
very humbly and respectfully, bowing down his head to receive her whisper --
Are not you a False man? (said she) Ay, Madam (replied he) but that is because
you are a True Woman. -- And let me remind you, that you have had the pleasure
to make a Whore of me, and a Cuckold of my Wife. Besides, I have taken care
that your reputation shall not suffer by me -- Alas (Madam pursued he aloud)
what needed this have been whispered? -- She says Sir Blunder, she will not be
debarred the gayety of her humor, nor be confined to your damned Conventicles,
nor smoaky City. And truly I think it is but reasonable she should not. In good
faith (replied Sir Blunder) she shall have Liberty of Conscience, if she will
have me: Upon that, Bellamant gave him her hand; and Sir Blunder was the happy
Man that got the City-Fortune; who indeed I think was fit for no man else. My
Lord (said Worthygrace) I will follow your generous Example, and add Ten
Thousand Pounds to my Sister's Portion, to make it Thirty Thousand Pounds. And
now I beseech your Lordship (pursued he) to prefix the day that shall make us
all happy. By this day fortnight (returned Bellamant) we may be prepared for
the mighty Blessing. This day fortnight (cried Philandra) I Will not stay an
hour, but will have the honor to set you the Glorious Example. There is a
Domine hard by I warrant you, that will oblige me so far. He was immediately
sent for, and they were both Executed at one blow. This day (said she) I
challenge as mine; you are all my Guests, and I have already ordered a Dinner
at my Country Farm, whither you all must go. Upon this, they instantly took
their Coaches, and drove for the Lady Slouche's; who, as I have heard, about
Eight Months after, was fain to be brought to Bed; before the Child could be
Born, which was very like the Father: The Lord Bellamant was Godfather; as any
Spark or Beau may be to the next, if he knows where to find her.

FINIS.

