A LETTER From His GRACE JAMES DUKE OF ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, In
Answer to the Right Honorable ARTHUR EARL OF ANGLESEY Lord Privy Seal, HIS
OBSERVATIONS and REFLECTIONS Upon the EARL of Castlehaven's Memoires Concerning
the REBELLION of IRELAND.

Printed from the Original, with an Answer to it, by the Right Honorable the
Earl of Anglesey.

LONDON, Printed for N. P. MDCLXXXII.

A LETTER From His GRACE JAMES DUKE OF ORMOND, etc.
My Lord,
IT is now, I think, more than a year since I first saw a little BOOK written
by way of Letter, called, Observations and Reflections on my Lord of
Castle-Haven 's Memoires: Wherein, though there are some things that might lead
the Reader to believe that your Lordship was the AUTHOR yet there were many
more I thought impossible should come from you: For it affirms many Matters of
Fact positively, which are easily and authentically to be disproved: And from
those Matters of Fact, grossly mistaken, it deduces Consequences, raises
Inferences, and scatters Glances injurious to the memory of the Dead, and the
Honors of some Living: Among those that by the Blessing of God are yet living,
I find my self worst Treated; Twenty years after the Kings Restoration, and
Forty after the beginning of the Irish Rebellion, as if it had been all that
while reserved for me, and for such Times as these we are fallen into, when
Calumny, (though the Matter of it be never so groundless and improbable,) meets
with Credulity; and when Liberty is taken to asperse Men, and Represent them to
the World under the monstrous and odious Figures of Papists, or Popishly
affected: Not because they are so thought by those that employ the
Representers, but, because they are known to be too good Protestants, and too
Loyal Subjects, to join in the Destruction of the Crown and Church: Besides,
the Treatise came forth, and must have been written, when I had but newly
received Repeated Assurances of the continuance of your Friendship to me,
wherein, as in one of your Letters, you are pleased to say, you had never made
a false step; for these Reasons I was not willing to believe that Book to be
your Lordships Composing, and hoped some of the Suborned Libellers of the Age
had endeavored to Imitate your Lordship, and not you them; but I was in a
while after, first by my Son Arran, and afterward by the Bearer, Sir Robert
Reading, assured your Lordship had owned to them that the Piece was yours, but
professed the Publication to be without your Order, and that you did not intend
to do, or think that you had done me any injury or prejudice: If your Lordship
really thought so, the Publication might have been owned as well as what was
Published: But then let the World Judge, whether Pen, Ink, and Paper are not
dangerous Tools in your Hands? When I was thus assured your Lordship was the
Author, it cost me some thoughts how to vindicate Truth, my Master the late
King, my self, my Actions and Family, all Reflected on, and traduced by that
Pamphlet; I found my self engaged in the Service of our present King, and that
in a Time of difficulty and danger, and in such Times for the most part it has
been my lot to be Employed in Public Affairs; and though I had not been so
taken up, yet I well knew that Writing upon such Occasions is no more my
Talent, than it is my Delight: And to say truth, my indisposition to the
exercise might help to persuade me, that the Book, though honored with your
Lordships Name, would, after it had performed its Office in Coffee-Houses, and
served your Lordships Design in that Conjuncture, expire; as Writings of that
nature and force usually do: And herein I rested, without troubling my self, or
any body else, with Animadversions upon your Lordships mistakes, which are so
many, and so obvious, that I wonder how you could fall into them. I will add to
this, that I have been in expectation that by this time your Complete History
would have come forth, wherein, if I may judge by the Pattern, I have just
cause to suspect that neither the Subject or my self will be more justly dealt
with, than in that occasional Essay, and I would have been glad to have seen
all my Work before me, in case I should think fit to make a Work of it. The
delay of your Publishing that History, and the consideration of your Lordships
Age and mine, are the occasions of this Letter, whereby I inform you, that as
no man now alive is better able than I am to give an account of the Principal
Transactions during the Rebellion in Ireland; so no man is possessed of more
Authentic Commissions, Instruments, and Papers; all which, or Transcripts of
them, you might have Commanded, before you set forth your Reflections: But
possibly to have stayed for them, might have lost you a seasonable opportunity
of Publishing your abhorrence of the Irish Rebellion, and your Zeal against
Popery: What your Lordship might then have had, you may yet have, because I had
rather help to prevent than detect Errors, but then I must first know to what
particular part of your History you desire Information, and how you deliver
those parts to the World and to Posterity. If after this Offer your Lordship
shall proceed to the Conclusion and Publication of your History, and not accept
of it, I must beforehand Appeal from you, as from an Incompetent Judge of my
Actions, and a partially engaged and an unfaithful Historian.

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant, ORMOND.
Dublin, 12. Nov. 1681.
A LETTER From the Right Honorable ARTHUR EARL OF ANGLESEY Lord Privy Seal, In
Answer to his GRACE the DUKE of ORMOND'S Letter of November the 12 th. 1681.

About his Lordships Observations and Reflections upon the EARL of
Castle-Haven's Memoires, concerning the Rebellion of Ireland.

LONDON, Printed for N. P. 1682.

A LETTER From the Right Honorable ARTHUR EARL OF ANGLESEY, etc.
My Lord,
YOUR Graces of the 12 th of November, I received toward the end of that
Month, and was not a little surprised, after being threatened above a year with
your Graces Answer to the Observations and Restections on my Lord Castle-Haven
's Memoires, which your Grace takes notice you had seen above a year before; to
find them only most Satyrically burlesqued, and my intentions in the Writing of
them most unnaturally misinterpreted and misjudged, without giving instance of
any one particular, which could so much transport your Grace, or interest you
to judge of a Letter of mine to another, with so invective heat and mistake.

Your Graces Letter therefore consisting only of Generals, I can no otherwise
adapt my Answer, (after a most serious revision of my Book upon this Occasion)
but by giving the reverse of your Graces strained and erroneous Affirmatives by
my plain and true Negatives, till your Grace shall administer occasion, by
Communicating the particular Animadversions your Grace has been (as I hear) so
long about.

The Reasons leading your Grace to believe it impossible I could be the Author
of that Discourse, I cannot admit, though they import a fair Opinion of me; and
that in the beginning of your Letter your Grace had better thoughts than when
your Hand was in and heated.

I do therefore absolutely deny that I affirm any Matters of Fact positively in
that Book, which are easily or authentically (or at all) to be disproved.

Or that from those Matters of Fact, grossly mistaken, it deduces Consequences,
raises Inferences, and scatters Glances injurious to the memory of the Dead,
and the Honor of some living; among which your Grace finds your self worst
treated.

This being so, your Graces unjust Inferences from the time of its Writing, and
the misjudging the design of the Author, give no countenance or occasion to
your Graces Rhetorical Character of the Times, though I join in all, but the
Opinion your Grace seems to have taken up that there is a Plot, (other than
that of the Papists) to destroy the Crown and Church; a Discovery worthy the
making, if your Grace knows, and believes what you Write; but how I am
concerned to have it mentioned to me, I know not, your Grace can best tell what
you intend to insinuate thereby.

These are your Graces Reasons why you were not willing to believe that Book to
be of my Composing, yet you cannot leave me without a sting, in your expressing
the hopes which succeeded them, viz. That some of the Suborned Libellers of the
Age had endeavored to imitate me, and not I them.

Whether I should imitate Suborned Libellers, or they me, would be all one for
my Reputation; because I were grossly Criminal in the first, and must have been
so before in your Graces Opinion, or they could not imitate me in the second:
Your Grace will want Instances in both, except this of your own making; and
therefore there must be some other reason why your Grace did not believe (if
really you did not) that Discourse to be of my composure.

But this admitted for truth (as it is undoubtedly) your Grace in the next
place calls the World to judge whether Pen, Ink, and Paper, are not dangerous
Tools in my Hands.

I remember the Times, when they were serviceable to the Kings Restoration, and
constant Service of the Crown, or craved in aid by your Grace, that you did not
account them so; and it is much to my safety that they are not so in your
Graces Hands, though I find them as sharp there as in any man's alive.

Your Grace being at length assured I was the Author, your next care was to
spend some thoughts to vindicate Truth, the late King, your self, your Actions,
and Family, all reflected upon, and traduced (as your Grace is pleased to
fancy) by that Pamphlet.

But your Grace had no cause to trouble your thoughts with such Vindications,
unless you could show where in that Book they are reflected upon and traduced,
no such thing occurring to me (upon the strictest revisal) nor ever shall be
objected to me with Justice and Truth.

After your Grace has brought it to the Coffee-Houses, (where I believe it
never was till your Grace prefered it to that Office) and where you have doomed
it to expire, as Writings of that Nature and force use (you say) to do (for
which I shall not be at all concerned) you rested without troubling your self
or any body else with Animadversions upon my mistakes, which your Grace is
pleased to say are so many and so obvious (though you name none, nor do they
occur to others) that you wonder how I could fall into them.

If your Grace believe your self in this, you seem to have forgot the long time
you spent in considering and animadverting upon that despicable Pamphlet, with
your Labors whereon I was threatened by some of your Graces Relations for many
Months; and your Grace has redeemed the delay, by the virulent general
Reflections you have now sent me, which yet I doubt not will evaporate or
shrink to nothing, when your Grace shall seek for Instances to back them,
whereof if you can find any, I claim in Justice they may be sent me.

Your Grace adds, That you have been in expectation that by this time my
complete History would have come forth; wherein (if you may judge by the
pattern) your Grace says, you have just cause to suspect, that neither the
Subject nor your self will be more justly dealt with than in that occasional
Essay; and therefore offer me all the helps of Authentic Commissions,
Transactions and Papers your Grace is possessed of, whereof you inform me none
has more.

This is an anticipating Jealousy, which no man living can have ground for;
and when my History shall be completed (which is now delayed for those
Assistances your Grace is so well able, and so freely offers to afford me)
though my weakness may be exposed, my Integrity and Impartiality shall appear,
and your unjust suspicion will, I doubt not, cease, if Truth may be welcome to
you, and not accounted one of the dangerous Instruments in my Hand; by which
having incurred your Anger and Enmity in the first Essay, I have slender hopes
to be more acceptable in the second; though I resolve to hold to the first
approved Law of a good and faithful Historian, which is, That he should not
dare to say any thing that is false; and that he dare not but say any thing
that is true, that there be not so much as suspicion of favor or hatred in his
Writing.

And this might give a Supersedeas to your Graces unseasonable Appeal, before a
Gravamen; though I never intended, by relating the truth of things past, to
become a Judge of your Graces or any other man's actions, but barely Res gestas
Narrare, for the information, correction, and instruction of this Age and
Posterity.

Your Grace desiring to know to what particular parts of my History I would
have Information, I shall at present only mention these.

The Intrigues of the Cessation, and Commissions for them and the two Peaces of
1646. and 1648. forced upon the King by the Rebellious Irish.

The grounds and transactions about depriving Sir William Parsons from being
one of the Lords Justices, and then dismissing him, Sir Adam Loftus
Vice-Treasurer, Sir John Temple Master of the Rolls, Sir Robert Meredith
Chancellor of the Exchequer, etc. from the Council Table.

The Mystery of Glamorgan's Peace, and his Punishment.

The several ungrateful Expulsions of your Grace by the Confederate Roman
Catholics.

The passages concerning the Parliaments Present of a Jewel to your Grace.

The Battles, Reliefs, Seiges, and Chief Encounters in your Graces time.

The Proceedings between your Grace and the Roman Catholic Assembly of the
Clergy in 1666. with the Commission for their Sitting.

The Plot for surprising the Castle of Dublin, in which Warren and others were,
with the Examinations, and what Offenders were Executed, etc.

And any thing else your Grace judges of import to have conveyed to Posterity.

Other parts of the History shall be proposed to your Grace in my Progress, and
before I put my last Hand to it, with a resolution, that though I may have been
sometimes mistaken in Judgment: yet as I never did promote the report of a
Matter of Fact which I knew to be false, so I never would.

Which I am induced the rather to mention, because your Grace says, you had
rather help to prevent, than to detect Errors.

My Lord, Your Graces most humble Servant ANGLESEY.


