Dr. BENTLEY'S DISSERTATIONS ON THE Epistles of PHALARIS, AND THE Fables of
AESOP, EXAMINED By the Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire

-- Remember Milo's End;
Wedged in that Timber which he strove to rend.
Roscom. Ess. of Transl. Verse. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the
Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard. School.

THE PREFACE.
SOON after Dr. Bentley's Dissertation came out, I was called away into
Ireland, to attend the Parliament there. The Public Business, and my own
private affairs, detained me a great while in that Kingdom, else the World
should have had a much Earlier account of Him, and his Performance. For though He
took above two Years to make his Learned Reflections on Phalaris; yet Two
Months would have been enough to have shown him, that he is but a weak Champion
in a very frivolous Cause.

I speak not this one of any vain design of setting up for a Quick Writer, but
merely to avoid being thought to have thrown away any considerable part of my
life upon so triflng a subject: which, as Idle a man as I am, is an Imputation
I would not willingly lie under.

I little imagined ever to have been engaged in a Dispute of this nature. I am
not very fond of Controversies even where the Points debated are of some
importance; but in trivial matters, and such as Mankind is not at all concerned
in, methinks they are unpardonable. This, ever since I came to have any
Opinions of my own, has been one of 'em; and is still, though I am unluckily at
present brought to act contrary to it. But the Case is this -- Dr. Bentley has
been pleased, with some warmth, to fall foul on an Edition and Version of
Phalaris's Epistles, that I some years since offered to the World. He has taken
a great deal of Good-natured pains to prove, that I had been very foolishly
busying my self upon a Contemptible and Spurious Author; and had made a bad
book much worse by a very ill Edition of it. I was very Young, when I appeared
on that occasion; and I appeared rather as one that wished well to Learning
than professed it; and for both these reasons promised my self good usage from
the men of more profound Skill in such matters. Dr. Bentley was sensible that
his Criticisms would lie under some disadvantage on this account; and
therefore, to excuse his making so free with the Edition, was pleased to make
yet freer with Me; and, according to His Breeding, to tell Me, and all the
World, that I had set my name to a Book, which did not belong to me.

The first of these Reflections, had it come single, I could easily have
neglected: had he stopped there, I would have left the Book to shift for it
self, and Him to the good opinion he has of his own performances, without
endeavoring to lessen it. But when he carried his Criticisms so far as to
assert, not only of Phalaris, but his Editor too, that they neither of 'em
wrote what was ascribed to 'em; he gave me so plain, and so public an Affront,
that I could not, with any tolerable regard to my reputation, quietly put it
up. Thus was I, much against my inclinations, brought into the Lists. It was
necessary for me to say something in defense of my self; and when I did so, I
thought it would be judged proper for me to say something too in defense of my
Author; and to enquire into the justness of those Criticisms which Dr. Bentley
has advanced on this occasion; and which, I foresaw, would be looked upon, as
in some measure aimed at Me, though they did not really belong to me.

I have not any where in my Book asserted, that the Epistles, which carry
Phalaris's name, are Genuine; and I am not therefore engaged to defend their
Reputation against the Attacks of Dr. Bentley, or any other person, who, by the
help of Leisure and Lexicons, shall set up for a Critic in this point. But as I
have not undertaken for their being Genuine, so neither have I, with a decisive
and assuming air, pronounced 'em Spurious. I expressed my self with that
Caution and Reserve in this matter, which I thought became a Young Writer, who
was sensible, that the best and ablest Judges were divided in their opinions
about it; and I thought it would be a very Indecent part in Me, to make my self
a Judge between 'em.

But I was chiefly induced to observe these measures, by the Regard I had for
the most Accomplished Writer of the Age, whom I never think of, without calling
to mind those happy Lines of Lucretius, Qnem Tu, Dea, Tempore in omni
Omnibus ornatum voluisti excellere rebus.
a Character, which, I dare say, Memmius did not better deserve, than Sir
William Temple. He had openly declared in favor of the Epistles: and the
Nicety of his Taste was never, I think, disputed by Such as had any themselves.
I quoted his Words with that respect which is due to every thing that comes
from him: but must now beg his pardon for it; for I have by this means, I find,
drawn him into a share of Dr. Bentley's displeasure: who has hereupon given
himself the trouble of writing almost fourscore pages solemnly to disprove that
One of Sir William's which he has prefixed to his Dissertation; and which, to
give him my opinion of his whole Book at once, is the only good Page there.

I am therefore the rather inclined to give Dr. Bentley's Reflections a Due
Examination, on Sir William Temple's account; upon whom I so unhappily
occasioned this Storm of Criticism to fall. In truth, for a Man who has been so
great an Ornament to Learning, he has had strange usage from Some who are
Retainers to it. He had set the world a Pattern of mixing Wit with Reason,
Sound Knowledge with Good Manners; and of making the one serve to recommend and
set off the other; but his Copy has not been at all followed by those that have
writ against him, in a very rough way, and without that Respect which was due
both to His Character, and their Own.

I will not pretend to determine, on which side, in those Disputes, the Truth
lies; only thus much I will venture to say of 'em, that, let Sir W. T. be as
much out in some of his Opinions as he is represented to be, yet They, who read
both sides, will be apt to fall in with Tully's Opinion of Plato, and say, Cum
Illo Ego mehercle errare malim quam cum istis Scriptoribus vera sentire. I had
rather be so Handsomely mistaken as He is, if he be mistaken, than be so Rudely
and Dully in the right, as Some of his Opposers, allowing 'em to be in the
right, are.

There was also another Consideration that determined me to write. Dr.
Bentley's Reflections were understood to go further than either Sir William
Temple, or my Self; and to be levelled at a Learned Society, in which I had the
happiness to be educated: and which Dr. Bentley is supposed to attack under
those General Terms of Our New Editors, Our Annotators, and Those Great
Genius's with whom Learning, that is leaving the world, has taken up her last
Residence.

By these, and such expressions as these, with which his Familiar Epistle
abounds, he would insinuate as if Phalaris, as slight a piece as it is, had
been made up by contribution from several hands, and were the Joint Work of
that Eminent Body. But in this he does me too great an honor; and I Am almost
tempted to take it, as Terence did the agreeable Reproach of Laelius and
Scipio's writing his Plays for him; neither to own nor deny it. But Terence
wrote what might have become those Noble Pens; and therefore did no injury to
their Reputation when he favored that mistake: whereas I should be extremely
to blame, if I should suffer a Report to spread to the disadvantage of so many
Excellent Men. I think my self therefore obliged to declare, that whatever the
Faults of Phalaris are, they are Mine; and I alone am answerable for them.
There is a very Deserving Gentleman indeed, who had a little before been the
Director of my Studies, and was then My Particular Friend, to whom I have
acknowledgments to make on his occasion. I consulted him upon any difficulty,
because I thought it not proper for one of my Age to offer any thing to the
Public without consulting Somebody. I wish I had advised oftener with him, for
then my Book would have been much more correct. But excepting Him, no one had a
hand in it; nay, scarce a line was ever seen by anybody else as I know of,
till it was finished And now I have confessed thus much, I don't care if I own
a little further to Dr. Bentley, that I have been again obliged to the Same
person for his Assistance in consulting some Books in the Oxford Libraries at
my request, which in the Places where I have been were not at all, or not
easily, to be met with. The Dr. may make what advantages of this he thinks fit;
I assure him, I will never recriminate; for I declare to the World, that I
sincerely believe the Dr's Dissertation is entirely his own, both as to Matter
and Dress; and that no Friend whatever, no not Mr. Wotton himself, had any hand
in it. The happy Genius of some Authors will for ever secure 'em from all
Scandals of this nature: Terence indeed was suspected, but Bavius and Moevius
never were. Dr. Bentley has industriously contrived to lead his Reader into
this mistake; imagining, I suppose, that the Conquest would have been too cheap
for a man of his Rank in Letters, unless he engaged, like the Hero of a
Romance, with great numbers at once. But some men have thought themselves
Heroes that were not, and some that were, have mistaken their Strength; and in
either of these cases have come off but scurvily. The Dr, I Am sure, would have
been made very sensible of this in the present Debate, had not I been kinder to
him than He was to Himself, and stepped in, as I thought it became me, between
Him and the just resentments of that Learned Body. 'Twere pity that any of
those worthy Men, who know so well how to employ their hours, should be
diverted from the pursuit of Useful Knowledge, into such Trivial Enquiries as
these. The Dispute began between Dr. Bentley, and Me; and it is fit that We Two
should end it.

I have a Request to Such as shall give themselves the Trouble of perusing
These Papers, that they would do Me, and Dr. Bentley, the Justice to compare
'em, Paragraph by Paragraph, with His Dissertations. The Task is a little
unreasonable, considering the Length of the Dispute; but it is necessary, in
order to form a true judgment of the Performance.

Dr. BENTLEY'S Dissertation UPON THE Epistles of Phalaris, etc. EXAMINED.
DR. Bentley, in the Piece I am about to examine, among several other
Liberties, has taken this, of writing without any Method. Great Genius's indeed
are above ordinary Rules: but it would ill become so unknown a Writer as I am,
to exempt my self from 'em; and therefore I shall prescribe my self a method in
answering him.

I think most of the scattered Remarks he has made, in that part of his
Dissertation which relates to Phalaris, will come under one of these Three
Heads; They are either some Arguments, which he has urged for the Spuriousness
of the Epistles; or some Faults which he has found with my Edition and Version
of 'em; or some Matters of Fact which he has related, as the Grounds of his
peevish Quarrel.

These last he has thrown into an odd corner of his Book, as it were out of
sight; and placed 'em in the Rear of all his learned Arguments. One would
imagine, by the Post he has given 'em, that he distrusted their strength, or
that he wrote his Book first, and found Reasons for it afterward. However that
may be, I think my self obliged to clear up this Point in the first place, by
setting those Matters of Fact in their true light, which Dr. Bentley has
extremely disguised: And then 'twill be time to consider the Wonderful Proofs
he has produced on his side, and the Mighty Mistakes he has thought fit to
charge me with.

About four or five Years ago, the worthy Dean of Christchurch, Dr. Aldrich,
(of whose College I was then a Member) desired me to undertake an Edition of
Phalaris. I could deny Him nothing, to whom I owed so much; and therefore, as
unfit as I thought my self for such a Task, I undertook it. In order to it, a
Manuscript Phalaris in the King's Library was to be consulted. It was of no Age
or Worth, I heard, being written but just before the restoration of Letters;
however it was a Manuscript, and therefore not to be neglected; especially
since we had no ancient Copies, either in England, or any where else, that I
could hear of. I sent to Mr. Bennet, my Bookseller in London, to get the
Manuscript, and desired him to apply himself to Dr. Bentley, in my name, for
the use of it; not doubting in the least a ready compliance with such a
request, from one of his Station and Order; and who besides was at that very
time in a Lecture of some Honor and Profit that had lately been set up by one
of my Family: especially, since the Book, which I desired to borrow, was of so
little importance, that it had scarce been a Favor to have lent it me, if I
had not asked it. After an Expectation of many months, Mr. Bennet sent me at
last a Collation of part of the Manuscript, with this account; that he had,
with a great difficulty, and after long delays, got the Manuscript into his
hands; that he had it but a very few days, when Dr. Bentley came to demand it
again; and would, by no means, be prevailed upon to let him have the use of it
any longer, though he told him, the Collation was not perfected: and that he
denied this Request in a very rude manner, throwing out several slight and
disparaging Expressions, both of me, and the Work I was about.

This I had reason to take very ill of Dr. Bentley, and therefore in that part
of my Preface, where I gave an account of the MSS. that were consulted in that
Edition, I inserted these words, [ Collatas etiam curavi usque ad Epistolam 40
cum MSo in Bibliotheca Regia; cujus mihi copiam ulteriorem Bibliothecarius, pro
singulari sua humanitate, negavit.] which, considering the usage I had had from
him, was as soft a thing as I could well allow my self to say. The Epistles
were no sooner published, but Dr. Bentley sent me a Letter; wherein, after
expressing himself with great civility to me, he represented the Matter of Fact
quite otherwise than I had heard it. I returned him immediately as civil an
Answer, to this effect: That Mr. Bennet, whom I employed to wait on him in my
name, gave me such an account of his Reception, that I had reason to apprehend
my self affronted: and, since I could make no other excuse to my Reader, for
not collating the King's MS. but because 'twas denied me, I thought I could do
no less than express some resentment of that Denial. That I should be very much
concerned if Mr. Bennet had dealt so ill with me, as to mislead me in his
accounts; and, if that appeared, should be ready to take some opportunity of
begging his pardon: and, as I remember, I expressed my self so, that the Dr.
might understand, I meant to give him satisfaction as publicly as I had
injured him. Here the matter rested, and I thought Dr. Bentley was satisfied;
especially since, I found, Mr. Bennet persisted in his account, and supported
it with further proofs; and the Dr. seemed willing to let the Dispute drop, by
his not writing to me any further about it, or discoursing Mr. Bennet
concerning it, to whom my Letter plainly referred him. In this Mistake was I,
for Two Years and an half after the Edition of Phalaris; till at last Dr.
Bentley's Dissertation came out, and convinced me, that he had had Vengeance in
his Heart all the time, and suspended his Blow only till he could strike, as he
thought, to purpose. In this angry. Discourse of his, he tells the World the
same story (bating a Circumstance or two which he has altered) that he had told
me before in his Letter. His words are these: A Bookseller came to me in the
name of the Editors, to beg the use of the Manuscript. It was not then in my
custody: but as soon as I had the power of it, P. 68.
I went voluntarily and offered it him, bidding him tell the Collator not to
lose any time; for I was shortly to go out of Town for two Months. 'Twas
delivered, used, and returned: Not a word said by the Bearer, nor the least
suspicion in me, that they had not finished the Collation.

Startled at these Assertions thus revived, after a long Silence, and improved
in Print, I examined Mr. Bennet again very strictly and particularly. He
assur^d me, that every word he had writ to me upon this occasion was punctually
true; and that Dr. Bentley's account, where it differed from his, was entirely
false. He drew up the Matter of Fact in writing, and set his Hand to it; giving
me liberty to make it public, and to assure the World, that he was ready to
justify the truth of what he had written with his Oath, when it should be duly
required of him. He added, that Mr. Gibson, the Collator, could confirm some
circumstances of his Account; and that his Brother (who was his Apprentice at
that time, and was sent by him both to Dr. Bentley, and to the Collator) would
have attested the Truth of the Whole, had he been alive; but he died some
Months after this Matter happened. However, if his own Testimony, and the
Collator's, should be liable to Suspicion, yet still there was a Gentleman of
known Credit in the World, Dr. King of the Commons, who was witness to all that
passed at one meeting, between him and Dr. Bentley; and would, he hoped, be so
just to him as to give an account of it. He was not mistaken; for Dr. King,
being applied to by a Friend of mine, presently wrote him the following Letter:
which, together with the several Certificates of Mr. Bennet and Mr. Gibson, I
here offer to the Reader.

WHereas the Reverend Dr. Bentley has thought fit, in the Appendix to Mr.
Wotton's Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, (p. 66, and 67.) to insert
the following words as Matter of Fact, See the Passage at length, p. 5.
[viz. A Bookseller came to me in the name of the Editors, etc.] I think my
self obliged to give the World the following account, wherein I have faithfully
related what passed on that occasion.

I was employed by the Honorable Mr. Boil, (and by him only) to borrow the
MS. of Phalaris from Dr. Bentley. After about Nine Months solicitation, it was
delivered into my custody, without any time limited for the return of it.
Within few days after, Dr. Bentley called upon me, to have it restored, and
Then told me, that he was to go into the Country. He staid till I sent to the
Collator, and word was brought by the Messenger, that it was not collated. I
then begged him to let me have it but till Sunday Morning, (it was Saturday Noon
when he came) and I engaged to oblige the Collator to sit up all Saturday
Night, to get it finished. But he utterly refused to leave it with me any
longer, demanding to have it sent that Day to Westminster, (which was done
accordingly) and not giving me any the least hopes, that if I applied to him
upon his return out of the Country, I should have leave to get the Collation
perfected. These Circumstances I am thus particular in, because I had occasion
to recollect 'em not long afterward, when Mr. Boyle's Book came out, and
Letters passed between him and Dr. Bentley, concerning the Passage in his
Preface.

It may not be proper, considering my Employment, for me to add an account of
the Reflections. Dr. Bentley was pleased to make from time to time, when I
spoke to him from Mr. Boil, for the Use of the MS. He has represented me as
having said too much on that subject. But, by good fortune, Dr. King was
present at one of the Meetings, and heard all that passed there. I hope he will
do Justice on this occasion.

Thomas Bennet.
July 13. 1697.

I Very well remember, that Mr. Bennet sent his Man to me for Phalaris's
Epistles, whilst I was collating 'em; and being unwilling to part with them,
before I had gone through 'em, I sent the Man back without them. But he
presently returned, and told me, that the Gentleman, that owned them, staid at
their Shop for them, and could not spare them any longer: This is the true
reason, why I could collate no more of the abovesaid Epistles.

Witness my Hand, Geo. Gibson.
July 15. 1697.

SIR,
I Am bound in Justice to answer your request, by endeavoring, as far as I
can, to recollect what passed between Mr. Bennet and Dr. Bentley, concerning a
MS. of the Epistles of Phalaris. I cannot be certain as to any other
Particulars, than that, among other things, the Dr. said, that if the MS. were
collated, it would be worth nothing for the future. Which I took the more
notice of, because I thought a MS. good for nothing, unless it were collated.
The whole Discourse was managed with such Insolence, that after he was gone, I
told Mr. Bennet, that he ought to send Mr. Boil word of it: that, for my own
part, (I said then what I think still) I did not believe that the Various
Readings of any Book were so much worth, as that a Person of Mr. Boyle's Honor
and Learning, should be used so scurvily to obtain 'em. That scorn and contempt
which I have naturally for Pride and Insolence, makes me remember that, which
otherwise I might have forgot. Believe me, Sir, to be

Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, William King.
Doctors Commons, October. 13. 1697.

The Case then between me and Dr. Bentley stands thus. There is, on the one
side, Dr. Bently's single Assertion, in his own cause; and these several
concurring Accounts, from Persons of Probity and Worth, on the other. The
question now is (if it be a question) which of these ought to be credited; the
Point to me is so clear, that I dare trust the most partial Friend Dr. Bentley
has to determine it.

Mr. Bennet and Mr. Gibson, I think, are so little interested in this Dispute,
that they may be entirely depended upon. However, Dr. King is a Witness without
Exception; and the account he gives of one of those Free Conferences Dr.
Bentley held with Mr. Bennet, is full and home; and I do assure our Learned
Critic, that whatever becomes of Phalaris's Letters, this of Dr. King's is not
spurious. I have the Original of it by me under his own hand, as I have the
Originals too of the other Papers, which shall be at Dr. Bentley's, or any
man's service, that pleases to command a sight of 'em.

And now had I not reason to say what I did, and much more than I did, of Dr.
Bentley, in my Preface to Phalaris? Could I resent the harsh Treatment he had
given me in Gentler Terms than I there made use of? Since he had denied me so
common a favor, and spoken of me with so much contempt, I was at Liberty, I
think, to have returned his Civilities in what way I pleased, and to have given
him any Language whatever that it was not below me to give. And that is a
Restraint which, I hope, I shall always be able to lay upon my self, whatever
the Provocation be.

Dr. Bentley then, considering all things, was really obliged to me, for using
him with so much Tenderness. What way did he take of owning his Obligations? He
immediately entered upon the Honorable and Christian Design of exposing me;
and resolved, whatever Time or Pains it might cost him, to prove, that the
Epistles I had put out were a ridiculous Cheat; and that I (or whoever the
Editor was) was to be pitied, for giving my self so much trouble about them.

I see Monsiour Rochfaucant drew his Observation from Nature, when he said, We
often pardon those that injure us, but we can never forgive those that we
injure.

In about two or three years time he had achieved this mighty Work, and
compassed a Dissertation as big as Phalaris it self, to make his Point good.
There, that he might be wanting in no instance of Humanity, he tells the World,
that the Edition of Phalaris was not mine, but only ascribed to me; and, be it
whose it would, that 'twas a faulty and a foolish one: and then tells me too,
in the same breath, that nothing of this was intended as a disparagement to me;
to show his Reader, I suppose, that he had as mean an Opinion of my
Understanding, as he had of my Learning. He names me not indeed, but in his
civil way of Circumlocution, calls me, That young Gentleman of great hopes
whose Name is set to the Edition. But what great hopes could the World have had
of a young Gentleman, who should have suffered the Lie to be publicly given
him, in a matter, where his Reputation, both as a Scholar and a Man of Honor,
was nearly concerned, and yet had either not Sense enough to discern the
Affront, or not Spirit enough to resent it?

Dr. Bentley was not satisfied with giving me ill Usage, unless he did it in
ill Words too; and therefore has culled out the very worst he could find, to
bestow on me: for surely no man of Liberal Education could put together so many
unmannerly and slovenly expressions without studying for 'em. He charges me
with Calumny p. 66.
, weak Detraction p. 66.
, Injustice p. 66.
, Forgery and Slander p. 66.
; with the basest Tricks p. 71.
, and a vile Aspersion p. 71.
: He tells me, that a certain Person, though a sorry Critic, was yet a degree
above me p. 75.
; and, that Printing is a Sword in the hand of a Child p. 67.
; meaning, I suppose, his humble Servant.

He likens me, by a very elegant Simily, to a Bungling Tinker mending Old
Kettles p. 76.
, in one place; and, by the help of a Greek Proverb, calls me downright Ass p.
74.
in another. The correcting the faults of my Version is, in his polite way of
writing, the cleansing of Augeas 's Stables; and, to carry on the Metaphor, he
says, The First Epistle cost him four Pages in scouring.

These are the Flowers, which Dr. Bentley has, with no very sparing hand,
strewn throughout every Page almost of his Learned Epistle. It can hardly be
imagined, how one, that lives within the Air of a Court, should prevail with
himself to deal in such dirty Language: the Chairmen at St. James's, I dare
say, manage their Disputes with more decency. I find the Dr. has not profited
much by the dependence he once had on a Great Man, who might have taught him,
wou^d he have vouchsafed to learn it, the Secret of engaging deep with an
Adversary, without Loss of Temper, or Breach of Good Manners.

But he will tell me, that few, or none of these exprssions were levelled at
Me; and that for a very obliging reason; because I am not included among the
Editors of Phalaris. Let 'em have been levelled at whom he will, they are
inexcusable. Chewed Bullets are not more against the Law of Arms, than such
ways of speech are against the rules of good writing.

Dr. Bently could not have taken a better way of justifying me in what I said
of him, than by writing in this manner he has done; and with so little of that
Humanity, the want of which I objected to him. Most Readers will be apt to
think that he might probably always want it as much as they see he does now. So
that if I needed further Vouchers than those which I have already brought, I
would call in his own Dissertation to witness for me* that I have not wronged
him, nor given him any Character but what he has since been courteously pleased
to make good.

But Dr. Bently appeals from me to more Equitable Judges; and tells me, that he
can produce several Letters from Learned Professors abroad, P. 68.
(whose Books in time I may be fit to read) wherein these very same words [pro
singulari sua humanitate] are said of him seriously and heartily. For I
endeavor (says he) to oblige even Foreigners by all Courtesy and Humanity;
much more would I encourage and assist any useful design at home.

But why must we go to Foreign Nations for a true account of Dr. Bently? I
thought Men's Characters had been best learnt from those among whom they
conversed. The Law of England is, that every man shall be tried by his Country
and his Neighborhood: and this is not more reasonable in the Case of Life and
Death, than in that of Reputation. But Dr. Bently pleads to have a Jury of
Foreign Professors impanell'd to sit upon him: a very suspicious Defense, I
think; and which ought, without any more ado, to condemn him. Should a man
taxed with ill breeding here at London (where he has lived all his time)
produce Certificates in his behalf from some Correspondents in Cornwall, or
Cumberland, would this Plea pass at Court? Granting Dr. Bently's Foreigners to
have said those things of him which he says they have, it is because they are
Foreigners; We, that have the happiness of a near conversation with him, know
him better; and may perhaps take an opportunity of setting those mistaken
Strangers right in their Opinions concerning him.

Thus much, upon the Supposition that he has these Testimonials by him: but I,
who have had some dealings with him, have learnt a little to mistrust his
accounts; and shall therefore, before I make any more Remarks upon this
passage, tell the Reader a Story.

There was, not many Years ago, a Dispute about a Point of History, between an
Ingenious Gentleman and a Learned Prelate of our Church, well known to Dr.
Bently. When the Gentleman was at a loss for Proofs, his last resort always was
to a certain Chest at Ilcomkill, where there were MSS. it seems, never seen by
any body besides himself, that proved every thing he had a mind to. This
presently put an end to the Controversy: for there was no disputing against
Invisible Authorities. How far this may be Dr. Bently's case, and whether the
Letters from Learned Professors abroad, which he talks of, may not lie in some
such Chest as those Records lay in, I will not pretend to determine. However,
since they are MSS. I know his Fondness for those precious Jewels so well, that
I believe he will be shy of making 'em public. Till he does, the Printed Proofs
that have been given of his great Humanity will stand good against what he
tells us has been written to him.

Sure I am, there are some Learned Men abroad, that are far from Complimenting
him. One of 'em, a Man of great note, has complained to me, how ill he has been
used by him, in a Case nearly resembling mine; and complained in very
expressive Terms; which, not yet having his Leave for it, I do not think my
self at liberty to publish.

Another, that was desirous to have a sight of the Alexandrian MS. and applied
himself to Dr. Bently very earnestly for it, met with no other Answer to his
Request, but that the Library was not fit to be seen. A pretty Excuse for a
Library Keeper to make, who had been four Years in that Service! And this
Instance of his Humanity, I assure him, is of no Old date; it happened since he
purged himself in his new Dissertation, and gave Learned Men encouragement to
expect better usage.

If he goes on at this rate, as we have no reason to doubt but he will,
Foreigners will begin to suspect, whether we have, as we pretend, the
Alexandrian MS. or indeed whether the King has any Library.

But because the Dr. strongly argues from his being ready to oblige even
Foreigners by all Courtesy and Humanity, that he would much more be ready to
do so to Learned Men at home: I will add one Domestic Instance of that kind;
that my Instances may be every way as large as his Assertions.

I have now a Letter by me under the hand of Sir Edward Sherburn, (a Gentleman
of known Worth and Learning) wherein he has these words; I have sent Rubenius
's Book, [ de vita Mallii, put out by Graevius in Holland, and dedicated to Dr.
Bently] the honor of whose Publication Mr. Bently has ungratefully robbed me
of. The meaning of this is explained in a Latin Memorandum entered by Sir
Edward in the Book it self; where he says, that he put the MS. into Dr. Bently
's hands, under this Condition, that he should send it to Graevius to be
published, letting him know from whence he had it, and desiring him to make an
honorable mention of him, as the person that had obliged the World with it.
The Edition came out, it was dedicated to Dr. Bently, the honor of the
Publication given to him; and not one word of Sir Edward Sherburn said in it.
The Sophists are every where pelted by Dr. Bently, for putting out what they
wrote in other men's names; but I did not expect to hear so loudly of it from
one that has so far outdone 'em: For, I think, it is much worse to take the
honor of another man's Book to one's self, than to entitle ones own Book to
another man.

But Graevius, it may be, was in fault; and forgot to do Sir Edward Sherburn
justice. It Is hardly to be imagined he could, had Dr. Bently told him plainly,
that the MS. was put into his hands under that express Condition: But if the
Dr. only gave some slight intimation of it, Graevius might indeed forget to do
what he did not know whether it were in good earnest expected of him, or not.

But supposing the original Omission to have lain wholly at Graevius's door,
yet how came the Dr. to be so very quiet under it afterward? Why did he not
send immediately to Sir Edward Sherburn to excuse it? Why did he not take care
to have this Neglect repaired in the next Holland Journal? Nothing of this was
done; and therefore, should the Dr. not have been the willing occasion of the
Mistake, yet at least he was very willing that it should prevail.

Upon a view of this Story, I am apt to retract my Suspicions about Dr.
Bently's Letters from Learned Professors. He may perhaps have Testimonials of
his Courtesy by him, if he sticks at no methods of procuring 'em: By such Arts
as these it is easy for a Man to get a Reputation of Humanity abroad, without
deserving to be much commended for his Honesty at home. It Is an hard word, and
which I should not easily allow my self to use, but that I think I may take a
greater Liberty in another man's behalf, than in my own.

By Dr. Bently's way of treating Sir William Temple, Sir Edward Sherburn, and
my self, one would imagine, that he had vowed hostility to all Gentlemen
pretending to Letters; that he thought they broke in upon a Trade which none
but those of the Body corporate of Professed Scholars ought to deal in; and so,
looking upon 'em as the East India Company does upon Interlopers, was resolved
to use 'em accordingly.

By this time, the Reader is able to judge, how far my Character of Dr. Bently
suits him, and how far he might justly expect to have that Character publicly
given him; whether his Humanity be Singular, or not, and whether my Opinion be
Singular concerning it. I hope I have now set the Matters of Fact in a true
light; I have only some few Remarks to add on some Passages in the Story which
Dr. Bently tells of this matter, in which either his Memory or his Sincerity
failed him.

He begins his Account with a great (and I had almost said a wilful) Mistake:
He says I have told the World in my Preface, that I had Collated the King's MS.
as far as the 40 th Epistle, and would have done so throughout, but that the
Library Keeper, etc. Whereas I told the World, not that I had Collated that MS.
but that I had taken care to get it Collated. My words are, Collatas etiam
[viz. Epistolas] curavi cum MSo in Bibliotheca Regia, etc.

The Difference here, as slig^ht as it may seem, is material; and Dr. Bently,
one may guess, was aware of it. He saw very well, that, unless I was
represented as having collated the King's MS. my self, he could not well lay
the Mistakes of the Collation upon me; which he was resolved however to do to
the utmost, and therefore gave that convenient Turn to his Matter of Fact at
the Entrance, which might best serve to countenance his Criticisms that follow.

With this View, he makes an unfair and broken citation of my words in the
Margin; placing there only thus much out of my Preface, [ MSo in Bibliotheca
Regia, cujus mihi copiam ulteriorem Bibliothecarius, pro singulari sua
humanitate, negavit] and taking no notice of the words that introduce these, [
Collatas etiam curavi cum] without which the Sentence is imperfect, and
unintelligible.

Dr. Bently could not have given us a better Earnest of his Integrity, at his
first setting out: The rest of his Account, we shall find, is wrote with the
same degree of Truth and Fairness. The true Story (says he) is thus: A
Bookseller came to me in the name of the Editors, to beg (he would say, desire)
the use of the MS. He knows very well, that Mr. Bennet went to him in my name
only; Mr. Bennet himself is positive in the point: but least the Dr. should
deny it, I have, by good luck, preserved so much of his Letter by me, as
relates to this Particular. There he was pleased to use these Civil
Expressions: Mr. Bennet desired me to lend him the Manuscript Phalaris, to be
collated, because a Young Gentleman, Mr. Boil of Christchurch, was going to
publish it. I told him, that a Gentleman of that Name and Family, to which I
had so many Obligations, and should always have an honor for, might command
any Service that lay in my Power.

But now he says, that Mr. Bennet came to him in the Name of the Editors. How
came I to be multiplied at this rate? unless he has recollected himself since,
and remembers the little Circumstances of this Transaction better at two or
three Years distance, than he did immediately after it happened.

He proceeds in his True Story. -- It was not then in my Custody; but as soon
as I had the power of it, I went voluntarily, and offered it him. What he means
by its not being in his Custody, whether that he had lent it to somebody else,
or that he was not yet fully entered on his Office, or that he had it not in
his Pocket, must be a Secret, till he pleases to explain himself. Whatever his
meaning be, the Reader is desired to take notice, that there was about Nine
Months Solicitation used to procure it: A longer time than he needed to
retrieve it out of the Hands of Those to whom he might have lent it, or than
the Ceremony of his Inauguration to his Library-keeper's Place could require.
I Am sure he was much nimbler with my Collator; for, instead of Nine Months, he
would not allow him Nine Days time to peruse it in.

His next words are, bidding him tell the Collator not to lose any time,
(which, translated into English, is, bidding him let the Collator know, that he
must not lose any time) for I was shortly to go out of Town for two Months.
This, I have reason to think, is pure Fiction; Mr. Bennet remembers nothing of
it: but he very well remembers, that when the Dr. came to demand the MS. of him
again, he then told him, he was to go into the Country, and gave that for his
reason why he could allow him no further time to collate it in. It was a mighty
Treasure it seems; the Credit of the King's Library depended on the Alexandrian
MS. and That; and therefore he would not trust it out of those Walls a day
longer. Besides, (which is a Circumstance, that though Dr. Bently has, yet Dr.
King has not forgotten) had it been collated, it would have been worth nothing
for the future. This was an Objection not to be got over, especially since Mr.
Bennet had no Orders from me to take the proper way of removing it.

It follows, 'twas delivered, used, and returned, not a word said by the
Bearer, nor the least suspicion in me, that they had not finished the
Collation. This is roundly averred; but the Reader has Mr. Bennet's and Mr.
Gibson's Certificates; and after comparing 'em with this Passage, may believe
as he thinks fit.

Well, (says he) the Collation, it seems, was sent defective to Oxon, and the
blame, I suppose, laid upon me. Does he only suppose it? Did not I positively
write him word, that it was laid upon him, and so laid upon him, that I was
obliged to take notice of it? But he is to be excused for forgetting what I
wrote to him, when it appears, that he has forgot what he himself wrote to me.

After a few Months, out comes the new Edition, with this Sting in the mouth of
it. 'Twas a Surprise indeed to find there, that our MS. was not peru^'d. Our
MS! that is, His Majesty's and Mine. I thought indeed by the Price Dr. Bently
set upon the MS. he fancied himself to have some Interest in it: He speaks out
now, it is no longer the King's, but Our MS. i. e. Dr. Bently's and the King's
in common: An Expression as much too familiar for a Library Keeper, as Ego and
Rex Meus was for a Cardinal. I will not, for the future, so nicely observe his
Indecencies, since I find he is so general and undistinguishing in 'em.

'Twas a Surprise indeed to find there, that our MS. was not perused. Could
they not have asked for it again then after my Return? Yes, I could, Sir, and
have been denied it again, which I was not very willing to venture. I neither
thought my self so little, nor Dr. Bently so great, nor the MS. so
considerable, that I should make a second Application for it after such a
Repulse; no, not though I had been sure of obtaining it: much less could I ever
think of asking it again, when, by what Mr. Bennet had told me, I had all the
reason in the world to think, I should be again denied it.

But there is a reason for every thing, (says the Dr.) and the Mystery was soon
revealed! A pretty decent Phrase on so light an occasion; but this is not the
only instance, where the Critic has got the better of the Divine. Well, but
how was the Mystery revealed? why, He had the hard Hap, it seems, in some
private Conversation, to say, that the Epistles were spurious, and unworthy of
a new Edition: Hinc Illae Lachrymae. If he said this, as he intimates he did,
at Oxford, where the Book was then printing, he said a very uncivil thing; and
what, in his Dialect, he terms his Hard Hap, other People would be apt to call
his Ill Breeding. However, I seriously declare I was utterly a stranger to this
Discourse of his, till he told me of it in Print. I might hear, perhaps, of his
being in Oxford, but I had heard too much of his Discourse with Mr. Bennet, to
be curious in making any Enquiries into his private Conversation.

The Reader will excuse this Tedious Descant on Dr. Bently's Relation of Matter
of Fact. The true Story of our MS. was a point of importance: my Honesty was
concerned in this part of the Dispute, the rest only touches my Learning.
Having therefore, I hope, justified my Conduct where it most became me to do
it, the Matters of pure Criticism will give me no Concern, I Am sure, though they
may put me to some little Trouble. I shall enter upon 'em with the Indifference
of a Gamester, who plays but for a trifle, which it is much the same to him
whether he wins or loses.

I should now fall closely to my work, the Authority of Phalaris's Epistles,
but that there is an Introduction of Dr. Bently's that lies in my way, and must
first have a Reflection or two bestowed upon it.

He begins it with telling us, that Mr. Wotton, by the power of a long
Friendship between 'em, engaged him to write it.

I hope Mr. Wotton will let the Public know, that he neither engaged his
Friend to write upon this Subject in this manner, nor approved of these
Discourses, when written: which the World will presume him to have done, till
the contrary appears; and till he has disclaimed Dr. Bentley's attempt as
publicly, as he seems now to countenance and avow it. It Is a little strange,
that Mr. Wotton in a second Edition of his Book, which he had discreetly taken
care to purge of most things that looked like ill Manners in himself, should be
prevailed upon to allow a place to the ill Manners of another man. But I hear,
and* I am not unwilling to think, that Mr. Wotton receiv^d this Present at a
venture from Dr. Bently, and let it be printed without giving himself the
trouble of reading it. And I the rather fall in with this account, because I
find Mr. Wotton in his Book P. 415, and 416.
zealously vindicating the Age from the Imputation of Pedantry, and assuring
us, that though the Citation of Scraps of Latin, and a nauseous ostentation of
Reading were in fashion Fifty or Sixty Years ago, yet that all that is now in a
great measure disused. Which I suppose he would never have done in some of the
last Pages of his Book, if he had then known of the Dissertation that
immediately follows it.

A Gentleman of my acquaintance was observing to me, what a Motly, Unequal
work, these two Pieces made, as they now lie together. Mr. Wotton (said he) in
his Reflections takes in the whole compass of Ancient and Modern Learning; and
endeavors to show wherein either of 'em has been defective, and wherein they
have excelled. A Large Design, fit for the Pen of my Lord Bacon! and in the
well executing of which any one Man's Life would be usefully spent! Dr. Bentley
comes after him with a Dissertation, half as big as his Book, to prove, that
three or four small Pieces ascribed to some of the Ancients, are not so ancient
as they pretend to be: a very inconsiderable Point; and which a wise man would
grudge the throwing away a weeks thought upon, if he could gain it! and what
then shall we say of Him, that has spent two or three years of his life, to
lose it? Mr. W's motive to write was, he tells us, a piece of Public Service
that he hoped he might do the World; Dr. Bentley's plainly a private Picque,
and such as 'twas utterly unfit for him to act upon, either as a Scholar, or a
Christian; much more as he was one in Holy Orders, and that had undertaken the
public defense of Religion. Mr W. (continued he) is modest and decent; speaks
generally with respect of those he differs from, and with a due distrust of his
own Opinions: Dr. Bentley is Positive and Pert; has no regard for what other
men have thought or said, and no suspicions that he is fallible. Mr. W's Book
has a Vein of Learning running through it, where there is no ostentation of it:
Dr. Bentley's Appendix has all the Pomp and Show of Learning, without the
Reality. In truth (said he) there is scarce any thing, as the Book now stands,
in which that and the Appendix agree, but in commending and admiring Dr.
Bentley; in which they are so very much of a Piece, that one would think Dr.
Bentley had writ both the one and the other.

But leaving these two Friends to the Pleasure of their mutual Civilities, I
shall go on to the rest of my remarks on Dr. Bentley's Introduction. After
telling us then at whose Instance he wrote this famous Piece of Criticism, he
begins to give us a cast of his skill in the Point. Sir W. Temple had observed
in favor of the Ancients; that some of the Oldest Books we have are the best
in their kinds. To this Dr. Bentley replies, That some of the Oldest Books are
the best in their kinds, the same Person having the Double Glory of Invention
and Perfection, is a thing observed even by some of the Ancients And for this
he very learnedly quotes Dion Chrysostom: But then (says he) the Authors they
gave this Honor to, are Homer and Archilochus, one the Father of Heroic Poem,
and the other of Epode and Trochaic, p. 7. What he means by saying that this
had been observed even by some of the Ancients, is not easy to apprehend, nor
why he quotes Chrysostom for it, whose Authority either in this, or any other
case, is not very considerable; and who besides, does not say that for which
he is produced; especially when there is an approved Writer more ancient than
Dion, that has directly said that for which Dion is improperly brought. Dion,
in the Oration quoted, after a tedious insipid Exordium about the different
talents of praising and dispraising, takes occasion from thence to mention
Homer as the famous Parent of Panegyric, as Archilochus was of Satyr, and
prefers 'em to all others in their way. But he has not a word there about the
Oldest Books being the best in their kind, or of the Double Glory of inventing
and perfecting; for which Dr. Bentley gravely produces him. But though Dion says
nothing of this, Velleius Paterculus does: Non quenquam alium (says he) cujus
operis primus Auctor fuerit, in eo perfectissimum reperiemus praeter Homerum
and Archilochum. Lib. 1. Cap. 5. It Is a little odd, methinks, that Dr. Bentley,
who professes in this Piece of his to give Battle to Sophists and Sophistry,
and to decry 'em as a company of illiterate Scriblers, should yet think fit to
grace the very Entrance of his Work, with vouchng the Authority of as errant a
Sophist and Declaimer as ever was; and with vouching him for what he really did
not say: and for what had been said by a much better hand, before him. But
great Scholars have very particular ways with 'em.

Dr. Bentley goes on: But the choice of Phalaris and Aesop, as they are now
extant, for the two great and inimitable Originals, is a piece of Criticism of
a Peculiar Complexion, and must proceed from a singularity of Palate and
Judgment.

For Aesop it will be time enough to account when I come to the entire
Dissertation that concerns him. But as to Phalaris's Epistles, many learned men
of different Ages and Countries, have been professed admirers of 'em; never any
man, till the Judicious Dr. Bentley arose, pretended to despise 'em: even those
Critics of late days, who suspected their being Genuine, yet allowed 'em to be
finished things in their way, and excellently well counterfeited. And therefore
the value which Sir W. Temple professes for 'em cannot be said to proceed from
a Singularity of Palate and Judgment: at least this ought not to be said by
him, who but four Pages afterward lets us know, that Stobaeus esteemed 'em so
highly, as to insert some of 'em into his Judicious Collections; and that
Suidas terms 'em (...), most admirable Letters. Sir W. Temple, one would have
thought, might have been secured from the imputation of Singularity by the
concurring Judgments of two such men, for whom, we may be sure, Dr. Bentley on
any other occasion would have had a particular regard: the one an eminent
Commonplacer, and the other a no less eminent Dictionary-writer. It Is a
pleasant Reflection to consider that Dr. Bentley, at the same time that he is
passing this free Censure on Sir W. Temple's Palate, is himself advancing an
Opinion contrary to the sense of all Mankind that had ever written before him:
Will not a modest Reader, on this occasion, be apt to say, that both the
Criticism and the Critic too are of a Peculiar Complexion?

He forgets, I believe, when and where a certain Critic of our times
maintained, that Ovid and Manilius, were the only two Poets that had wit among
the Ancients. A very extraordinary piece of Criticism! and which, doubtless,
proceeded not from any singularity of Palate and Judgment! It Is just as if I
should say, that Sir W. Temple and Dr. Bentley are the two best-bred Writers
living; or, to put it into the Dr's more learned and polite way, That Nireus
and Thersites were the only two formose men that repaired to the Siege of
Ilium. Manilius writes with just as much wit as Dr. Bentley does with modesty:
only the difference is, that Manilius's subject would not admit of wit* and
therefore he might have it, for ought we know, though he did not show it: whereas
Dr. Bentley's subject, (which is generally Himself) does not only admit of
modesly, but require it.

The rest of Dr. Bentley's Preamble is taken up in giving us an account how
spurious Books came to prevail upon the World. He says, This was a practice
almost as old as Letters; but that i^ chiefly prevailed, when the Kings of
Pergamus and Alexandria rivalling one another in the Magnificence and
Copiousness of their Libraries, gave great Rates for any Treatises that carried
the names of Celebrated Authors; and this he proves out of Galen upon
Hippocrates, de Natura Hominis.

There are other Old Writers that tell this Story, and tell it more truly, than
Galen did, though a Native of Pergamus. He positively affirms, in favor of the
Point he is proving, that till the time of these Rival Princes, there was no
such thing as a spurious Book in the World; which is neither true, nor
agreeable to what Dr. Bentley tells us in the case, that the Practice of
forging Books was almost as Old as Letters. Here therefore, as before in the
case of Paterculus, Dr. Bentley should have contented himself with vouching
apposite, though common Authorities; and not have gone out of his way to have
fetched in a witness, that, after all, speaks against him. But he loves to
surprise and dazzle his Reader: for who would expect to see a point of History
settled out of a Physician?

I thought indeed Quotation had been the Dr's peculiar Province; and that
either he could manage that to advantage, or nothing. But these two awkward
Proofs out of Dion Chrysostom and Galen (the very first he has produced) have
shook my opinion of him even in this Respect. As we go further, we shall see
clearlier what to judge of him.

I will detain the Reader no longer in the Approaches to our Argument, than
till I have desired him to join with me in his thanks to Dr. Bentley, for the
Intimation he has given us of a certain Supplement to Petronius found at Buda.
He does not, I suppose, mean that from Alba Graeca, which any of his
Dictionaries would have told him was Latin, not for Buda, but Belgrade: and
therefore I conclude, that this must be some new discovery, which Dr. Bentley
has had earlier notice of, than the rest of the Learned World; and that in time
he will oblige us with a further account of it.

DR. Bentley having declared open War against Phalaris, and all his Party, and
having in his own Opinion gained the Victory, thought that the more Captive
Critics there were to follow his Chariot-wheels, the more glorious would his
Triumph be: He begins therefore with giving us an account of the Number and
Strength of the Enemy he engages. He tells us, that the Epistles have been
admitted as Genuine, ever since Stobaeus's time; that He has quoted 'em thrice:
that Suidas speaks of 'em with honor; and, that Tzetzes has made large
Extracts out of 'em. These three, I think, says he, are the only Men among the
Ancients that make any mention of 'em. P. 11.


They are perhaps the only Ancients, whose testimonies are to be met with, in
any of the Prefaces to Phalaris: but Dr. Bentley methinks should have dug
deeper for his materials, and consulted Original Authors. Had he done so, he
might have found, that they are mentioned too by Epist. 207.
Photius in his Epistles, that they are quoted by Nonnus (...) etc. p. 144.
in his Historical Comment on St. Gregory's Invectives, and by the Plut. verse.
142. (...) -- (...).
Scholiast on Aristophanes; that very Scholiast, whom, one would think, the Dr.
by his citing him so often P. 100, 117, 118, 119, 137, 140, 148, etc.
, had thoroughly read. The Latest of these is some Centuries older than either
Suidas or Tzetzes. Indeed Tzetzes, who lived but in the 12th Century, deserves
not to be called an Ancient; and Dr. Bentley himself is of this mind in another
part of his Dissertation P. 53.
, where he styles him a Later Greek. But it was convenient, that he should be
an Ancient here, and a Modern there, in order to the different Ends which Dr.
Bentley had to serve by him.

Besides these, there is another remarkable Quotation from the Epistles in
Stobaeus, which Dr. Bentley has overlooked; it is Tit. CCXVIII: where an entire
Epistle of Phalaris is transcribed, as it is again in the Collection of
Antonius and Maximus the Monks, which accompanies Stobaeus. Had Dr. Bentley had
these Authorities in his view, he might with better Grounds, though not with more
Assurance, have pronounced, that P. 12.
The Epistles have the general Warrant and Certificate for this last thousand
years, before the Restoration of Learning. And thus far I can agree with him:
but when he further assures us, that P. 11, and 12.
All the Scholars of those Ages received 'em for true Originals; as willing as
I am to hear any thing in Phalaris's favor, I must beg leave to dissent from
him; because I find One of those I mentioned, (and Him a Scholar, I think, if
there were any in the Age in which he lived) speaking of 'em with some
distrust: It Is Photius I mean; who gives 'em indeed an extraordinary character,
and prefers 'em to the Epistles of Plato, Aristotle, and Demosthenes: but
withal intimates his Suspicions that they are not Genuine, when he calls 'em
the Ep. 207. (...).
Epistles that are attributed to Phalaris, and joins 'em, with those that (as
he speaks) are ascribed to Ib. (...).
Brutus.

With these Ancients, he tells us, many Moderns have concurred in Opinion;
particularly, that Fazeltus and Iacobus Capel^us, two very Learned men, have
asserted the credit of the Epistles; and that Seldom himself depended on 'em so
much, as to determine a point of Chronology out of 'em. And now what would a
Modest man expect should have been Dr. Bentley's end in reckoning up all these
great Men's Opinions, but to strengthen and countenance his Own? whereas he
brings 'em in, only to show how impossible it was for them to judge right, who
had the misfortune to live before him. In spite of what the Learned men of so
many Ages and Nations have thought and said, Dr. Bentley knows P. 64.
, and will demonstrate P. 5.
, Phalaris's Epistles to be spurious: Nay, he is very much mistaken, he says,
in the nature and force of his Proofs, if ever any man hereafter, that reads
'em, persist in his Old Opinion of making Phalaris an Author P. 13.
. I will own to the Reader, that had these words offered themselves to me
before I had been acquainted with Dr. Bentley's Manner, they would have given
me some uneasiness. Phalaris was always a Favourite-book with me; from the
moment I knew it, I wished it might prove an Original: I had now and then
indeed some suspicions that 'twas not Genuine; but I loved him so much more
than I suspected him, that I would not suffer my self to dwell long upon 'em.
To be sincere, The Opinion, or Mistake if you will, was so pleasing, that I was
somewhat afraid of being undeceived. However, I ventured to try, whether the
Dr's Proofs would overbear me with that weight of Demonstration they threatened.
I read 'em, I weighed 'em; and I found, to my satisfaction, that Phalaris might
still be an Author, notwithstanding what Dr. Bentley had said against him. Nay,
I assure the Reader, that my Doubts about the Authority of the Epistles, since
I read Dr. Bentley's Dissertation, are much lessened; and if he should write
once more upon the Subject, perhaps the point would be clear to me.

His Arguments against the Epistles (they are to go for such, till I have
proved 'em not to be Arguments) when taken out of the Confusion with which he
has delivered 'em, may be distinguished into such, as affect the whole, or
touch only those Particular Epistles from whence they are drawn. The first of
these are of greatest consequence; for if any One of 'em holds, the Authority
of the Epistles is in danger: and I shall therefore, with Dr. Bentley's leave,
consider 'em in the first place. In order to come at any of these, I must
overlook a great many of his Pages for the present; not without intentions of
returning to 'em: for he has advanced nothing on this Subject, but what shall,
in its proper Time and Place, have a thorough Examination.

The First of these General Proofs, that I meet with, (for I shall take 'em as
they lie) is in the 12th Paragraph, where the Dr. objects against the Dialect
Phalaris uses; who reigning in Sicily, and being, as he tells us P. 44.
, born there, should have spoken Doric, the prevailing Language of the Island;
whereas he writes Attic, the beloved Dialect of the Sophists, in which they
affected to excel one another even to Pedantry and Solaecism P. 41.
.

Though it be no very material point, yet I cannot grant the Dr. that the
Language of these Letters is properly Attic. There are indeed several Attic
ways of speech in 'em; but so there are in other Authors, who confessedly wrote
in the Common Dialect. It Is one thing to mix Atticisms in ones style, and
another thing strictly to write Attic; Homer did the one, Thucydides and Plato
the other: however no body will say, that Homer wrote in the same Dialect with
Thucydides and Plato. Dr. Bentley has abundance of pure Anglicisms in his
Latin, and Latinisms in his English; but he will not for all that be willing to
allow, either that his Dissertation on Malala is in English, or that this on
Phalaris is in Latin.

Well, but supposing the Letters to be in Attic, what use does he make of this?
why, he argues from hence, that they were written by the Sophists; who, he
tells us, affected to excel one another in writing Attic, even to Pedandantry
and Solaecism P. 41.
. A very deep Reflection! so deep, that I must confess my self to be a little
at a loss for the Meaning of it. The perusal of a Late Author indeed has given
me a clear Notion what it is to be affected even to Pedantry, but the being
affected even to Solaecism, and in Attic too, is to Me, I confess, a very
incomprehensible degree of Affectation. I thought, the Athenians, of all the
Greeks, spoke the most Properly, and Purely; and were the furthest removed from
any suspicion of Solaecism: and that therefore no one could be guilty of it,
while he spoke as They spoke; any more than a Man can stick strictly to the
Language of the Court, and yet speak false English. But Dr. Bentley's Notions
of Language differ much from mine; and therefore it is no wonder if I do not
apprehend him.

To let his Flourish pass then, and to come to his Argument; I will venture to
say, that it is a silly one: and I make thus free with it, because it is my
Own, and mentioned by Me, in my Preface to Phalaris Neque cum Siculis
Scriptoribus placuerit semper Dialectus Dorica, Agrigentinorum (qui antiquitus
Doors erant) Tyrannus alia uti debuit. p. 2.
, as one of the Grounds I had to suspect the Authority of the Epistles; though I
was far, even then, from having that high Opinion of it Dr. Bentley has, or
thinking it to be Demonstrative Evidence: and the more I consider it, the less
Weight I find in it.

For Phalaris was by no means obliged to speak Doric, on the account of his
being a Sicilian born; for two good Reasons: because the Natives of Sicily (and
so of other places) did not always write in the prevailing Dialect of their
Country; and because Phalaris was no Native of Sicily. I shall dispatch this
Last point first, because it will give us the least Trouble.

If the Credit of the Letters stands good, Phalaris, we are sure, was no
Sicilian; Dr. Bently indeed says he was, and threatens to prove it from Good
Authors P. 44.
: but threatened History, as well as other threatened things, has the luck
sometimes to live long; and so it has happened in the present point: for the
Dr. notwithstanding his Menaces, has not, throughout his Dissertation, said a
Syllable to shake it.

I can help the Dr. indeed to One Author, that speaks something to his purpose;
and Him an Old Scholiast too, which will please the Dr. the better: Nonnus In
Greg. Invect. p. 143.
says, that Phalaris was by birth a Sicilian; but he gives this, together with
some other Impertinent and Ridiculous Accounts of him, which he there confutes.
This is all I can at present do for the Dr. in the matter; and as little as it
is, it is more than the Dr. has done for himself.

But whether Phalaris were of Sicily, or no; the Dr. is positive Astypalaea, a
City in Crete, never mentioned before by any Geographer. Dissert. p. 44.

Our Diligent Editors made that Discovery in Geography; for it could not be
learnt any where else. Dissert. p. 58.


, that he was not of Astypalaea, a City in Crete, as I have represented him.
And upon this fancied mistake of mine he is very merry, and throws out a great
deal of awkward Drollery; which, had there been an Occasion given for it,
would, let me tell him, have but ill become a Man of his Gravity, and a Reader
of Old Scholiasts: but as it is founded purely on a Mistake of his own, is
somewhat the more unseasonable, and unbecoming. For, after the Dr's fit of
Mirth is over, I would ask him seriously, how he comes to impute the Discovery
of this new City in Crete to me? do not the Epistles themselves plainly suppose
it? and does not he himself grow wise enough, or sincere enough, by the 58th
Page, expressly to own that they do so; and save me the trouble of proving it? I
have the same Authority to say that Phalaris was born at Astypalaea in Crete,
as that he was born at any place of that Name. And what has the Dr. to oppose
to it? why, he assures us, that there was no such City in Crete. Has he then a
List of all the Hundred Cities there? if he has, it is a compleater one by far
than Ptolemy's and a mightier Discovery in Geography, than that of mine, with
which he so ingeniously diverts himself. He should however have had some Wisdom
in his Mirth, and have looked about him, before he resolved to be positive. Had
he done so, he would have found, that both Goltzius Hist. Sicil. and Mag. Gr.
ex Numism. p. 126. Patre Cretensis, Vrbe Astyphalide.
and Fazellus Rer. Sic. Dec. 1, L. 6, C. 1. Phalaris Creta Insula Vrbe
Astyphalide ortus.
made this Discovery before me: the Last of these Dr. Bentley has vouchsafed to
call a very Learned Man Dissert. p. 12.
; and I Will venture to call the Other so. So that if I did mistake, I mistook
after Great Names: and Dr. Bentley is unpardonable, for not knowing, or not
owning, what One of these had said; for he quotes Dissert. p. 12.
the very Page in Fazellus, where the Words I have produced from him are. If he
had read it, as well as quoted it, he could not have missed 'em; They stand so
fairly in the Front of Fazellus's short account of Phalaris, that they must
needs have star'd him in the Face. I will not be so rude as to call the Dr. a
Second-hand Critic; but the Reader may judge how far he has given me an
occasion to do it.

But No Geographer, he says, has mentioned this City in Crete Diss. p. 44
. He speaks unwarily; I will suppose, he means, no Old one. No more have they
several of the other Ninety Nine; which nevertheless were as surely there, as
if half a dozen Geographers had given us the Names of them. It is enough for my
purpose, that the Letters have mentioned this Astypalaea. If Dr. Bentley will
discard all Places, that occurr but once in Ancient Writers, he will make mad Work
in Geography. What does he think of Trinacia, the Sicilian Town in Diodorus?
what of the (...) mentioned by Scylax? where else does he meet with 'em? He Will
say, they are corrupt Readings, perhaps: but the MSS. agree in 'em. No matter
for that! while the MSS. are for Him, he is for Them; and no longer. And,
therefore to shorten the Work, and save my self, and the Reader, the trouble of
more Instances, I Will put the Dr. in mind of what the Learned Palmerius says
upon this place in Scylax: Ejus Loci seu Regiunculae (says he) alibi quod sciam
non fit mentio. Sed ideo forte non est exterminanda ex hoc loco Vox. Nam quot
Loca, quot Regiunculae fuerunt, quarum Authors, qui ad nos usque devenerunt,
vel semel, vel nunquam fecerunt mentionem? Does the Dr. think, because
Astypalaea was an Island among the Cyclades, and among the Sporades, that
therefore it could not be a Town any where else? Is not this just the Case of
Naxos, which was an Isle among the Cyclades; and yet a Town in Crete, and in
Sicily too? Strabo mentions Astypalaea a Promontory in Attica, another
Promontory of that name in Caria; a third Astypalaea, the ancient Metropolis of
the Island Cos: and why might there not be an Astypalaea in Crete too?

I have dwelt too long on this point; however I cannot yet part with it, till I
have done right to the Learned Greek Professor of Cambridge; whom Dr. Bentley
takes upon him to correct, without the least Ground or Color of Reason: to
show, I suppose, that he was Impartial, and resolved to bestow his Good
Manners, as he had done Himself, upon Both Universities.

Dr. Barnes would have the Island Astypalaea, where he supposes Phalaris born,
to be that among the Cyclades. Dr. Bentley allowing Phalaris to have been born
in the Island Astypalaea, yet says it must be that among the Sporades; for this
convincing Reason; because this Latter was nearest to Crete, whither Phalaris
's Wife and Son are supposed to have fled. Ep. LXIX P. 44.
. Giving the Dr. Leave to suppose this Flight from Astypalaea to Crete, why
must it needs be from the Astypalaea that was nearest? Those that fly are
usually glad to get as far as they can out of the reach of their Pursuers. But
now even the Flight, upon the Supposition of which this fine Reasoning turns,
is it self a Fiction. For neither in that Epistle which the Dr. quotes for
this, nor in any other Epistle, is any such Flight mentioned, or supposed, or
in the least intimated. Was it worth his while to forge this little Piece of
History, only in order to contradict his Betters? Is the Pleasure of inventing
a Circumstance, merely to be rude with, an Equivalent to the Shame of being
told on it?

But he has found the Professor in another Mistake, as Material as This, and as
well made out. Dr. Barnes had called the Island, Astypala, and not Astypalaea;
and the Exact Dr. Bentley therefore is so kind, as to inform him how it should
be spelt. A little share of Good Nature would have made the Dr. suspect an
Error of the Press in this case, if there had been any Error; and a little more
Reading than he has, would have taught him, that there was no Error in it: for
the Professor called the Island but as Scylax (...).
had called it before him. On both these accounts, the Dr. might have spared
his Criticism: and so he would probably, but that Mr. Professor had been guilty
of a Fault not to be forgiven by Gratuitously undertaking to Apologize for the
Epistles of Phalaris Differ. p. 14.
, in his Elaborate Edition of Euripides: that is, (for I can make no other
sense of it) by defending the Authority of the Epistles, without having any
thing for his Pains. This looks as if the Dr. thought Learned Men were to set a
Price upon their Civilities, and never part with a Favor till they had their
Fee.

But to return from our Digression; Let us allow the Dr. what he contends for,
without any manner of Proof or Reason, that Phalaris was a Sicilian born: will
he infer from hence, that it was necessary for him to write in Doric? That I
can never allow him. For we have Instances without Number, of Authors writing
in a Dialect different from that of their own Country; and not a few Instances
of Sicilian Writers, who laid aside the Doric: and why then should Phalaris, a
Prince, and a very Arbitrary and Lawless one, be confined to it? Agathyrsides,
the Historian of Samos, had he followed the Dialect of his Country, would have
written in Doric; and Chrysermus of Corinth, in Doric: and yet both of 'em writ
in the Common Dialect, as appears by the Extracts out of 'em, preserved in
Stobaeus. So did Andronicus the Rhodian, who paraphrased some part of
Aristotle, and Dionysius the Halicarnassian; though both Rhodes and Halicarnass
were Cities of Dorian Original. Herodotus was of the same place with Dionysius,
and yet made the Ionic Dialect his choice; as Hippocrates of Cos, a Dorian Town
also, had done before him. Rhianus, and Epimenides were both Cretans: that the
First of these wrote not in the particular Dialect of Crete, we are as sure, as
that the large Fragment ascribed to him is his; that the Latter did not, we
have reason to think from the short Citation out of him in St. Paul (...).
, where we find the Common word (...) employed instead of (...), which the
Grammarians tell us Ioh. Philop. de Dialectis* Corinthus, de Dialectis*
was peculiar to the Inhabitants of that Island. Alcaeus, Sappho, and
Simonides, were born in places where the Ionic was spoken, and yet wrote their
Lyric Poems in Aeolic, or Doric. Dr. Bentley indeed pretends in some measure to
account for this by saying, that the Lyric (or, as He loves to speak, the
Melic) Poets chose the Doric Dialect for the sake of the Doric Harmony, which
was fitted to That, and to the Nature of the Ode: but why then did not the rest
of the Lyric Writers choose it too? It would have become Anacreon's Odes, every
whit as well as Sappho's; and Archilochus's, as well as either: and yet both
Anacreon and Archilochus wrote in Ionic. So that no sure Rule can be fixed, or
holding Reason given, for the Ancient Writers departing from the Idiom of their
Country: Historians, Moralists, Philosophers, and Poets of all sorts practiced
it at pleasure; choosing such a Dialect, as either pleased their Own Ear, or the
Ears of those for whose sake they wrote, and whom they endeavored to please
This probably was the Case of Callimachus, in his Hymn upon the Baths of
Pallas, composed by him in Doric, to compliment the Argians (or Argivans, as
Dr. Bentley new names 'em, p. 82): though the same reason will not hold for his
Other Doric Hymn, dedicated to the honor of Ceres: nor can any reason be given
for it, but what will equally prove, that he ought to have written the rest of
his Hymns in Doric.
; or such, as they thought suited best with their Subject: and very often they
took up with that Dialect, which was in Fashion among the Polite Writers of the
Age in which they lived. For, that there was a Fashion in Dialects, and that
the Chief of 'em had severally their Course and Period, in which they
flourished, may (not to mention other Proofs of it) be gathered from a Passage
in Dionysius Halicarnasseus; where he says of the Old Greek Authors, that they
chose the Ionic Dialect to write in, as being that which was most in Vogue in
their time (...). D. H. in Thucyd.
. I propose this only as probable, Dr. Bentley would have said it was
demonstrable. But no man should be Dogmatical in Cases of this Nature, where
several other Circumstances, beside the vast distance of Time, concur to make
the Subject obscure; where all is but a Lucky Guess, and He that is most
Learned must, if he be fair, confess, that he has but a very dim and uncertain
Light to see by.

It will then be very hard upon our Sicilian Prince, to deny him a Liberty,
which Writers of all sorts, and of all other Countries and Times have taken:
and it will be harder still, if we consider, that this is what has been done
often even by Sicilians themselves. Diodorus and Empedocles are famous
Instances of this kind; the One, in Prose; and the Other, in Verse: Archimedes
the Syracusan's Works do not all equally partake of the Doric Idiom; some have
more, and some have less of it, as they were written sooner or later; and his
Treatise of the Sphaere and Cylinder, the most remarkable part of his Works,
least of all.

To come yet closer to our point: We have a Letter writ by Dion of Syracuse to
Dionysius Tyrant of that place, and part of another written by Dionysius
himself; both preserved among the Epistles of Plato; where there is not the
least Shadow of Doricism: but as well the Prince as the Philosopher have
written their Epistles in such a Dialect, as if (to use Dr. Bentley's
Gentlemanly Phrase) they had gone to School at Athens Diss. p. 43.
.

Nay some of the Princes and States of Sicily, and other Dorian Countries, have
caused Coins to be struck, whose Inscriptions are not in pure Doric. [Abundance
of Instances of of this kind are to be met with in Goltzius, Paruta, and
Harduin: I shall give the Reader a Taste of them in the Margin (...), a Cretan
money; in some other Inscriptions it is (...), the Inscription of a Coin,
belonging to Velia, a Town in Magna Gracia.
.

But the most remarkable Instance of all is that of Zaleucus, King of the
Locrians, a Doric Colony; the Preface to whose Laws is preserved in Stobaeus,
an exact and faithful Copier of Old Authors; and has plainly nothing of the
Doric Dialect in it. Diodorus Siculus, who does not so strictly transcribe, but
chooses rather to weave things into the Phrase and Body of his History, has the
same Preface, with some Alterations; but none, that make it more Doric than it
is in Stobaeus.

And now, upon a View of these Instances, (and others of this kind, which I
could produce; but I spare the Reader) I might be-speak the Dr. in his own pert
way of Enquiry; Pray, how came Attic (or any other Dialect but the Doric) to be
the Court-Language at Syracuse? How came Zaleucus, and Dionysius the Tyrant, so
to dote on the Dialect of a Democraty Disser. ^. 41.
? How is it that those Little Princes of Sicily, as Arbitrary and Jealous of
their Prerogative as the Mightiest Monarch whatever, allowed of Inscriptions on
their Coins, which were not in the Language of their Country? Any clear
Solution that he shall please to afford us of these matters will equally serve
to give us an account, why Phalaris too might be excused from writing in Doric.

Dr. Bentley has endeavored to prevent me in some part of the Evidence that I
have brought; and has excepted against such Instances as those of Empedocles,
and Diodorus, whose Case, he says, is widely remote from that of our Tyrant.
The former being to write an EPIC POEM, showed an excellent Judgment in laying
aside his Country Dialect for that of the Ionians; for the Doric Idiom had not
Grace and Majesty enough for the Subject he was engaged in; being proper indeed
for Mimes, Comedies, and Pastorals, where Men of Ordinary Rank are represented,
etc. but not to be used in HEROIC, without great disadvantage Disser p. 49.
.

I desire Dr. Bentley to inform me, in what Old Scholiast, or Manuscript
Author, he has met with this Curious account of Empedocles^s writing an Epic
Poem: as much out of the way as he loves to read, he will be hard put to it, I
believe, to find an Authority for it. If he can, it is plain he knows more of
Empedocles's Works than Laertius did; who has been so absurd, as to inform us
particularly of several less considerable Pieces of his, and to pass over
altogether in silence this Epic Poem. Dr. Bentley will be pleased, at his
leisure, to produce his Vouchers in this point; which I am apt to believe he
will do, at the same time that he lets us know where the Buda MS. of Petronius
is to be met with. Empedocles wrote many things in Hexameters indeed; but Dr.
Bentley sure cannot be so wretchedly ignorant as to think, that every Large
Copy of Verses written in Hexameters, is an Epic Poem. Aristotle would have
informed him, that Empedocles was so far from being an Epic Poet, a Poet of the
first Rank, that he scarce deserved the Name of a Poet at large: (...) (says
he) (...). Poet. c. 1.
There is nothing that Homer and Empedocles agree in but their Verse; and
therefore Homer indeed may justly be called a Poet, but Empedocles rather a
Naturalist, than a Poet. Or if Aristotle be too good a Book for Dr. Bentley to
converse with, there is a Writer of less size, Comp. of anc. and mod. Lear. p.
32.
even his Friend Mr. Wotton, who would have taught him the Distinction between
Philosophical and Epical Poems; that is, such as Empedocles and Lucretius wrote
on the one side, and Homer and Virgil on the other. He who is so nicely severe
upon Phalaris, for confounding (...) and (...) Disser. p. 59.
, should have taken care not to have given Phalaris's Friends an Opportunity of
making Reprisals. The Fatal Mistake in this case was, that Suidas, the Dr's
Oracle, calls him (...), which strictly taken, signifies an Epic Poet, but in
its loose sense a Versifier only; and the Dr. was not at leisure to take notice
of this distinction.

And if Empedocles did not write an Epic Poem, how did he show his Judgment in
laying aside his Country Dialect? Could not Physics have been as Iudiciously
wrote in Doric Verse, by Him, as in Doric Prose by Ocellus Lucanus, and the
rest of the Pythagoreans? His Treatise of Expiations (...).
, why would it not have born being written in Doric, as well as Theocritus's
Pharmaceutria? especially since Laertius intimates, that the Subject of that
Treatise was in great measure drawn from the Pythagoreans: would it not
properly then have been composed in the Dialect those Philosophers used? We
have several small Remains of Empedocles; but not a Line of his in Doric. We
have a Large Fragment of his, directed to the People of Agrigent, his Townsmen:
did he show his Judgment in laying aside his Country Dialect there too, when he
was directing his Verses to the very People of his Country? Had the Doric Idiom
not Grace and Majesty enough for the Subject he was engaged in, when the
Subject was no higher than an Account of Himself to his own Countrymen? If
Doric be proper for Mimes, Comedies, and Pastorals, where Men of ordinary Rank
are represented, why is it not as proper for little Poems, where Men of
ordinary Rank are addressed to? I believe it would puzzle a Man of less
Sagacity than Dr. Bentley, to tell us, for what reason Empedocles used Ionic,
but because he had a mind to it: and may not the same reason be urged also in
behalf of the Attic of Phalaris?

Dr. Bentley has had very ill Luck in bringing off the Poet, let us see whether
he has better in what he has to say for the Historian. P. 50.
Diodorus Siculus, he tells us, and the other Historians of Dorian Nations, had
great reason to decline the Use of their Vernacular Tongue, as improper for
History; which besides the affectation of Eloquence, aims at Easiness and
Perspicuity, and is designed for General Use: but the Doric is Course and
Rustic, and always clouded with an Obscurity. The Reader cannot but observe in
this Passage the particular Beauty and Happiness of the Dr's Expression: but it
matters not much how he Writes, let us consider how he Reasons.

If the Dr's Solution be just, how came Archimedes and the Pythagorean
Naturalists and Moralists not to decline the use of their Vernacular Tongue, as
well as the Historians? They all, I dare say, aimed as much at Perspicuity, and
the Last of the Three doubtless designed their Treatises as much for General
Use. I will not say indeed, that they affected Eloquence, because I do not
think that a good Character, whatever Dr. Bentley may: but, which is much
better, they were Eloquent; very Lofty and Magnificent, and withal very Clear
in their Expression: on both which accounts they are recommended by Dionysius
Halicarnasseus (...). T. 2. p. 70.
, to be read by all those that desire to write well. And his Judgment in this
Case is the more to be valued, because he wrote excellently well himself, and
with great Perspicuity.

It Is true, as the Doric Dialect grew out of Use and Request, their Writings
grew less Easy and Perspicuous; and Porphyry had reason therefore to attribute
the decay of the Pythagorean Sect to the Use, or rather to the Decay of that
Dialect: but without dispute the Doric, in its flourishing days, had the same
degree of Clearness as the rest; and the Philosophers, that writ in it,
designed their Works to be of as General Use, and to last as long, as those of
the Historians. So that Dr. Bentley has assigned no Reasons for the Historians
not writing in Doric, but what will serve as well to prove Others not to have
writ in it, though we are sure they did: a Way of arguing, worthy his Adventurous
Pen! and which no body, I believe, will envy him the honor of!

Hitherto I have been proving against Dr. Bentley, (I hope not without success)
that Phalaris was under no obligation of writing Doric, though he had been a
Sicilian born: much less was he obliged to write it, upon the account of his
Living among the Agrigentines, or Reigning over them, as Dr. Bentley pretends.
He was a Publican (says the Dr.) or Collector of Taxes; could not that
Perpetual Negoce and Converse with the Dorians bring his Mouth to speak a
little broader P. 46.
? No doubt it could; and perhaps it did: but the Question is, whether,
notwithstanding his learning Doric, he might not retain another Dialect with
it; and speak it, and write it occasionally? But would not He that aimed at
Monarchy, and for that reason designed to be Popular, have quitted his Old
Dialect for that of the place, and not by every word he spoke make the
Invidious Discovery of his being a Stranger? The Dr. forgets, that every one of
Phalaris's Epistles were written after he was a Tyrant: He might, for ought we
know, speak Doric before he got into Power; but afterward there was no need of
courting the People, for he governed by his Blew coats P. 39.
. And I think he could not have taken a more proper way of showing his
Tyrannical Temper, than by throwing off the Language of the Country, and using
a Foreign Dialect in all his Dispatches. The Conqueror did the same thing by
Us, when he changed the Language of our Law; and he showed himself in nothing
more a Conqueror, than by doing it.

But the Dr. has urged, that Phalaris, being such a Tyrant, would not probably
have been fond of the Language of a Democracy, that was eminently (...), an
hater of Tyrants P* 41.
. Was not Doric too the Language of the Lacedaemonians? and did not they hate
Tyrants, as much as the Athenians themselves? At this rate, Phalaris could not
have spoken any Dialect of the Greek Tongue, for every one of 'em was the
Language of a Democraty, some where or other. If the Dr's Reasoning be right
indeed, it may happen to prove that the Epistles are not Genuine, because not
written in Persic; but it will never prove 'em Spurious, because they are not
written in Doric. After all, what Trifles are these to amuse us with? that
Phalaris, to be sure, would not speak Attic, because the Athenians in his time
drove out Pisistratus? Would I give my self leave to declaim at this rate,
might I not with much better color say, that Phalaris would, to choose, make
use of that Dialect; because it was the Language of Pisistratus, his Brother
Tyrant? I see Dr. Bentley loves no less to argue, than read out of the way; and
it is so much out of the way, that I am ashamed to follow him.

Were I so very a Critic, as to love Wrangling rather than Truth, I might
further dispute it with the Dr. whether Doric were the Language of Agrigent, or
no, and that upon no less an Authority than Strabo's; who expressly says, that
Agrigent was a Colony of the Ionians (...). L. 6, p. 272.
. And Monsieur Menage Certe ut erat Agrigentum Ionum Colonia, test Strabone,
Agrigentini licet Siculi (qui quidem Siculi Doors erant) Ionico sermon forsan
utebantur. Notae in Diog. Laert. l. 8, sect. 60.
relied upon this so far, as to account from hence for the Ionic of Empedocles.
However, I must freely own my Opinion, that this Passage is corrupted, and that
we ought to read (...) instead of (...), according to the account which that
most Exact and Faithful Writer Thucydides has given us; not to mention
Polybius, and the Scholiast on Pindar. And this Conjecture is the more
probable, because Strabo seems to be speaking there of Colonies drawn from one
part of Sicily to another; such as that from Syracuse to Camarina, which he
mentions in the words immediately foregoing. I wonder how this escaped the most
Learned and Acute Casaubon's observation. Not to insist upon this therefore;
but allowing Dr. Bentley, that Agrigent was a Dorian Town, as I believe it was;
allowing him, that Phalaris was even born there, if he pleases, or in any other
Town in Sicily, that he shall pitch upon, as I believe he was not: an allowing
further, that Phalaris was obliged on this account to speak Doric as long as he
lived, yet still I have One Question to ask the Dr.; How can he prove, that
Phalaris did not write Doric? It Is true, the Epistles at present are not in
that Dialect: but they might have been Originally in it; and afterward, upon
the disuse of that Dialect, have been turned out of it into the Ordinary
Language at the Fancy of some Copyer, before the Days of Stobaeus P. 49.
. This the Dr. has irrefragably proved in the very Article we are upon, to have
been the case of Ocellus Lucanus's Book (...): and why may it not too have been
the case of Phalaris's Epistles? If some Copyer since Stobaeus's time thought
that Ocellus's Physics would look better out of Doric than in it, and therefore
transdialected 'em; why might not some other Copyer before Stobaeus's time
think the same of our Tyrants Letters, and do the same to 'em? and why, after
this was done, might not the Original Phalaris be lost, as well as the Original
Ocellus? It is certain, that Stobaeus thought that this might so happen, or at
least, that Phalaris might not have written Doric originally; for he
transcribes several of his Epistles into his Excellent Work, in the very
Language we now find 'em, without imagining in the least that they could not be
Genuine, because they were not in Doric. Such a Consequence as that never
entered into his Head: He had met with several Sicilian Writers, that chose to
write out of the Dialect of their Country, particularly Empedocles, an Author
of the same Town with Phalaris: (He had not indeed met with any Heroic Poem of
his; that Lucky Hit was reserved for the Inquisitive Dr. Bentley) and he had
met also with some Writers, whose works were at first in all probability penned
in Doric, and yet were in another Dialect in his time: for instance, the Pieces
of Perictyone, and Aristoxenus, two Pythagoreans; and who very probably wrote
Doric, because they were Pythagoreans; and yet in Stobaeus's time it is plain,
that some part of the Writings of the One were in Ionic, and those of the Other
(if I remember right; for I have not Stobaeus now by me) in the Common Dialect.
Let Dr. Bentley then take which side he pleases; either that Perictyone, and
Aristoxenus, (and I will add Zaleucus too, who we are sure was a Pythagorean
also from very good Authority Porph. in Vita Pyth. p. 15. Diod. Sic. l. 12, p.
84.
) either, I say, that these did write originally in Doric, or that they did
not. If they did, then we have Instances in 'em of Ancient Authors
transdialected very early, long before the days of Stobaeus; if they did not,
then here is a plain Proof that Authors probably of Doric Countries (to be sure
One of 'em was) might nevertheless not write Doric: and either of these being
granted me, the Reader sees, there will be no difficulty in justifying the
Dialect of Phalaris. Indeed if the Last be granted me, it will be pretty
difficult to justify Dr. Bentley's hardy assertion, that the Pythagoreans
would sooner have lost their Lives, than have written out of Doric Disser. p.
47.
; and that, if they had done it, it is most certain they would have been
banished the Society Ibid. p. 48.
. And therefore Dr. Bentley. I suppose, to make himself Consistent, (a very
hard Task!) will choose rather to grant, that these Writers were originally in
Doric: and if they were, he will please to consider, how they got out of it;
and show us, why Phalaris might not get out the very same way.

And here I should take my leave of this tedious Article, but that I hear Dr.
Bentley crying out (...), and calling loudly on the Learned World to listen to
a mighty Discovery. He undertakes to prove, that Ocellus Lucanus did not
repudiate his Vernacular Idiom, nor compose his Book [(...)] in the Dress that
it now wears, but in his own Country fashion Dissert. p. 47.
; that is, in plain English, that he did not write it in the Common Dialect, as
it is now extant, but in Doric. Upon this the Dr. spreads his Plumes, and swells
beyond his usual pitch: I dare engage to make out, and, If I may expect Thanks
for the Discovery, are Expressions that carry in 'em an Extraordinary Air of
Satisfaction; and seem a little too Pompous for the Matter they introduce, were
it entirely New, and his Own; but they much less become it, considering it is
all taken, Word for Word, out of a Preface to an Edition of Ocellus, as I shall
now show the Reader.

Vizzanius, above fifty Years ago, put out Ocellus Bononiae 1646.
; and in his Prolegomena to that Piece has said every thing that Dr. Bentley
has produced on this Subject, to a Tittle; and (which is a little unlucky) has
said it almost in the very same Words too: only Dr. Bentley is in English (I
compliment him when I say so) and Vizzanius is in Latin. The Dr. has
condescended to translate that Honest Editor's Preface, without making the
least Improvement of a single Argument there, but not without worsting several;
and has the Modesty after that to take it All to Himself, as the First
Inventor; and to talk higher of this Petty Larciny of his, than Vizzanius did
of the Original Discovery, which he thought too Obvious to value himself upon.
Perhaps some, who have not the Opportunity of comparing this Editor with Dr.
Bentley, may be glad to have a Particular Account of the Dr's Ingenuity in the
matter: and therefore I shall take the trouble of going through all he says on
this point, and plainly show whence he had his Intelligence.

I find (says the Dr. Dissert. p. 47.
) it was agreed and covenanted among the Scholars of that Italian Sect, (...)
(Jambl. Vit. Pyth.) I can tell him, where he found it, it was in Vizzanius: who
says the same thing, and quotes the very same Authority for it. Id certe
asserendum crediderim Ocellum Dorica Dialecto suum Opus conscripsisse, tum quia
Pythagoraeos quoslibet illi studuisse comperio, tum quia id Pythagorae suadeant
Instituta, cui semper Idiomatum Graecorum Doricum maxim voluit sectari, tum
antiquius, tum etiam praestantius illud arbitratus test Iamblicho, in Vita
Pythag. Indeed he makes no such Inference as Dr. Bentley does, that the
Pythagoreans would sooner have lost their Lives, than have broken this
Agreement; and that it is most certain, if any body had published a Book against
that Injunction, he would have been banished the Society: because he knew, this
was not observed by Empedocles, nor by the Author of the (...), nor even by
Iamblichus, while he is writing this Account of the P^thagoreans; no nor by
Pythagoras himself, if Diogenes Laertius may be credited.

It Is true, Vizzanius speaks a little unwarily, and may be understood to
intimate, that the Use of this Dialect among the Italian Sect was from the
institution of Pythagoras himself: a Mistake, which, if he were in, he was
probably led into by too slight a perusal of Iamblichus. Dr. Bentley took all
he found there for his Own, and this Mistake among the rest; and when he had
it, to make it look the more like his Own, gave it the Confident Turn.
Immediately these Instituta Pythagorae grew a solemn Injunction of Pythagoras
P. 47.
, which the Dr. talks as familiarly of, as if he had seen a Copy of it. But
methinks he might have inferred, that there was no Injunction of this kind,
from what he himself had told us out of Iamblichus but Three Lines before; that
this Use of the Dialect proceeded from a Covenant and agreement among the
Scholars P. 47.
themselves: For they who know what an Implicit Regard was paid to Pythagoras's
Orders by all his Scholars, will easily agree, that there could be no need of
their entering into a Compact, to do any thing that He had commanded. Dr.
Bentley's Adversaries may be as severe upon him, on the account of his
Criticisms, as they please; but they needs must allow him to have a Particular
Talent at Reasoning, and to have thus much at least of a Good Disputant, that
he is sure to make the most of his Argument.

Dr. Bentley's next Suggestion is this, We are assured that the other Pieces of
this Author were made in Doric, as one of Law, (...), cited by Stobaeus.
Vizzanius too cites this Fragment of Ocellus's Piece (...), from Stobaeus, and
makes the same Use of it: Ocellum scil. Lucanum scimus Librum de Legibus
scripsisse -- hujus fragmentum exhibet Stobaeus -- Dorica Dialecto expressum,
etc.

Dr. Bentley goes on, But, which is plain Demonstration, Four Citations are
brought by the same Writer out of this very Book, (...), all which are in
Doric, and not as they are now extant in the Common Dialect. Vizzanius referrs
us to these four very places as they lie in Stobaeus, and observes too that
they are there in Doric; not, as they are now extant, in the Common Dialect. De
caeteris tandem in hoc Ocelli Opusculo contentis quis dubitet? Si enim primum
respiciamus Caput, textum ejusdem ultimum; si secundum caput, textum sextum; si
tertium caput, postremam textus quarti partem; and textum quintum and sextum;
iisdem servatis vocibus, immutata licet Dialecto, ad amussim veluti Ocelli
dogmata describit Stobaeus.

From hence Dr. Bentley argues, that this Tract of Ocellus now extant is to be
acknowledged for a Genuine Work, which HITHERTO Learned Men have doubted of
from this very business of the Dialect. So does Vizzanius in the passage before
quoted; and again, Grave Stobaei Testimonium, non perfunctorie, sed summo studio
veteris monumenta sapientiae semper lustrantis illud [Opus de Lege] ab Ocello
prodiisse dubitare non sinit; and tamen Dorico Idiomate videmus conscriptum,
cujus nec minima in hoc [(...)] opere conspiciuntur vestigia: ideoque an vere
Ocellus aureum hoc opus conscripserit, jure quemcunque suspicari contingat --
hinc tamen certa potius quibus illi operi fides conciliatur, erumpunt
argumenta. The only difference between Vizzanius and Dr. Bentley upon this
point, is, that Vizzanius does not triumph over the mistakes of those that went
before him, nor tell us that All the Learned Men before his time had doubted
whether the Work were Genuine; even when he might perhaps have said this
safely, and truly: whereas Dr. Bently says it, fifty Years afterward; and
assures the World, that HITHERTO Learned Men have doubted of this matter, at
the very time that he is a Translating a Learned Man, who was so far from
doubting of it, that he was giving Reasons, why No body else should ever doubt
of it hereafter.

Dr. Bentley concludes his Whole Argument thus, Now We see by these Fragments,
that every Word of the True Book is faithfully preserved; the Doric only being
changed into the ordinary Language, at the Fancy of some Copyer, since the Days
of Stobaeus. Vizzanius does not speak quite so strongly as the Dr, but he gives
much the same account of it: Quis dubitet de hoc Opusculo, cum viderit eosdem
quos retulit Stobaeus textus iisdem quidem omnino verbis, at diversa Dialecto,
Dorica scilicet conscriptos? -- indeque tenui ac facili immutatione Ocelli
Opera ad Atticam traducta Dialectum? and in the Words before quoted [ Hinc
certa potius, etc.] He answers the Cavils of those who suspected Ocellus from
his Dialect, and handsomely turns their own Cavils against them. But I must give
Dr. Bentley his Due, and own he has here made some Improvement: for Vizzanius
never thought of carrying this Argument so far as to prove, that because these
few Fragments cited by Stobaeus exactly agree with Ocellus, as we now have him,
therefore it is certain, that every Word of the True Book is faithfully
preserved. This was a Consequence reserved for Dr. Bentley, which a Common
Critic, who reasons but like other men, would never have thought of: and it
being the only one which he has produced of his Own on this Occasion, I should
not be just to him, unless I fairly told the World, that he did not borrow it.

And now, why don't the Critics, Great and Small, rise up to do him Homage? How
many Letters can he produce from Learned Men abroad, who have paid him their
acknowledgments for this Information? What has he to say for himself? can he
pretend not to have seen this Edition of Ocellus? how came he then to hit just
upon all Vizzanius says, and no more? has he not seen the Amsterdam Edition of
Dr. Gale neither? To what purpose, does he think, that Dr. Gale set those Four
Passages out of Stobaeus before his Edition, but to let People see that his
Author was Genuine, and writ in Doric? He did not indeed make a Stir with that
matter in his Preface, because he knew that Vizzanius had exhausted the point
before Him; and he thought it not fit for Him to take the humble and
dishonorable Task of transcribing another Man's Labors, either with, or
without naming him.

I am glad of this Opportunity of mentioning the Worthy Dean of York, and of
paying my Public Acknowledgments to him, for the particular Kindness and
Favors I received from him, while I was under his Care. The Foundation of all
the little Knowledge I have in these matters was laid by Him; which I
gratefully own: for I think my self obliged to let the World know, whom I have
been beholden to; though Dr. Bentley, I find, be of another Opinion.

And now I think I may without Vanity say, that I have outdone Dr. Bentley in
the way of Discovery: for Mine, as inconsiderable as it is, is a Discovery; and
such an one, as proves His to be None.

FROM the particular Idiom of Speech which Phalaris used, Dr. Bentley has
proved nothing but this, that he can Construe a Latin Preface, take a Learned
Man's Notions, and calmly put 'em off for his own; and then imperiously summon
in the Men of Letters to do Obeisance to Him, as the First Discoverer: all
which I, and his Readers, would readily have allowed him, without putting him
to the trouble of proving it. Having therefore thus strenuously managed the
Argument of the Dialect, he now turns his Formidable Pen to another kind of
Proof: He has found out, that the Greek even of that Dialect is more Modern
than the Times of Phalaris.

His Arguments on this Head are so far from making any thing to his purpose,
that one would imagine he brought 'em only as so many Instances to illustrate
what he said in the 13th Page, that Men have been deceived in their Conjectures
of this Nature even to Ridicule. For, could he make out what he aims at, and
produce some Expressions from these Epistles, that are not used by the Polite
Greek Writers, what would he infer from hence? that these Words were certainly
coined since the Age of Phalaris? how does he know but that they might be Then
in use, and dropped afterward when the Learned Age came on; and revived again,
as that declined? Horace thought such Changes and Revolutions in Speech not
unusual: and it might easily be proved, that there have been many such, both in
the Greek and Latin Tongue; but that Dr. Bentley has made the Proof of it
superfluous here: for he has not produced any One Word, that is of that New
Stamp he pretends. And among all the Marks and Moles Disser. p. 52.
which, he says, betray the Epistles to be a Thousand Years younger than
Phalaris P. 51.
, he has had the Judgment to choose out such, as betray Him to be as little a
Critic in the Greek Language, as he is in his Own.

He has so proposed his First Instance, that He and I shall have no Dispute
about it in This Place: (...), in the sense of accusing, is, he says, an
Innovation in Language, for which the Ancients used (...). I entirely agree
with him, it is an Innovation in Language, and a very Modern one; so Modern,
that I suspect 'twas first broached by a Little Greek, that writ toward the
latter end of the 17th Century: (whom I shall not forget to talk with on this
score, when I find his Criticism in its Proper Place, among the Faults of the
Version) and consequently I apprehend the Epistles to be in no danger from This
Word; but the next seems to carry Terror in it. For the Dr. declares, that
(...), which in the XVII. Epist. must signify, having given before, was never
so used by the Ancients, but always for having betrayed. And this is One of the
Instances that is to bring down the Date of the Letters a Thousand Years lower
than their pretended Author. Let it have its force to the Confusion of
Phalaris, and all his Adherents: but what shall we do for St. Paul? He comes
far within this Period; so that the Writings that carry his Name must be Four
hundred Years Younger than We Christians suppose 'em: and the Epistle to the
Romans could not be the Genuine Work of that Apostle, but was penned (as
Phalaris's Epistles were) by some more Recent Sophist; whom Dr. Bentley has
detected and unmasked by the word (...), employed to signify, he gave before;
[ Romans xi.35.] but never used in this sense, till many Ages after our Savior.
What shall we say to this? Shall we allow Dr. Bentley to be a Scurvy Critic, or
shall we in Tenderness to his Honor, give up our Bibles? Perhaps the Dr. may,
for this once, be mistaken: and I Am the rather inclined to think he is, because
I find (...) and (...) used in the very same sense by the Best Writers of
Antiquity, Xenophon (...) (in margin rectius (...)) (...) Which Leunclavius
rightly translates, Praterea Cyrus and Stip^ndium prius illis debitum
persolvit, and menstruum aliud ante tempus numeravit. Xen. Hellen. l. 1, p. 441.
, Demosthenes -- (...) Orat. (...)
, and Aristotle -- (...) Oecon. l. 2.
, if the Oeconomicks be his.

These are Great Authorities; but if they should prevail with the Dr. to
withdraw this Argument, we are not yet safe; he has still a stronger Objection
against the Epistles of St. Paul and Phalaris, taken from the word (...), put
for following; which, he says, anciently signified to pursue, when that which
fled feared and shunned the Pursuer. What pity it is, the Knowing Dr. Hody had
not learnt this Secret Piece of Criticism sooner? how easily might he have
proved the Septuagint of a much less Authority, and Later Date than Vossius
contended for, by that Expression in Ezra (ix.4.) (...)? by which however the
LXX, I suppose, were far from meaning, Every one that persecutes the Word of
God. (...), as I remember, is used once only by Phalaris in this sense; but I Am
sure it is frequently so employed by St. Paul; and Remarkable it is, that in One
Passage of his Epistles the Word is taken both in Phalaris's following, and Dr.
Bentley's persecuting Sense, within the Compass of two Lines: (...) Romans
XII.13, 14. Now let Phalaris shift for himself; but I am again concerned to put
in one word for our Apostle. Would Dr. Bentley give himself Time to consider,
he would find, that (...), in all its various acceptations still implies the
Notion of Following: sometimes the Thing followed has reason to fly and fear
the Follower; and then it signifies to pursue in Dr. Bentley's sense: but
sometimes the Thing followed is less shy and timorous; and then it signifies
barely to follow. Theocritus says, (...).
Now though the Kid might be afraid of the Wolf, yet the Cytisus is not so apt to
run away from the Kid: and Virgil therefore, who understood the force of a
Greek Word as well as Dr. Bentley, translates it thus, -- Lupus ipse Capellam,
Florentem Cytisum sequitur lasciva Capella.
where the Word sequitur, which is of it self Indifferent, is, as the Greek
Word (...) is in Theocritus's Verse, determined to signify differently by the
several things to which it is applied. In much the same sense it is used by
Aristotle, throughout his Ethics, wherever he has occasion to express a
pursuit after Honor, Riches, Pleasure, Virtue, and many such Objects, which
are under no fearful apprehensions of the pursuer. If Dr. Bentley be not yet
convinced, I refer him for his farther satisfaction to Plato (...), ('It Is
Socrates speaks) (...) Phoed.
, and Dionysius Halicarnasseus (...) Faustulus followed Romulus into the City.
P. 52.
; and I desire him particularly to consider those Words of Xenophon in the
Memoirs of Socrates, (...), which, according to the little Skill I have in
Greek, is to be translated thus, We ought to fly the Men of a Troublesome
Temper* and to court the Candid. But if (...) here signified to pursue: then
(...), which is opposed to it, would signify to follow: and so indeed we
should have a Precept for Courting Dr. Bentley.

He instances again in these words, (...), which in one of the Epistles are
meant to express Lovers of their Children; whereas, says he, this of Old would
have been taken for a Flagitious Love of Boys; and he would argue from thence,
that this use of the word must be introduced by some Modern Sophist. Now to Me
the Argument seems to lie quite the other way; and since the words (...) and
(...) were, in latter times, of such infamous usage, it is not to be imagined,
that a Sophist should put 'em into Phalaris's Mouth, to express the Love of
Children: but it is very conceivable, that this in Phalaris's time might be an
innocent Expression; though afterward, as Greece grew lewder, it had a Double
Meaning, and was therefore not fit to be used. I Am sure, I can give a better
reason for my conjecture, than the Dr. can for his; and it is this: Whenever
Phalaris has occasion to express the Scandalous Love of Boys, he does not use
this word, as Later Authors do; he calls Lysinus (Ep. VIII.) (...), but not
(...); which, if the Word had then born as Vile a sense as it did afterward,
he would certainly have done: for he had a little of Dr. Bentley in him at that
time, and was bestowing the very Worst Names he could think of upon his
Adversaries. Besides, (...) and (...) sound very differently; and if we take
the Whole Sentence in Phalaris together, (...), the Connection plainly shows,
that (...) can have no ill meaning. Nay, long after Phalaris's time, we have
Instances where these Words are employed in a Virtuous Sense: Plato uses 'em so
almost every where; particularly in his (...) they recurr often, and under a
Chaste meaning (...), Says one of the Persons in that Dialogue -- Who
immediately afterward professes, that he meant not these Words of a Lascivious
Love: (...), etc. p. 192. In the same manner (...), which generally had a
Scandalous Sense, is by Plato often used in a Good one: particularly in his
Phoedrus; where Socrates calls Lysias the Orator (...), Phoedri Deliciae,
because of Phoedrus 's admiring and delighting in Lysias 's Orations. See p.
236.
, if Plato's own word may be taken for it. If Dr. Bentley thinks otherwise, and
dares say so, I leave him to be scourged by Mr. Norris, and the rest of the
Platonists.

Till I am at leisure to look out for more Authorities, I hope Plato may be
thought considerable enough to countenance Phalaris in the use of this
Expression: but the Dr. has still a Proof in reserve, which he takes to be the
most distinguishing Mark of a Late Writer. (...) (Ep. CXLII.) is used for
Maidens: this, he says, is a most manifest token of a Later Greek; even Tzetzes
interprets it (...): that is, (if I can make any Sense of what he says) this
Use of the Word is so modern, that even Tzetzes himself was ashamed so to
employ it, and therefore put (...) instead of it. But if Tzetzes's Judgment may
go for any thing, he is of my side; for he cites the Epistles as Genuine: and
therefore to be sure did not substitute (...) in the room of (...), because he
thought this sense of the word Modern. And here again I must put the Dr. in
mind of his Bible. For in the LXX. we find, (...), ( Prove. xxxi.29.) where
(...) must mean Women, or Maidens: But these Maidens were Some body's
Daughters; and so, I suppose, were those that Phalaris presented to his Friend.
The same Expression recurrs too in the Evangelists, where they tell us what our
Savior said to the Woman that touched the Hem of his Garment; St. Matthew has
it, (...); and St. Mark, (...) I need not go farther for Instances, since it is
probable that this Criticism is altogether founded on a mistake; and what we
now read (...) in the modern MSS. of Phalaris, was in the more ancient ones
contractedly written (...), which might be read either (...), or (...), as the
Copyer chanced to hit upon it. Tzetzes therefore might truly read, and not
interpret, it (...); and (as it has often happened in Other Cases) this True
Reading, which is corrupted in the entire MS. of the Author, be preserved in
this cited Passage of him. If our great Dealer in MSS. did not observe this,
where is his Sagacity? If he observed it, without owning it, where is his
Sincerity? He must give me leave now and then to ask him an Insulting Question;
He has asked me a great many. But I have One Enquiry more to make of him on
this occasion; and that is, Whether he thinks, that his Philosophical Lectures
serve more to the establishment of Religion, than his Criticisms do to
overthrow it? For is he not Positive, that the Idioms of the Letters prove them
to be a Thousand Years later than Phalaris? And are not some of these very
Idioms frequently to be met with both in the Gospels and Epistles? Should not
so Profound a Grecian and Divine as He is have looked a little into the New
Testament, before he had pronounced such rash and groundless Assertions? Could
Men imagine One, who writes at this rate, to have any Meaning, they would think
he had a very ill one: but the whole management of this Controversy clears him
from all suspicions of Meaning and Design.

These are all the Marks of Novity, which he has given himself the trouble to
take notice of; They that will search, he says, may find more of this sort:
without question they may; but if they don't find some of another sort, they will
have the Discretion to keep their Discoveries to themselves, and not expose 'em
to be corrected by every one that can turn an Index, or a Lexicon N^c sane
quisquam est tam procul a cognitione eorum remotus, vt non Indicem certe ex
Bibliotheca sumptum transfer in Libros suos possit. Quint. Instit. l. 10, c.
1.
. By such Helps as these, 'twould be easy to collect Authorities in abundance
against every Instance that Dr. Bentley has brought on this head: but I am so
far from valuing my self upon a multitude of Quotations, that I wish there had
been no occasion for those few I have produced; and think I am obliged to
excuse my self to the Reader for that mixture of Latin and Greek, with which I
am forced to vary this Odd Work of mine. I can only say, that I have been as
sparing in this way, as Dr. Bentley would give me leave to be: and I have the
rather avoided being tedious upon the Particular Point in debate between us,
that I might have room to examine the General Reflection which he has made upon
the Change and Decay of Languages.

It is easy (says the Dr.) from the very turn and fashion of the Style to
distinguish a fresh English Composition from another a hundred Years old. Now
there are as real and sensible Differences in the Greek; were there as many
that could discern them. But very few are so versed and practiced in that
Language, as ever to arrive at that Subtilty of Taste Diss. p. 52
. I can easily grant, that the English Tongue has undergone very considerable
and surprising Changes, especially in this Last Century; till about the middle
of which, we did not in good earnest set about the Cultivating and Refining it:
and then carried our Improvements so far, that Some who wrote at the beginning
of this Century are not now easily understood. At our best, We are perhaps a
little too fond of adopting Foreign Words; and fancying, out of a Modesty
peculiar to our Nation, that we have not stock enough of our own, are
continually borrowing from our Neighbors: and this brings a great many New
Phrases in upon us, and consequently antiquates a great many others. Besides we
have few things in our Tongue writ with any tolerable Degree of perfection; and
They therefore who would write or speak well, have no Patterns to look up to,
no sure Rule, but the present Mode of the Age, to guide themselves by: and as
fast as That alters therefore, the Manner of writing must alter along with it.
But now if Dr. Bentley pretends to point out as Real and Sensible Differences
in the several Ages of the Greek, as a moderate Critic may in the English, I Am
afraid his Subtilty of Taste will fail him. Does he take the Greek of Lucian to
be as different from that of Plato, as our English Now is from that which was
spoken soon after the Conquest? Are not Homer and Oppian much nearer one
another in their Language than Chaucer and Cowly, though in Time they are far
more distant? No body is so absurd as to say, that the Greek Tongue did not
admit of some few Alterations in Every Age; but 'twas incomparably the most
fixed and enduring of any that we are generally acquainted with: and I shall
offer at Some Reasons, that gave it this remarkable advantage over other
Languages. 'Twas early improved and adorned by Men of the greatest Genius that
ever appeared in the World; They polished and perfected it to that degree, that
it was admirably fitted to all the Purposes of Speech and Ways of Writing
imaginable: They wrought it up into all the Majesty and Grace, all the
Sweetness and Smoothness that an Happy Composition of Words, an Harmonious
mixture of Vowels and Diphthongs, or a Just Cadency of Syllables could give it.
The best Greek Writers had generally Skill in Music; which was infused into 'em
from their Infancy, and none were reckoned well-bred that wanted it. This made
their Ear just, and fine: and the fineness of their Ear easily slid into their
Tongue; modeled their Speech, and made it Tuneable. They brought all the
Learning in the World into their Language; and wrote in the best manner, upon
all the most useful and pleasing Subjects, that could benefit, or entertain
Mankind. The Natural Perfection of their Tongue, and the distinguishing
Excellency of their Authors in all Kinds of Knowledge, and Ways of Writing,
made 'em a Complete Standard and Model to other Nations, and after-Ages; upon
which every one endeavored to form himself. So that what was sure always to be
liked, could not choose but last long. Their Empire also did not a little
contribute to the Stability and Prevalence of their Language: They overcame a
Great part of the World, and extended their Tongue with their Conquests, so as
to make it Universal; All Nations borrowed from Them, but They had that
Contempt of the Barbarity of other Countries, that they were shy of suffering
either their Manners, or their Speech to be introduced among 'em. This Pride
they preserved in a great measure, even when the Roman Empire was at its utmost
height; and while Rome flourished with the Glory of Arms, the Seat of Learning
still continued at Athens. This kept the Language so far entire and unmixed,
that we have Greek Books writ by Authors at almost Two thousand Years distance,
who disagree less in their Phrase and Manner of Speech, than the Books of any
Two English Writers do, who lived but Two hundred Years asunder. This then was
a Peculiar Happiness of the Greek Tongue; No other Language, that has been of
known and familiar use in the World, not even the Latin it self, enjoyed any
thing like it. An 150 or 200 Years was the utmost Length of Time that the Latin
Purity continued. And therefore, to Compare the Greek, the most Holding Tongue
in the World, with the English, the most Fickle and Fleeting of any; and to
Infer from the observable difference between the several Ages of English, that
there was as great a Difference between the several Ages of Greek; is a
Comparison and an Inference, which Nobody, but Dr. Bentley, would have allowed
himself to make: that is, (to be plain with him) Nobody but One, who has no
true Relish, no nice Taste of the Beauties and Proprieties of Either of these
Languages; or of any Other, that he has yet pretended to judge of, or to write
in. By those Marks and Moles of Novity which he has pointed out, in the
Paragraph we are upon, the Reader is by this time satisfied, how able he is to
assign to every Greek Writer his proper Age and Period, merely by the Thread
and Color of his Style. Indeed, though he has the Vanity to declare this to be
his Extraordinary Faculty, yet he has withal the Modesty not to hope that he
shall convince any body Disser. p. 52.
; and in this, I dare say, he is not mistaken. For it is somewhat hard to
imagine, how a Man should enter into the Spirit and Delicacy, and all the
Various Niceties of a Dead Tongue, who is so far from having any exquisite
sense of these things, even in that very Tongue, which he was born and bred up
in. I shall take an occasion by and bye to give the Reader such a Specimen of
his English Eloquence, as will discourage any body (if there be any body left,
who is not yet discouraged) from choosing Him for a Taster. In the mean time, to
stay the Reader's Longing, I shall instance in One Happy Phrase, newly minted
by the Dr. in this very Paragraph: he speaks here of the Mien of a Face; which,
as I take it, is much the same thing with the Behavior of a Look, or the
Carriage of a Smile: I do not know how particular the Dr's Mien, or his Face,
may be; for, to my knowledge, I never saw him; but the Mien of the Face of his
Style the Reader must allow me, even from this single instance, is somewhat
extraordinary!

THE Use of the Attic Dialect was made one shrewd Objection against Phalaris;
the Use of the Attic Talent, Dr. Bentley is resolved, shall be another. This
Way of Counting recurrs pretty often in the Epistles; however not so often, as
that an Argument built upon it should deserve to be ranked among the General
Proofs: but I am so little sensible of the force of it, that I am willing to
allow it a place there; and if Dr. Bentley can make it out, I promise to
renounce, not those Particular Epistles only from whence it is taken, but the
Whole Set of them.

The Dr. upon this Article, accuses his Mock-Phalaris of mistaking the Sicilian
Talent: and this Mistake of his, he, with his usual Gaiety, calls a Slippery
Way of telling Money Disse^ p. 5^.
; and therefore cautions us against dealing with him Ibid. p. 54.
. He explains himself thus, -- That the Sicilian Talent was the Lowest of any;
that Phalaris promising in his Epistles to several of his Countrymen Talents in
General, must be understood to mean Sicilian Talents, whereas he means nothing
like it. Now (says the Dr.) if a Bargain were made in England, to pay so many
Pounds, or Marks; and the Party should pretend at last, that he meant Scots
Marks, or French Livres; few, I suppose, would care to have Dealings with him.
And this is the very Case in so many of these Letters Dissert. p. 54.
. So far from being the Case, that the Case is just contrary! For if the
^icilian Talents were so very Low, and Phalaris must be thought to intend them
in his Promises, and yet paid Attic ones; Those he dealt with had certainly no
reason to complain of him. Would a man think himself ill used in Scotland, who
should have a General Promise made him of so many Pounds, which he expected to
be made good in the Pounds of the Country, and received 'em afterward in good
English Sterling? What could possibly give this Perverse Turn even to Dr.
Bentley's Imagination? What Cloudy Author had he been conversing with, that
could put him into this State of Perplexity and Confusion? We have great hopes
indeed that the Intricate Accounts of this Paragraph should be cleared up, by
such an Head, in such Order! But, it may be, the Dr. did not intend this for a
Remark that was to Edify his Reader; but for a pure piece of harmless
Diversion. Having therefore sported himself a little, he resumes the Chair, and
thus authoritatively dictates to us.

We are to know, that in Sicily, as in most other Countries, the Name and Value
of their Coins, and the way of reckoning by Sums, was peculiar. The Sum
Talent, in the Sicilian Account, contained no more in Specie than Three Attic
Drachms, or Roman Denares; as plainly appears from Aristotle Pollux, l. ix, c.
6.
, in his now lost Treatise of the Sicilian Government. And the Words of Festus
are most express; Talentorum non unum Genus: Atticum est sex millium Denarium,
Syracusanum trium denarium. What an Immense Difference! One Attic Talent had
the real value of Two thousand Sicilian Talents. Now in all these Epistles the
very Circumstances assure us, that by the word Talent simply named, the Attic
Talent is understood. But should not our wise Sophist have known, that a
Talent, in that Country where he had laid the Scene of his Letters, was quite
another thing? Without Question, if the true Phalaris had penned them, he would
have reckoned these Sums by the Sicilian Talents, increasing only the Number:
Or should he have made use of the Attic Account, he should always have given
express notice of it; never saying (...) alone, without the addition of (...)
Disser. p. 54, 55.
.

Now, in opposition to the Dr's Reasonings and Authorities about this matter of
the Talents, I shall endeavor to show, that what the Dr. says we are to know,
we are still to know, after all the Information he has vouchsafed to give us:
and that if we did know it, we could not from thence gather, that these
Epistles are Spurious. For if there is Room to suspect that the Dr's Witnesses
are corrupted, if their Testimony is inconsistent, if they tell us things
demonstratively false, if the Dr. says more than his Witnesses do, if there be
stronger Authority to counterbalance theirs; if, admitting what they say, or
what the Dr. makes 'em say, to be true, the Letters may be nevertheless
Authentic: if these things can be made good, the Dr. will, I hope, pardon me,
if I refuse to part with Phalaris, upon any Quarrel about the Talents.

The Dr's Witnesses are Pollux, and Festus, whom I shall examine severally.
Aristotle indeed is called in for a Witness; but He not appearing in Person, we
have his Testimony only at second hand: so that its force will wholly depend on
the Authority of Pollux, the Relater. To Him we are referred in the Margin; but
it does not appear from the Book and Chapter there cited, that the Treatise of
Aristotle which, the Dr. says, is now Lost, was ever sound. That Aristotle
wrote (...), or accounts of the State and Polity of several Particular Cities,
and of several Sicilian Cities among the rest, is sufficiently known (...)

Diog. in Vita Arist.
: but that he wrote any thing which bore such a Title as a Treatise of the
Sicilian Government, we want the Light of some other Lost Treatise to make
plain to us. A Treatise of Aristotle, but not under this Name, is cited by
Pollux in this Chapter: but whether that part of this Chapter which concerns
the Value of Talents be genuine, we have Room to doubt. Seberus, in his Notes
on Pollux, tells us, that from Page 435, v. 32, of his Edition, to the End of
the 6th Chapter (within which space all that is said to Talents lies) is
wanting in One MS But allowing it to be genuine, what the Dr. says is plain
from that place in Pollux, is so far from being plain from thence, that Pollux,
must be changed and helped out from other Authors, before he can be made to
speak to the purpose. It plainly appears to the Dr. from Aristotle, as there
cited by Pollux, that the Sum Talent in the Sicilian Account contained no more
in Specie than three Attic Drachms, or Roman Denares. But though the Sicilian
Talent be there mentioned, it is neither adjusted to Attic Drachms, nor Roman
Denares (...) * (...)

Poll. l. 9, c. 6.
. Two sorts of Sicilian Talents are there taken notice of; an Ancient, and a
Later: That equal to 24 Nummi, This to 12. And the Nummus is said to be equal
to three (...) So that before the Value of the Sicilian Talent can be settled
from this Passage, the Value of the Nummus should be first agreed on; which it
will not be very easy to fix from its given proportion to the (...), because
that is a Species of Money we are Strangers to; and the Critics are agreed we
owe that Coin purely to a Corrupt Reading of the Text: (which, by the bye, is
much such an Instance of Equivocal Generation, as that which the Dr. tells us
of Dissert p. 118.
, where he makes Mushrooms to grow out of a Rotten Passage in Suidas). Some
therefore for (...) read (...), others (...). This Latter must be owned to be a
greater departure from the Letter of the Text than the Former; so that if we
admit it in order to our settling the value of the Nummus, and consequently of
the Talent, we do not owe our Light in this matter to what we read in Pollux,
but to what we gather from our own Conjectures, or from other Authors. When we
have put (...) for (...), it is granted, that the Nummus, which is equal to
three half-Obolus's, or one Obolus and an half, is the same with the Nummus
Sestertius of the Romans: the value of which being known from other Authors,
and it is proportion to the Roman Denare; the proportion of the Sicilian Talent
to the Roman Denare is thereby made out. But those who go this way to work in
settling the value of the Sicilian Talent from this obscure and corrupted
passage, seem to take it for granted, that the Greek word (...) in Pollux means
the Roman Nummus; or Sestertius, and then adjust the obscure word (...) (by
changing it into (...)) to the known value of the Sesterius. But Pollux tells
us, that though (...) L. 9, C. 6.
(...) may seem to be a Roman Name of Money, yet it is a Greek one, and a Term
of the Dorians in Italy, and Sicily. And if so, it is more probable that the
Sicilian Talent is here compared to the Dorian or Sicilian Nummi, whatever
those were, than to the Roman Sestertii. Had Pollux given us the Value of the
Sicilian Talent in his own Name and Words, we might have supposed that he
adjusted it to the Roman Moneys; but it is absurd to think that Aristotle, those
words (...), etc. ut supra.
are here cited for the value of the Talent, should give it us in Roman
Sestertii, which were a Coin not stamped at Rome, till after Aristotle's time
Who died Olymp. cxiv, 3. according to Laertius. And Pliny tells us, Argentum
signatum est Anno urbis 585, ( others read 485) Quinto Fabio Consule, 5 annis
ante primum Punicum bellum. Not. Hist. l. 33.

Now A. U. C. 585, falls in with Ol. 153. A. U. C. 485, with Ol. 128.


. So that the Ground upon which the received Computation of the Sicilian Talent
seems to have been made, plainly fails. But admitting the Nummus here to be the
same with the Roman Sestertius, which we have good reason not to admit; and
that (...) is rightly substituted, which we have no reason to grant: yet after
all Dr. Bentley has imposed upon us in his valuation of the Sicilian Talent.
For the Value of the more Ancient Sicilian Talent, which is equal to 24 Nummi
or Sestertii, will be equivalent not to Three, but to Six Roman Denares, or
Attic Drachms; it being agreed on all hands, that each Sestertius is one fourth
part of a Denare or Dram: so that the Dr. has sunk the value of the Sicilian
Talent (admitting this Computation) half in half. The Later Sicilian Talent
will indeed at this rate be, as the Dr. puts it; but the more Ancient one will
be double its Value. But though the Dr. in his way of telling Money after Pollux,
slips the Old Talent, (which it had been fair to have taken notice of, since
Phalaris must be supposed to reckon by those Talents that were most ancient)
and gives us the value only of the Later one; yet the difference between these
Two Talents is not, I own, so great, as to be worth contending for: since it is
freely acknowledged, that the Talents mentioned in Phalaris must be put at a
higher rate than even the greater Sicilian Talent, if that was worth no more
than Six Roman Denares, or Attic Drachms. The value of a Denare, or Dram, is
computed by all Authors, and may be proved by the Scales to be equal to 7 d.
ob. so that Six of these will amount to 3 s. 9 d. the Price, as is pretended,
of the Greater Sicilian Talent: and Three of them, to half that Sum, 1 s. 10
d. ob. the value of Dr. Bentley's Talent. But now if Pollux had expressly told
me from Aristotle, that these were the several Values of the Two Sicilian
Talents, I should have made some difficulty of giving him any Credit in this
matter. For I find, that this same Pollux, as we now have him, cites Aristotle
for things of this nature, which even upon Aristotle's Authority I cannot
admit. He tells us from Aristotle (...) L. 4, C. 24.
, that the Sicilians reckoned that Two Brass Pieces ((...)) were equal to Six
Litrae; and that Six Brass Pieces were equal to half a Litra. Now, that Two
should be twelve times as much as Six, is not according to the received Rules
of Arithmetic: To puzzle us still more, Pollux tells us in another place (...).
L. 9, C. 6.
, from the same Treatise of Aristotle, that Six Talents are equal to Two Brass
Pieces; and that Three Talents are equal to Three of the same Brass pieces;
that is, that Three are more than Six. I beg to be excused, if I cannot believe
Pollux, that Aristotle counted at this rate; because I always thought, that
Aristotle had some little Skill in Mathematics. It would not perhaps be
difficult to offer some Emendations, that might set these things right: but
till that is done, Pollux's Calculations are of no great Credit with me.
Pollux, in the same place which the Dr. cites for his value of the Talents,
informs us He tells us expressly, that the Mina of each Country is divided into
an hundred Drachms of that Country. (...) L. 9, C. 6. And if the Drachmae of
each Country rise and fall in proportion to the Talent, it is evident, that
there are as many Hundreds of them, that is, as many Minae, in one Talent as in
another. And so Brerewood understands Pollux: Omne Talentum, ut Suidas and
Pollux inquiunt, continet Minas 60, ut Mina Drachmas 100. Proinde 6000 Drachmas
continebat* Talentum Omne, proprias sc. l. ejus regionis, cujus Talentum esse
dicebatur. De Nummis, p. 26.

Talentum quodvis s^xmillia Drachmarum sui generis habet, quae ad Atticas
reductae variant. Gron. de (...). Vet. c. 3.


, that as the Attic Talent was divided into Sixty Attic Minae, and each of
those Minae into an Hundred Attic Drachms, so the Talent of each Country was
divided into the same number of Minae; and each Mina into the same number of
Drachms, proportionably to the value of the several Talents. So that the
Sicilian Mina, the 60th part of the greater Sicilian Talent, will at this rate
be just Three Farthings of our Money; and the Sicilian Dram, the hundredth
part of that minute Sum, i. e. more than three and thirty times less than our
Farthing. Now it cannot easily be imagined, that the Sicilian Dram, which was
a Coin current amongst them, should be so unconceivably little as it must be,
if its value were but the three and thirtieth part of our Farthing: and yet we
must not stop here, but must carry our Imagination further, and still break
that Particle of Metal into Two Parts, if we would reach the Littleness of that
other Dram which answers to the Lesser, or Dr. Bentley's Talent; being not
quite the 66th part of our Farthing, and that in Silver too: a Species of Money,
not to be counted without the help of Microscopes. So that when we have
occasion hereafter to express the Value, or rather worthlesness, of any
contemptible Performance, we shall in complement to the Dr's Criticism say, it
is not worth a Sicilian Dram.

I beg the Reader's Patience, while I take a Review of what has been said in
answer to the Dr's First Authority. The Value of the Sicilian Talent appears
clearly to him from a Lost Treatise, which he owns has long since disappeared,
and which I think never did appear. That part of Pollux, where he finds the
Remains of this Lost Treatise, is of suspected Credit. If it is Genuine, it is
Imperfect; and to be supplied by Guess. The Supplies which have been made to it
seem to have been built upon a Wrong Supposition, that the (...) in Pollux was
a Roman Word. When these Supplements are admitted, they do not sink the Talent
in dispute quite so low as the Dr. does. Pollux, whose Authority we must depend
upon for this Citation from Aristotle, cites things of this nature from him
which, as they there stand, are demonstrably false. In his Division of the
Talent, he breaks it into pieces, which, admitting the Dr's Rate of the Talent,
are of no Value, and of no Use.

If this Plea (for the Length of which I beg the Reader's pardon) is sufficient
to invalidate the Authority of Pollux, the Testimony of Festus will admit of an
easier Dispatch. For, not to insist on any of those Exceptions against Pollux,
which affect Festus equally with Him, it is observable that the Book which we
now have under the Name of Festus, is not the Work of Festus, but composed out
of some Fragments of Festus, and an Epitome of Festus, which Paulus Diaconus, a
mean Writer Paulus Longobardus, homo confidentissimus ac ineptissimus; nihil
Festo pejus potuit accidere, quam quod in hujus Pauli manus inciderit. Ios.
Scalig. in Ep. Ded. ad Castigationes in Fes^um.
, whose Picture Scaliger has so drawn, as if an Acquaintance of mine had sat
for it, made in Charles the Great's time. The Original Festus, if we had him
entire, was but an Epitome of Verrius Flaccus; and Scaliger thinks it a Just
Judgment upon Festus, for having abridg'd Flaccus, that his Epitome was
Epitomized by so Ignorant a Creature as Paulus. But, what is most to our
Purpose, those that give us these words of Festus, (if they be His) which the
Dr. says are express to his point; take care to warn us, that for Syracusanum
trium Denarium, we ought to read, Syracusanum, trium millium Denarium. Which
Error may be supposed easily to have crept into the Copies of Festus, by
leaving out the Capital Letter M, between the Words Trium and Denarium.

I have consulted all the Editions of Festus I could meet with; and find none
Vide Notas Gothofredi ad Schedas Festi fragmento detractas, p. 234.

Vide eundem in Notis ad Festum, p. 1821.

Vide Festum ex Editione P. Santandreani, ubi in textu ponitur Trium Denarium,
in margin, Trium Millium.

Vide Antonii Augustini Annotationes ad Festum ad vocem Talentum, ubi dicit;
Mendosus hic Locus est, and qui non patitur Emendationem. Hoc unum certum est,
Talentorum non unum esse Genus, and Atticum esse Sex Millium Denarium. Caetera
incerta sunt.

Vide Bernardum de Ponderibus and Mensuris, qui Syracusanum Talentum dicit esse
3000 Denarium, citatque Festum.

Vide Dacerii Notas in Festum.


which does not take notice of this Emendation; and This the Dr. could not be a
Stranger to: and had He therefore been a Fair Dealer in this matter, Festus had
not been quoted at such a Loose Rate, to prove Phalaris a foul one.

The Opinion which the Dr. would have us entertain of his Great Reading would
have been better confirmed, had he supported his Notion of the Low Value of the
Sicilian Talent by good Authorities taken from approved Sicilian Writers, or
others that purposely treat of Sicilian Affairs. But, whether the Dr. knows it
or not, he had good reason to decline the Testimony of those, who so plainly
declare against him. For they give us better Grounds for setting an higher
Price on the Talent, by which Sicilian Authors used to reckon, than Pollux and
Festus could give us for placing it so low; though they had been more express to
the Dr's purpose than they are.

Diodorus a Sicilian, writing of Sicilian Affairs, frequently uses the word
Talent* without any Addition; which therefore, according to the Dr, must mean
the Sicilian: and which yet, by the Circumstances must have as great a Price
put upon it, as the Talents mentioned by Phalaris require. He tells us, that
Agathocles being possessed of a Garrison of the Messaneans in Sicily, offered
to surrender it to 'em for 30 Talents (...)

Diod. Sic. l. 19.
. Here a Sicilian Writer speaking of a Contract between the Prince of one
Sicilian Town, and People of another, mentions Talents, which must be the
Sicilian, according to Dr. Bentley's Reasoning; but must not be Sicilian,
according to his Computation. For by his Reckoning, a Garrison, upon a fair
bargain, was to be parted with for less than Three pounds: which, if it be
true, it is probable Agathocles got less by selling his Garrisons, than his Pots.

Again Diodorus tells us, that Gorgias the famous Rhetorician of Leontium (...)
L. 12.
, had One hundred Minae a piece from his Scholars, ( Sicilian Minae they must
be, according to the Dr.) for teaching em his Art. This, though taken notice of
by the Historian as an Extraordinary Price, was very inconsiderable Pay It
amounts to 3 s. 1. l. ob. of our Money.
for so great a Master; unless we may suppose, that he taught at different
Prices, in proportion to the Improvements of his Scholars; and then I can allow
the Dr. that there is a sort of Eloquence, which had been too dear a Purchase
even at that rate.

From the same Author we learn (...) L. 11.
that the Syracusians, after a signal Victory, gave One Mina to each of their
Subjects, that had behaved themselves well in the Fight. The Relator of this is
a Sicilian: those who give, and those who receive the Reward are Sicilians of
Syracuse, the very place from whence the Dr's Low Talent had its Denomination:
The Persons honored with this Gratuity are such as had distinguished
themselves by their Bravery: and for their Exemplary Courage, and Eminent
Service to their Country they are crowned, and each of them receives, according
to the Dr's Estimamation, the moiety of Three Farthings. A Noble Donative! for
which no doubt the States were often remembered by the Soldiery in the best
Wine of Syracuse.

Theocritus, another Sicilian Writer, in one of his Idylliums, mentions both
Minae and Drachmae. The Persons he introduces speaking (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Idyll. (...)
are two Syracusian Ladies; Stephens in the margin reads (...)
they talk Doric, the Language of Syracuse. The One admires the Others fine
Habit, which she had put on upon a Great Festival, to appear at Court in, and
asks the Price of it: The Other answers her, that it cost somewhat more than a
Mina or two; and seems to make an Excuse for her Extravagance: which, if she
paid for it in the Dr's Money, she need not have done, considering they were her
Holiday-clothes.

In the same Idyllium we have an account of Five Fleeces (...) --
bought for Seven Drachms. It is true, we are told it was bad ware: but the
Woman had no great Reason to rail at her Husband as a Spendthrift, and an ill
Marketman (as we find she does) if the Whole Purchase fell short of the Eighth
Part of a Farthing.

It would be easy, if pardonable, to multiply Instances of this Nature from
Sicilian Writers, or such as treat of things transacted in Sicily. A
Neighboring State Diod. Sic. l. 13.
is by a Bribe of 15 Talents Less than 30 Shillings.
prevailed with to forsake the Agrigentines, their Allys. Sixty Talents Thucyd.
p. 353.
are offered by the Egestani of Sicily for a Months pay A Talent 1 s. 10 d. ob.
for a Months pay of a Ship.
for 60 Ships, which they had occasion to borrow. Timoleon Plut. in Vita
Timoleontis.
the Restorer of Syracuse to its Liberties and Rights, was magnificently buried
by the State, which he had delivered, at the Charge of 6 s. 3 d.
200 Minae. A vast Fund of Less than 100 pounds.
a Thousand Talents is raised by letting out Ground and Houses to 60000 men,
for the Recruit of Syracuse, after it had been ruined by a War Plut. ibid.
. Dion's Estate, Plato, Ep. 7.
which lay at Syracuse, is reckoned a Great one; and its full value said to be
an Hundred Less than 10 pounds.
Talents. Two Sicilian Princes Polyb. p. 249.
send 75 Talents to the Rhodians Less than 7 pounds.
for their Relief, after they had been ruined by an Earthquake; but could not
raise so great a Sum at once, and therefore sent it by Parcels. In short, after
some search into this matter, I am persuaded no one Instance can be produced of
Talents, or other Moneys mentioned by any Sicilian Writer, or any one that
writes of Sicily, which will countenance or admit of the Low Valuation of the
Sicilian Talent, that Dr. Bentley espouses.

But because I find the Modern Dealers in ancient Moneys go into the Opinion of
a Sicilian Talent of Low Value, without any other Authority, as I can find, but
the obscure and interpolated Passages of Pollux and Festus, I shall lay no
stress upon the Exceptions that have been made against that Opinion: since we
may freely admit such a Low Value of this Talent, and yet think these Letters
Genuine. For there might be a Low Value of the Sicilian Talent in some other
Age, and yet the Talent of Phalaris's time might be higher. Or there might be a
Talent of his Low Value in other parts of Sicily, and yet the Talent of
Agrigentum, a distinct State, might be higher. Or there might be a Low Talent
of baser Metal The Talents in Pollux, being compared to (...), and being,
according to the present reading of Pollux, lower in Value than They, seem to
be Brass rather than Silver.
, suppose Brass, equal to a Litra; and yet the Silver Talents, which Phalaris's
are expressly said to be Epp. 118, 95.
, might be higher. Or there might be a Low Value used by the Natives, and
ancient Inhabitants of Sicily, and the Talent used by the Greek Colonies that
placed themselves there, might be higher. Or if in Phalaris's time there was a
Silver Talent of this Low Value of use among the Greek Colonies, at Agrigent
and elsewhere, yet the Reasons that may be offered for Phalaris's using the
Attic Dialect (to speak loosely) though a Sicilian, will justify his reckoning
the Talents, as the Athenians did: Or if these Letters might by a Later hand be
changed out of the Doric Dialect into the Attic, the same hand might make 'em
speak Attic, in the valuation of the Moneys. All these Suppositions must be
shown impossible, before any convincing Argument can be drawn from hence, to
prove these Letters Spurious. Or Lastly, though none of these Reasonings should
hold, it is agreed by those, who treat of these matters Talentum sine adjectione
Scriptoribus antiquis passim pro Attico.

Gronov. de Pec. Vet. c. 3. Talentum Atticum proprie (...) in scriptis Graecis
Latinisque.

Bernard. in Ep. ad Pocock. Semper in Auctoribus (praeter Sacros) ubi Nomen
Talenti occurrit, hoc ipsum ( Atticum, 6000 Drachmarum Atticarum) intelligendum
est, si Nomen Talenti absolute positum sit, neque distinctionis causa aliquid
adjiciatur.

Brerewood de Number. p. 27.
, and give us this low Value of the Sicilian Talent, that wherever the Word
Talent is used by Greek Writers, without any addition, the Attic Talent must be
understood. So far are the Learned from thinking, as the Dr. does, that
Phalaris, had he made use of the Attic Account, should always have given
express notice of it: and never have said (...) alone, without the addition of
(...). For They, who were conversant in other Books beside Dictionaries were
sensible, that Sicilian Writers frequently used the Word Talent in the Attic
sense of it, without any such express Limitation. And if Other Sicilian Authors
might express themselves in this manner, without being suspected as Spurious,
Phalaris is unjustly suspected by the Dr. on this account. As to this head, he
stands or falls, with the rest of his Countrymen: and I doubt not but the
Reader, upon a fair and impartial View of what has been said to This Article of
Dr. Bentley's Indictment against Phalaris, will pronounce him Not Guilty.

HItherto Dr. Bentley has kept himself pretty well within his Province, and
criticis'd chiefly upon Words and Phrases and Dialects; in his next General
Proof he ventures to criticize upon Things, and to show the Letters an
Imposture, from the Matter and Business of 'em Dissert* p. 55.
. They are a Fardle of Common Places (he says) without any Life or Spirit from
Action and Circumstance: When You come to 'em, YOU FIND BY THE EMPTINESS AND
DEADNESS OF THEM, THAT YOU CONVERSE WITH A DREAMING PEDANT, WITH HIS ELBOW ON
HIS DESK; not with an active ambitious Tyrant, with his Hand on his Sword, etc.
All that takes or affects You is a Stiffness, and Stateliness, and Operoseness
of Style, etc. which is quite aliene from the Character of Phalaris, a Man of
Business and Dispatch Dissert. p. 62, 63.
.

Stiffness, and Stateliness, and Operoseness of Style, is indeed quite aliene
from the Character of a Man of Business and Dispatch: for which reason, any
body that reads Dr. Bentley would easily guess, that he is not a Man of
Business. And not being a Man of Business, but a Library Keeper, it is not
overmodestly done of him, to oppose his Judgment and Taste in this case to that
of Sir William Temple; who is certainly a Man of Business, and knows more of
these things, than Dr. Bentley does of Hesychius and Suidas. For, as his Friend
Mr. Wotton has with Great Sagacity observed, It is Universally acknowledged,
that He who has studied any Subject is a better Judge of that Subject, than
another Man who did never purposely bend his Thoughts that way; provided they
be both Men of Equal Parts Reflect. upon ancient and modern Learning, p. 20.
. Sir William Temple has spent a good part of his Life in transacting Affairs
of State; He has written to Kings, and They to Him: and this has qualified him
to judge how Kings should write, much better than all Dr. Bentley's
Correspondence with Foreign Professors; especially if they be such Professors,
as have the Judgment to admire Him and His Humanity. I shall not therefore
offer a Word on the General Part of this Head, in Justification of the
Epistles: I shall barely set down the Passage in which Sir William Temple
expresses his Sense of this matter; and shall then leave it to the Reader,
whose Opinion he will think fit to take, either His, or the Library-keeper's at
St. James's. Sir William's admirable Words are, I think he must have but little
skill in Painting, that cannot find out this to be an Original. Such Diversity
of Passions upon such Variety of Actions, and Passages of Life and Government;
such Freedom of Thought, such Boldness of Expression; such Bounty to his
Friends, such Scorn of his Enemies; such Honor of Learned Men, such Esteem of
Good; such Knowledge of Life, such Contempt of Death, with such Fierceness of
Nature, and Cruelty of Revenge could never be represented but by Him that
possessed 'em. And I esteem Lucian to have been no more capable of Writing than
of Acting as Phalaris did. In all One writ You find the Scholar, or the
Sophist; and in all the Other writ, the Tyrant and the Commander. It is plain,
Sir William Temple does not write like a Dreaming Pedant, with his Elbow on his
Desk: and therefore the Reader perhaps will be apt to take his Judgment, when
he tells him, that Phalaris does not write like one neither.

I cannot but observe, that Dr. Bentley is here and elsewhere Those Little
Pedants, that have stalkt about in the Apparel of Heroes. Dissert. p. 29.

-- that wretched Pedantry in the matter, p. 65.

-- affected to excel each other, even to Pedantry. p. 41, etc.


very Liberal in distributing the Reproach of Pedantry; which is to Me, I
confess, a plain Proof that he has no just Notions of it: for if he had, it is
so high an Offense against Good Manners, and Good Sense, that methinks he
should impute it more sparingly. I will endeavor therefore to set him right;
which perhaps I shall be the better able to do, because having conversed much a
late with some Writings, where this Beauty of Style prevails, I have very
strong and sensible Impressions of it.

PEDANTRY is a Word of a very various and mixed meaning, and therefore hard to
be Defined: but I will Describe it to the Dr. as well as I can, by pointing out
some of the Chief Marks and Moles of it.

The First and surest Mark of a Pedant is, to write without observing the
received Rules of Civility, and Common Decency: and without distinguishing the
Characters of Those he writes to, or against: For Pedantry in the Pen, is what
Clownishness is in Conversation; it is Written Illbreeding.

It is Pedantry, to affect the use of an Hard Word, where there is an Easy
one; or of a Greek or Latin Word, where there is an English one, that signifies
the very same thing. And these Two Meanings of the Word my Lord Roscommon seems
to have hinted in those sine Verses of his; which are worth at least half a
dozen Pages of Dr. Bentley's Scraps of Callimachus, Notes and all. The Soil
intended for Pierian Seeds
Must be well purged from rank Pedantic Weeds.
Apollo starts, and all Parnassus shakes
At the rude Rumbling Baralipton makes.
For none were ever with Admiration read,
But Who, beside their Learning, were well bred.
Ess. on Transl. Verse. How Dr. Bentley will, on these Articles, excuse his
Familiar Treatment of Sir William Temple Could neither discover the true Time,
nor true Value of his Authors. p. 6.

-- Criticism of a Peculiar Complexion, and must proceed from a Singularity of
Palate and Judgment. P. 7.


, and his Course Complements to Me Sorry Critic, Bungling Tinker, Lucian 's
Ass, etc.
; how he will bring off his Greek and Latin Proverbs (...), Asinus ad Lyram,
etc.
, his aliene, and negoce, and concede, and repudiating a Vernacular Idiom, with
an Hundred other such Elegances of Speech, I leave him to consider at his
Leisure.

To over-rate the Price of Knowledge, and to make as great ado about the true
Rendering of a Phrase, or Accenting of a Word, as if an Article of Faith, or the
Fortune of a Kingdom depended upon it, is Pedantry. And so is an Assuming and
Positive way of delivering ones self, upon Points especially not worth our
Concern, and not capable of being perfectly cleared: and whether Dr. Bentley be
guilty in this respect or no, the Reader will be able to judge, when he has
cast his Eye on the Margin, and considered, how many times the Dr. in his
Dissertation, has freely used the Word Demonstrate of his own Performances --
even Demonstrated, that the Epistles of Phal. are Spurious. P. 5.

-- that Demonstrate Anaxilaus to have lived -- P. 26.

-- Demonstrate the Doric Dialect to have been, etc. P. 42.

-- But which is plain Demonstration, P. 48.

-- I Will Demonstrate 'em by and by to be an Imposture. P. 116.

-- I shall Demonstrate ours to be of a modern date. P. 138.

-- is a Demonstrative Proof. P. 141.


: and withal, how fond he is of Negatives, (a very dangerous way of Speech!)
and that in Cases oftentimes where the Contrary Affirmative is most certainly
true; as it is, and shall be proved to be, in all those Instances, which this
Mark There was no such thing as Tragedy while be tyrannized at Agrigentum. P.
40.

(...) never used by the Ancients in that sense. P. 52.

By that time I have done with 'em, it will be no more a Controversy, whether
they are Spurious. P. 89.

There is No MS. above CCC Years old, that has the Fables according to that
Copy. P. 146.

In all that Tract of Time, not one Single Author, that has given us the Least
Hint that Aesop was Ugly. P. 149.

Astypalaea, a City in Crete, never mentioned by any Geographer. P. 44.

A Discovery in Geography, that could not be learnt any where else. P. 58.

Eustathius, who appears never to have seen the true Athenaeus. P. 20.


referrs to.

To depart from the Common Ways of Writing or Speaking, and such as have been
used by the best Pens, on purpose to show ones self more Exact and Knowing than
the Rest of the World, is a Piece of Affectation, that favors of Pedantry.
Tauromenium is the word that is generally used by both Ancient and Modern
Writers. Dr. Bentley has reformed our Spelling, and will have it Taurominium,
because Pliny, and Solinus, (and perhaps somebody else) have happened to call
it so. And here I must beg the Reader's Excuse, if I go a little out of the
Way, to do right to Sir William Temple, in a Case of the Like nature: Mr.
Wotton tells him, with great Plainness of Speech, that He, of all men, ought
not to have arraigned the Modern Ignorance in Grammar, who puts Delphos for
Delphi, every where in his Essays Reflect. upon anc. and mod. Learning, p. 59.
: A Capital Mistake, and worthy to be chastis'd by the Acute Pen of Mr. Wotton!
But is he sure that putting Delphos for Delphi is an Offense against Grammar? I
thought always, that what was according to Propriety, and the received Use of a
Tongue, could not be against Grammar. It may indeed be against some General
Rule of Grammar: but so Wise a Man as Mr. Wotton is, should have known, that
Grammar has not only General Rules, but Particular Exceptions too; and that the
Common Custom and Usage of a Tongue is capable of creating an Exception at any
time; and is as good a Rule as any in the Grammar. Now Delphos, for the Latin
Word Delphi, is used by all the finest Writers of our Tongue, and best Judges
of it: particularly, by Mr. Waller twice, in some of his Last Copies P. 269,
263.
; which, though they are worse Poetry than the rest, yet are in Correcter
English: by Mr. Dryden, four or five times, in his Life of Plutarch P. 6, 33,
41, 46, 48.
; by Mr. Duke P. 4, 20, 23, 36, 42, 59.
, and Mr. Creech P. 280, 288, 310.
often in their several Lives of Theseus, and Solon: and (because* perhaps One
Old Divine may weigh more with Mr. Wotton than all these Modern Witnesses) by
the Reverend and Learned Dr. Iackson, in his Volumes on the Creed T. 2^ p. 364.
. Mr. Wotton might have said indeed, that Delphos, in the Singular Number, is
not Good Latin, or Good Greek: but when he says, it is bad English, he only
shows, that he does not converse with so Good Authors as he ought to do. This
Digression might have been spared, but that Mr. Wotton, when he was purging his
Book of some unbecoming Passages in a second Edition of it, thought fit still
to retain this Grammatical Reflection there: perhaps in a third Edition, he will
take care that This too shall bear the rest Company.

Dr. Bentley will forgive me this short Visit to his Friend, now I return to
him.

Pedantry consists also in Low and Mean ways of Speech, which are a Vicious
Affectation of what is Natural and Easy, as Hard Words are of Learning and
Scholarship. And whether Dr. Bentley has not offended this way, by those
Familiar Expressions of Mother Clito the Herbwoman, and Going to Pott, and
setting Horses together, and Roasting the Old Woman, and by his apt Simile
drawn from Bungling Tinkers mending old Kettles; anybody, but Pedants, can
tell.

An Itch of contradicting Great Men, or Established Opinions upon very slight
Grounds, is another Instance of Pedantry: and (not to mention any thing that
relates to the Present Dispute) something of this kind there was, I Am afraid,
in Dr. Bentley's brisk Censure of Grotius and Scaliger for not knowing the
measure of an Anapaestic Verse Bentl. Ep. ad Millium in sine Malalae, p. 26.
, when it is plain (as I shall show, before I lay down my Pen In the Article of
the Thericlean Cups.
, that the Dr. would never have censured 'em, if he had known it himself
Madeste and circumspecte de tantis Viris pronuntiandum est, ne forte (quod
plerisque accidit) damnent quae non intelligunt. Quint.
. Castelvetro, an Italian Pedant, was famous for such a Snarling Faculty as
this; He was (as Balzac says very well of him Cestoit une Enemy Public, qui ne
pouvoit sousfrir le merit, ni la reputation de person. L. 5, Lettr. 5.
) a Public Enemy, that could not endure anybody should have Merit, or
Reputation, but himself.

The Subject is fruitful; but I will confine my self to one Particular more of
the Pedant's Character; and that is, a Love of Quoting Books, or Passages not
extant, or never seen by him; in order to amaze and confound his poor Reader,
and make himself Terrible in the Way of Learning. As Aristotle says in his Lost
Treatise of the Sicilian Government, says the Dr Dissert. p. 55.
; though that Treatise be so far lost, that Aristotle did really never write it.
And again he tells us, what Monsieur de Meziriac has done in his Life of Aesop
P. 135.
, and yet owns in the very next Line, that he never met with this Book, but
only guessed what was in it. He produces P. 26.
the Unknown Authors Diodorus transcribed, as so many Witnesses on his side:
and, in another place P. 28.
, he gives a very particular account of what A. Gellius said in a Lost Chapter;
not from any other Writer that had quoted it, but merely by dint of Conjecture.

These are all the Marks and Moles of Pedantry that I can now stay to point out
to the Dr: if he be still at a loss to know what the Pedant's Character is, and
where to apply it; I referr him to a Passage in Bruyere Les Caract. ou les
Moeeurs de ce Siecle. Chap. des Ouvrages de'l' Esprit.
, where I think this matter is very succinctly and fully handled. There are,
says he, in Learning, as in War, a sort of Inferior and Subaltern Officers;
Men, who seem made only for Registers and Magazines to store up the Productions
of better Writers. Collectors they are, Transcribers, Plagiaries; They never
Think, themselves; they tell You only what Others have thought before them.
They heap together Matter in abundance, without Choice or Distinction; and care
not how Worthless it is, so there be but Enough on it. They Know nothing, but
just as they learn it from their Books; and Learn nothing but what everybody
else desires to be Ignorant of. They have a Vain, Dry, Insipid sort of
Knowledge; that is Disagreeable, and Useless; can neither enliven Conversation,
nor conduce to Business. We are sometimes surpised at their Reading, but
always tired with their Discourse, or their Writings. These are They, who among
All the Little Men, and Some Great Ones, go for Scholars; but among the Wise
and Sensible part of Mankind, for Pedants.

This Account of Pedantry has drawn me a little out of my Way; I shall now
return again into it, and consider the Particular Instances Dr. Bentley has
brought to justify his General Assertion, that the Matter and Business of the
Letters betrays 'em not to be Genuine.

The first is an Improbable and Absurd Story P. 56.
(as he thinks) about Stesichorus; who dying at Catana, the Himereans desired
to have his Ashes brought back into his Native City Himera; but the Cataneans
would not part with them. This occasioned a fierce Contest between the two
Towns, which Phalaris appeased, by prevailing with the Himereans to let
Stesichorus's Ashes sleep in Peace at Catana, and build a Temple to the Honor
of him, at Home. Now what is there in this Story either Absurd, or Improbable?
that the Himereans should be so concerned to get the Ashes of Stesichorus, and
the Cataneans to keep them? This very thing happened afterward in the case of
Euripides; whose Bones the Athenians sent a solemn Embassy to Macedonia, to
retrieve, as A. Gellius informs us L. 15, C. 20.
; and that, not in a Lost Chapter. And after the Denial of this Request, we
learn from Pausanias L. 1, P. 2.
, that the Athenians built a Noble Monument to the Memory of Euripides, which
continued even to His Time. Somewhat of the same Honor was paid to Hesiod's
Remains; which being buried, where Hesiod was murdered, a great way off Ascra,
the Orchomenians, Plutarch tells us Conv. Sap. p. 162
, endeavored all they could to get 'em into their possession, but They that
had 'em, would not be prevailed upon to part with 'em. And if Euripides and
Hesiod were honored with such Contentions as these, after their Deaths, why
might not Stesichorus?

Ay, but says the Dr, a Temple, and Deification, were a little too Extravagant
an Honor to be paid to a Poet's Memory Disser^ p. 57.
. I thought such things as these could not have surpised a man of the Dr's
Polymathy: but, I find, he knows nothing of the several Temples erected to
Homer, at Smyrna, and in other places; as Strabo L. 14, p. 646.
, and Aelian Var. Hist. l. 13, c. 23.
expressly affirm: nor so much as remembers that Known Passage in Tully's
Oration pro Archia Poeta, which is no Secret even to the First Beginners in
Learning. Homerum (says he) Smyrnaei suum esse confirmant: itaque etiam Delubra
Ejus in Oppido collocaverunt. From whence also Dr. Bentley may please to learn
the reason, why Phalaris would have the Himereans content themselves with
erecting a Temple to Stesichorus, because That would declare to Posterity, that
he was Born there Smyrna Homerum Vatem sibi vendicabat; Sepulcrum, Templum, and
Statuas ipsius ostentans, Varro.
.

Nay, it happens a little unluckily, that an Ancient Marble is preserved to
this Day, (which perhaps belonged to some Temple erected to the Honor of
Homer, in some of the places that contended for his Birth) where the
Apotheosis, or Deification of that Poet is described; and a Learned Man,
Cuperus, has writ a Large Comment upon it: which methinks the Dr. should have
been acquainted with, though he be not a Foreign Professor.

E're I quit this Particular, I must observe a Little Slip of the Dr's, in
telling us, that Himera in Tully's time was called Thermae Dissert. p. 57.
. I believe it was not; because Tully himself assures us, that Himera and
Thermae were two Different Towns; and the Latter built at some Distance from
the Ruins of the Former Himera deleta, quos Cives belli Calamitas reliquos
secerat, ii sese Thermis collocarant, in ejusdem agri sinibus, neque long ab
Oppido antiquo. Or. 7. in Verr.
. And, without this Distinction, between Himera and Thermae it is impossible to
understand Diodorus, where he says, that after Himera was sacked and rased by
the Carthaginians, it continued altogether uninhabited, even to His Days (...)
L. 11, p. 38.
: which could not be True, if Himera and Thermae were the same; for, that
Thermae was well inhabited in Diodorus's time, is past Dispute. I will not
deny, but that some careless Passages may perhaps have dropped from the Pens of
Old Authors, where these Two are not nicely distinguished: but it is not in
Works, where they set up for being severe upon other Men's Mistakes; and Their
want of Exactness therefore may be forgiven them. But Dr. Bentley, who
professes to give no Quarter, should take care not to want any.

His Last Objection happily arose from contemplating the Matter of One Single
Epistle, the Dr. will now compare the Epistles together, and confute One by
another. There is an Inconsistency, he says, between the LIst and the LXIXth,
because in the LIst Phalaris 's Wife is Dead, and in the LXIXth She is Alive
again P. 57.
. As if it were necessary that these Epistles should have been written just in
the same Order that they stand; which is different in the Printed Copies from
what it is in the MSS, and different in one MS from what it is in another. Upon
such an unreasonable Supposition as this, how many Inconsistencies might be
found in Tully's Epistles? or even in Those of St. Paul? And yet, if this
Supposition do not take place, there is no manner of Inconsistency between
these Two Epistles of Phalaris. The Penetrating Dr. Bentley seems to have had
some Suspicions, that this Argument was of it self a little too weak to stand
its Ground; and therefore has backed it with a strong Reserve of Four Other
Suppositions: and if All These hold good, he will still prove the Epistles
Spurious. First he supposes, that Erythia was poisoned by Python, not long
after Phalaris 's Banishment; because otherwise, he supposes, she could not
want Opportunities to follow him: then he supposes, Erythia was poisoned in the
Island Astypalaea, where he supposes, that her Poisoner dwelt. Here Is more
Postulatums than Euclid required to build the Whole Body of his Elements upon;
and yet He must be very kind to Dr. Bentley, that will grant him any One of
them; since there is nothing either in the Epistles themselves, or in any Other
History I have had the Luck to meet with, that can give 'em the least
Countenance. At present therefore I take the same Liberty, to deny every one of
these Suppositions, as He has to assume them: If hereafter he can prove them in
another Language, 'twill then be time enough to show, that they are Nothing to
the Purpose.

In some Other Epistles, the Dr. has discovered a Scene of Putid and Senseless
Formality Dissert. p. 58.
. A Man of Quality in Syracuse, whose Wife was lately Dead, sends his Brother
to Phalaris, with a Request, that he would endeavor to prevail with
Stesichorus to write an Elegy upon Her: Phalaris trys, and prevails; but is not
so successful in a second Attempt of the same Nature, that he makes at the
Instance of another Sicilian Gentleman. I protest, I can see no Harm in all
this: there may indeed, for ought I know, be Putid Formality in it, because I
cannot well tell what those Hard Words mean; but I see nothing Unnatural there,
or Misbecoming the Character of Phalaris. No! says the Dr, what? can any One
believe that such Stuff as this busied the Head of the Tyrant Dissert. p 59.
? As Low thoughts as the Dr. has of the Epistles, I find he has very high ones
of Phalaris: he seems to have represented him to himself, as some Mighty
Monarch, that had Vast Dominions, and was too Great and too Busy, to attend
such Trifles: whereas He was only a Petty Prince of One Town in Sicily: and, as
such, I hope, the Office here given him was no ways below him. Indeed the Dr.
has, for the Honor of Phalaris, represented that Town as exceeding Populous;
for Diodorus, he says, counts 200000 Souls in Agrigent, and Others 800000
Dissert. p. 58.
. Diodorus I grant, in the place cited, says, there were such Numbers in it,
when the Carthaginians took it, Olymp. LXXXXIII. 3; when (as he tells us in the
same place) it was in its most prosperous and flourishing Estate: but must
there needs be as many Inhabitants in it, 150 Years before, in the Reign of
Phalaris? As for his Other Witness Laertius, his 800000 are given up by the
Learned, as a Gross Mistake; which Bochart supposes to have risen from the
change of a Numeral K into a (...): or however that may be, the Account, he
says, is incredible, and utterly false Cum res plane superat fidem adeoque sit
falsissima. Phaleg. p. 553.
. Incredible as it is, the Dr. vouchsafes to take up with it; and it grows
under his Hands: for by that time we are got to the End of this Article, these
800000 are a Million of Subjects Dissert. p. 58.
: the 200000 are thrown in carelessly to make it a Round Number. Let it be a
Million, yet there have been Tyrants, with many Millions of Subjects at their
Command, who have thought fit to employ and entertain themselves much after
this manner. Has the Dr. who deals so much in Fragments, never seen those of
Augustus's Letters to Horace? has he never heard, that we owe the Fourth Book
of Horace 's Odes, and the finest of all his Epistles, to that Prince's
Importunity, who pressed, and obliged him to write, and to make mention of Him
in his Poems? And such Stuff, I presume, may very well be allowed to busy
Phalaris's Head, which found room in the Thoughts of Augustus.

But why so much ado? says Our Keen Observer; could not the Syracusian have
written to Stesichorus, and at the pri^e of some Present met with Success
Dissert. p. 60.
? I agree with the Dr. that a Present is sometimes an Expeditious Method of
doing Business; I have known several things in my Lifetime stick for want of
it. However here it was Improper: for Stesichorus was not only the Greatest
Poet, but one of the Greatest Men in Sicily. His Brother Helianax was a
Lawgiver [(...)] Suidas tells us; and He himself probably in the Government of
Himera; or at least consulted by 'em in Extraordinary Cases, as appears by his
Apologue in Aristotle's Rhetoric: And the true way of prevailing with such a
man to employ his excellent Pen was to offer him not Money, but a Subject that
deserved it. Some of his Brother Poets indeed were to be tempted this way: but
they were Men of Mean Birth, and Education; and were to make their Fortunes by
their Pen; and no wonder therefore that they were Mercenary.

It is objected, that if these Letters about the El^gy were Phalaris's, he
would have expressed himself properly, and not have called the same Copy of
Verses (...), and (...), which are as different from one another as Theognis is
from Pindar Disser. p. 59.
: an Egregious Piece of Dullness! says the Dr; and which proves him to be a mere
Asinus ad Lyram! Now, to see the different Cast of Men's Heads, allowing the
Error in this case, so Egregiously Dull am I, that I should have reasoned, just
the other way, from it; that if a Sophist had writ these Letters, he would
never have confounded these Two Words, the distinct Sense of which was so well
settled before his Time by the Grammarians. But in Phalaris's time the meaning
of these Terms of Art might not be so strictly marked out; or a Prince might
not think himself obliged to take notice of it, and to write with all the
Exactness of a Scholar. So that from this very Mistake, if it were one, I
should have inferred something favor of the Letters: but, to our Misfortune,
here is no Mistake. Phalaris did but as a Nicer Man than He might have done; he
calls the Poem (...) Ep. 144.
, when he asks it of Stesichorus, and did not know in what Verse it would be
composed by him; and he calls it (...) afterward Ep. 79.
, when he had it, and found it was in Lyric Measures. (...) and (...)
originally signified only a Mournful or Funeral Song -- Elegeia, flebile
Carmen: Ah! nimis ex vero nunc tibi nomen habes!

Ovid. (...)

Eust. in Hom. Il. O. paulo ante sinem.
an Elegy, as we say in English: referring to the Subject of the Song, and not
to the Measure. But Elegies being generally writ in Hexameters, and
Pentameters, the Word came afterward to be applied purely to the Measure,
without any Regard to the Subject. However this Second Sense of the Word did
not so far prevail, as absolutely to extinguish the First; still (...) and
(...) were now and then employed in a Looser Meaning than what the Grammarians
put upon 'em; and of this I will give the Dr. one plain Instance, from a
Darling Author of his, Dion Chrysostom, who in his 4th Book de Regno calls the
Heroic Verses written on Sardanapalus's Tomb, (...): And Aristophanes speaking
of the Nightingale, has this Passage: (...)

In (...). Where (...) can signify nothing, but a Melancholy Tune, or Mournful
Song Accordingly the Scholiast thus interprets it. (...).
; unless our Grammarian can prove, that the Nightingales in that part of the
World sung in Elegiac Measure. And the Misfortune of it is, that these very
(...) are called (...) but a few Verses before. (...)
(...).
And I hope Aristophanes understood Greek, and was no Asimis ad Lyram. As
strong Proofs as these may seem, I have still behind One Authority more, which
will go farther with Dr. Bentley than any I have yet brought: it is his Own. He,
p. 139, of his Dissertation, tells us, that Somebody made an Edition of Aesop
's Fables in Elegiac Verse; and after giving us several Instances of the kind,
he adds, that Some of Them, ( i. e. of the Elegiac Fables) were all in
Hexameters Disser. p. 140.
. I Would advise him therefore to call in this Criticism, and his Dirty Proverb
along with it, for fear it should stick where he has not a mind it should.

He has still One way left of disproving this Piece of Putid Formality; and
that is, by denying that Stesichorus and Phalaris were acquainted Ibid. p. 60.
. It Is a Negative, and therefore pretty hard to be made out; let us see how he
sets about it. He observes, that Lucian says nothing of this Acquaintance.
Lucian mentions it not by Name indeed; but he speaks in General of Phalaris's
Conversation with Learned Men, and their great Esteem of him; and then gives an
Instance in Pythagoras, the most celebrated Scholar of his Time (...), etc.

Luc. Phal. 1.
; and after Him, there needed no other Instances. Had a Less Skilful Hand been
employed in making this Oration, he would probably have heaped up all he knew
of Phalaris, and overacted his part by too Great and Circumstantial a Nicety.
But Lucian had more Art; he knew when to leave off, that the Piece might not
look stist and unnatural. Besides, if Lucian's Silence be an Exception to
Stesichorus's acquaintance with Phalaris, it is to Abaris's too; which yet Our
Critic has before, for the sake of Aristotle and Iamblichus Disse^* p. 15.
, been graciously pleased to allow.

But Plato is silent, as well as Lucian, in this matter; and that in an Epistle
written to a Tyrant of Sicily, where he is reckoning up the Friendships of
Learned Men with Tyrants and Magistrates Ibid. p. 6^.
. Neither has Plato mentioned any thing in that Epistle of the acquaintance
between Phalaris and Pythagoras; which had been as Proper, and as Domestic an
Instance as the other. And yet the Pythagoreans all agree that their Master and
Phalaris were acquainted; and Dr. Bentley grants it: why should Plato's Ill
Memory be a proof against the one, and no proof against the other? But I rather
think, it was his Good Judgment, than his Ill Memory, that occasioned this
Omission: Phalaris's Name was detested and infamous in Sicily; and to have
brought him in therefore among his other Instances, would have spoiled the
Complement to Dionysius, who might like well enough to have the Parallel drawn
between Him and Hiero, or Pericles. or Periander, or Croesus; but would not
have thought it a Civility, I believe, to have been compared with Phalaris:
whose Character, when taken at the best, and as drawn in these Epistles, is not
so Amiable, as that any man should be pleased with resembling him; especially
One, who could not but be conscious to himself, that he had made use of His
Methods, and had reason to expect His Fate. Plato was a Great Master of
Decency; and he never showed it more than in this dextrous management, which I
am not surpised to find that our Library Keeper has no Relish of.

His last Argument is from Pindar, who speaks of Phalaris's Cruelty with
Detestation. And what follows from thence? that he never heard of his
Extraordinary Dearness with Stesichorus; for the sake of which, Pindar, had he
known it, would certainly have forborne giving him so Vile a Character Disser.
p. 61.
. This indeed is Demonstration, and not to be withstood! I will not Attempt to
answer it; only I will put the Dr. in mind of One false Color, that he has
given to his Argument: for it does not appear from any Expression in this Ode,
that Pindar is there exhorting Hiero to be kind to Poets and Men of Letters
Ibid.
. There is not a Word of Poets and Men of Letters mentioned in the Verses
themselves, whatever Guess the Scholiast (who perhaps knew as little of
Pindar's Intentions, as I or Dr. Bentley do) may make at their Remote Meaning.
Pindar only praises Hiero for his Humanity and Hospitality, at large; and tells
him, Croesus was renowned for these Virtues, and Phalaris infamous for the want
of 'em. Which I would have observed, because if he be not speaking here of
Beneficence to Poets and Men of Letters, Dr. Bentley might as well have
undertaken to prove his point from (...), as from the passage he has produced.
He has lamed it in his Quotation; I will give it the Reader entire. (...).
Croesus, says he, will always be renowned for his Humanity and Benevolence; but
the Memory of the Savage and Inhuman Phalaris is everywhere detested. Could a
better Panegyric be made upon Hiero, in fewer Words? Could any thing be more
artful, than the pitching upon these Two Opposite Instances, to set out his
Character by? Were a Man to Complement some Person in Dr. Bentley's Station,
could he do it more effectually, than by saying of him, that he had all the
Humanity and Good Nature of the Library Keeper at Cambridge Mr. ^aughton.
, and none of the Disobliging Rude Qualities of Him at St. James's?

After all, the Dr's Opinion and Mine upon this point are not so very distant
as he may imagine: for I agree with him, that there was no Extraordinary
Dearness between Stesichorus and Phalaris; nor do the Letters themselves imply
that there was. They say indeed that Phalaris obliged and courted Stesichorus,
out of Vanity, or a Real Esteem of his Merit. And Stesichorus could not but pay
some Regard to Phalaris, on this account; though he could never Love Him, or his
Character: nor is there any Proof from the Epistles, that he did. Phalaris,
after he had given him his Life, desired only his Friendship in return; and
Stesichorus was obliged both in Gratitude and Prudence, not to stand off; but
to be in as Good Terms as he could with a Man that was able to do him so much
Mischief. We have a Lively Account of just such a management as this between
Julius Caesar and Tully, in the Epistles of the Latter. When Caesar had got the
better of Pompey, whose Side Tully took, either out of a true Esteem for
Tully's Virtues, or out of Design, he took all Methods of making him his Own;
paid him a great many Civilities, and did him a great many Services. Tul'y
could never from his Heart love a Tyrant, but we may imagine how he behaved in
this case; he accepted Caesar's proffered Friendship, wrote Civilly to him, and
lay still. No more than this, that I can see, ever passed between Stesichorus
and Phalaris, to speak upon the Foot of the Letters: and if so, what becomes of
Dr. Bentley's Harangue about the Silence of Authors, in relation to this
fancied Intimacy and Dearness? Good Writers must needs say nothing of that
which never happened. Stesichorus's Love for Phalaris could no more be the
Subject of any of the Pens that went before us, than Dr. Bentley's Humanity
will be of any of the Pens that shall come after us. It Is Easy then to answer
for the Silence of Authors upon This Head; whether it can be justified as well
upon the Next, I shall now enquire.

IN my Preface to Phalaris, among the Objections that might be raised against
the Epistles, I mentioned This for One, that they had, for ought we knew, lain
a Thousand Years without being taken notice of. Dr. Bentley has been pleased to
resume this slight Argument of mine, as he did that of the Dialect, and give it
a place among his Irrefragable Demonstrations: an Honor which, I must own, it
no ways deserves. For, though he has taken this occasion of showing his
Extraordinary Talent in Wit and Raillery, and tells us, the Epistles were
preserved in the Parchments of Jove, and buried in some Secret Cave under
Ground, or else they had certainly gone to Pot Dissert. p. 63.
: yet I suppose he does not in good Earnest think it any great Wonder, that
Mortal Vellum should endure a Thousand Years; or that a small Parcel of Letters
should lie so many Ages without being mentioned by any Author now extant; a
Thing not altogether Incredible, because it has actually happened to other
Books besides Phalaris.

Vellejus Paterculus, an Elegant Writer, and one that tells us several
Particulars, not to be met with in other Roman Historians, might with more
reason expect to be taken notice of than Our Author: yet perhaps Dr. Bentley
will not meet with any plain mention of his Writings for Five Centuries after he
writ, till Priscian quotes him, and that only in a point of Grammar. After this
time he will be as much at a loss to find any Footsteps of him for Nine Hundred
Years more, down to the Age of Aventinus: and yet the Critics have received
him without being so nice as to examine, what Secret Cave he was concealed in.
Phoedrus, as far as I can find, was never mentioned by any Author since
Avienus, till his Fables were in this Age brought to light by Pithaeus, after
they had been lost above a Thousand Years. Lactantius de Mortibus Persecutorum,
was a Book which the World had not seen since St. Ierome's time, till, after a
Thousand Years, Baluze discovered it in the famous Library of Colebert, and
made it public. Now, as our Dissertator learnedly argues, if these Books lay
untouched and unstirr'd, they must have moulder'd away: if they were used
during these Ten Centuries, Somebody would surely have spoken of 'em. Either
the Dr. must give up these Authors as Spurious, or these Objections as Slight
and Frivolous; and own, that the Silence of the Ancients is not a Direct, but
(as anybody else would have thought, and called it) a very Indirect Argument
against 'em: though still not quite so indirect as another, that he founds upon a
Disagreement between Lucian, and the Epistles, in their Accounts of Phalaris.
This does not come properly under the head I am now speaking to: however,
because he has thrown together here Two or Three Paultry Proofs, that would
make no Figure by themselves, I shall take 'em as they lie before me. The
Different Relations concerning Phalaris given by Lucian, and the Epistles, I
urged formerly Preface to my Edition of Phalaris.
as a Proof that Lucian could not write them. But as He has managed it, at
second hand, to show, that Lucian does as good as expressly declare he never saw
'em, it either proves nothing, or proves too much; even that Lucian never saw
Timaeus, as Learned as he was, and as often as he mentions him. For Timaeus
relates, that the Agrigentines threw the Brazen Bull into the Sea; but Lucian
says, Phalaris sent it to Delphos. What I should gather from hence would be,
that Lucian overlooked that and many other Authorities, and did not confine
himself to strict History in a Declamation: but, according to Dr. Bentley's
manner of drawing Consequences, it must follow, that Timaeus no more writ his
History, than Phalaris did his Letters; for Lucian equally contradicts Both;
and for that reason is a Bad Evidence against either of them. Now if Lucian
himself be of no Authority in this point, much less are those Authors he
followed Dissert. p. 65.
, which Dr. Bentley summons up as so many Witnesses against the Epistles. I
would ask him how many Witnesses these are? where they lived? what are their
Names, and the Names of the Books they wrote? `Tis very hard to urge such
Testimonies against us, as are not now, and probably never were in being: For
Lucian, in this Harangue, seems to tie himself up to no Authors, nor to be
guided by any thing but his own Invention: and this the Dr. himself confesses
in another place Dissert. p. 62.
; where he says, Lucian feigns an Embassy from Phalaris to Delphi. And if the
Ground of this whole Discourse were a Fiction, why does the Dr. here argue from
it as seriously as if it were copied from the most Authentic Histories then
extant? how can he allow himself to put such an Air of Gravity upon what he
knows to be such a Trifle? We shall have him, at this rate, in his next
Dissertation, solemnly quoting Lucian's Vera Historia too, and the unknown
Authors which he followed. But I suppose he resolved to make the best advantage
he could of these Poor Colors, for want of Better Authorities: For the Two
Historians he brings to strengthen his Proof, say nothing that is inconsistent
with the Epistles. Jamblichus, he says, brings in Abaris in company with
Pythagoras to Phalaris; but in the Epistles Abaris refuses to come. Who would
not have refused an Invitation from Phalaris, till he had good assurances that
he might come with Safety? Report had told him very dismal Stories of him, and
dressed him up in frightful Colors; Abaris perhaps did not know at first, but
that Phalaris might Live upon Philosophers Flesh; or might have a Fancy to try,
which made his Bull Roar best, a Scythian, or a Sicilian: an Experiment, which
Abaris by no means cared to have made upon him; for he came from a Cold
Country, and had a very particular Aversion to Fire. These were very Important
matters, and if he should not have taken care to be fully satisfied in 'em
before he ventured his Person, he had not been quite so Wise a man as he was
thought to be; for one part of Wisdom is to be Cautious. Pythagoras therefore
managed at the very same rate; he often refused to come Ep. LXXIV.
, and yet came at last: why might not this be the case of Abaris? This is a
very easy way of reconciling Phalaris with Iamblichus; and he does not differ
so widely from Heraclides neither, but that They too may be brought (with Dr.
Bentley's Leave, and in his Carriers Phrase) to set Horses together. Phalaris
says, he was an Orphan, before he came to Agrigent; and yet Heraclides says his
Mother was burnt there. Dr. Bentley has given a Clear Solution of this
Difficulty himself; and frankly owns, that his Mother might be burnt, though his
Father died long before. But how, says he, came the Old Woman to be roasted at
Agrigent, if Phalaris fled alone from Astypalaea, neither Wife nor Child, nor
any Relation following him, according to the Epistles Dissert. p. 65.
? I do not remember any such Epistle in my Edition of Phalaris; but if there
should be such an one in the King's MS, I Will answer this Objection to it, when
the Library Keeper is in so good an Humor, as to favor me with a Sight of it:
Till then I may be excused from prosecuting this Point any further. Only I must
observe to the Dr, that either he uses some Copy of Heraclides that I have not
seen; or else cites him for what he does not say. Both Here, and in the 30th
Page of his Dissertation, he tells us, that Heraclides affirms Phalaris to have
been burnt by the Agrigentines; whereas he only says, (...) It Is true, it is all
one to his purpose, whether he was burnt, or any other way put to Death: but he
has such a Facility of Misunderstanding or Misrepresenting Authors, to serve a
Turn, that he does it, even when it is of no service to him.

I Hope I have now so thoroughly examined Dr. Bentley^s General Arguments, that
none of 'em can be thought to affect the whole Body of the Epistles: if his
Objections against some Particular Letters have no more Weight in 'em, he is the
best Patron Phalaris has yet met with; for the next Happiness to being very
well Defended, is that of being very weakly Opposed. All his Attacks of this
kind are grounded upon Chronology: and therefore, before he could make any
Approaches, he was obliged to settle the Time of Phalaris. And first he gives
us the account of Eusebius thus. Ol. XXXI. 2. Phalaris apud Agrigentinos
Tyrannidem exercet. Ol. XXXVII. 2. Phalaridis Tyrannis destructa: by which
reckoning he governed 28 Years Dissert. p. 14.
. Instead of Ol. XXXVII, he means, I suppose, Ol. XXXVIII, as it is in Eusebius;
or else his Reckoning of 28 Years (which he could bring in here, for no other
Reason, but to show his Skill in Counting) is false. However, he is willing to
allow, that (according to St. Hierome, and Suidas) Phalaris 's Government
commenced Ol. LIII. 3. and expired Ol. LVII. 3. This Account, says he, I allow
of for the sake of Aristotle and Jamblichus, who make him Cotemporary with
Stesichorus and Pythagoras Ibid. p. 15.
. But by his Niceness in Computation he confutes himself in the same Breath,
and says, Pythagoras was not taken notice of in Greece till 80 Years after Ol.
XXXVIII. (for I Will suppose XXXVII a false Print) i. e. Three Years after
Phalaris died. And yet Pythagoras had a great Name in Greece many Years before
he came into Sicily. So that Dr. Bentley has managed this Point with a
particular Dexterity; and proved that Pythagoras and Phalaris could not be
acquainted, by that very account which he accepted of merely to countenance
their acquaintance. A most auspicious Entrance upon his Chronological Proofs!
doubtless all the rest will be made out with Equal Force and Clearness! Here Is
a Page spent to give us his Opinion about the Age of Phalaris, where he has so
contrived to say one thing, and prove another, that we are still at a loss to
know what his Opinion is. Just such another Instance of his Consistency he
gives us about Xerxes's Expedition. P. 13th he says, 'twas Ol. 73. P. 85th he
says, the very next Olympiad after Xerxes 's Expedition Hiero was in the
Throne; and quotes Diodorus (xi. p. 39.) for it: where we read that Hiero came
to the Crown Ol. LXXV. 3. Therefore here Dr. Bentley is of opinion, that
Xerxes's Expedition was in the 74th Olympiad. And yet if Diodorus is to be
believed, (and he always believes him, when it is for his Turn to do so Vide
Diss. p. 88.
) Xerxes's Expedition was neither in the 73d, nor 74th, but 75th Olympiad. If
Dr. Bentley be so Quarrelsome, that he cannot agree with himself, how is it
possible for other people to agree with him? I would willingly allow of any
Date of Phalaris that he is inclined to admit: but since he has expressed
himself so intricately, that it is hard to know which way he is determined, I Will
take the most received Account, and go on to show, that notwithstanding any of
His Discoveries, the Epistles might have been written before the 58th Olympiad.

He begins his Chronological Observations with the Aeras of some Cities
mentioned in the Epistles; a very Slippery Foundation to build an Argument
upon! for all these Cities are so very ancient, that it would puzzle one of a
Greater Reach in Chronology than Dr. Bentley, to trace their Originals. The
Oldest Historians now extant had but very Slender Memoirs of those times, and
accordingly we find their Accounts so confused and contradictory, that Nobody
but a Man of Dr. Bentley's Judgment would pretend to draw Demonstrations from
'em. I hear the Famous Mr. Dodwell (who surpasses Dr. Bentley in Learning as
much as he does in Candor and Modesty) is now printing some Lectures at
Oxford, in which he shows, how very obscure and uncertain the Histories of
those Ages are; and that from the Concurrence of those Rude Accounts he meets
with, he has made it probable that Phalaris must be brought much lower than
even St. Hierome places him. This perhaps would cut off most of the Dr's
Arguments at One Blow; but for want of this assistance, I must encounter 'em
singly: and be content to wander with him through those Woods and Mazes in which
he often loses both Himself and his Reader. But before I follow him into this
Dark Scene, I will consider a little the Tendency of this way of arguing in
General. He would prove that Phalaris could not possibly be the Author of these
Letters, because some Places are mentioned there under such Names, as he thinks
were given 'em since the Age of Phalaris. Does he know Whose this Sort of Proof
is, and to what Ill Purpose it has been employed? It is famous for being made
use of by Spinosa to ruin the Authority of Moses's Writings; which he would
prove not to be His (just as our Chronologer here does) from Places being
mentioned in 'em, more Modern than He. Ought the Dr. in a Doubting Age to have
employed such an Argument, without the utmost Caution and Guard? Ought he to
have proposed it so Generally and Crudely, without informing his Reader, how
far it held, and where it failed? what Exceptions were necessary to be made to
it, and of what Solutions it was capable? Is he so Eager to prove Phalaris
Spurious, that he cares not whether the Authority of the Sacred Writings sink
with him? But I hope he does n't think there is any more Weight in Spinosa's,
than I think there is in His Arguments. The General Answer I have heard given
upon this occasion is, that these Names were changed since Moses writ, to make
his History more intelligible to those, to whom the ancient Names of those
Towns and Countries were no longer known. And this Plea therefore I might
fairly lay hold of for Phalaris, if there were any need of it; and presume,
that the Copyers of these Letters might alter some of the Old Names to such as
were of more known and familiar Use in their Time. But I have no occasion to
say this, till Dr. Bentley has clearly proved some of the Names of Cities
mentioned there to be later than Phalaris, which, I think, with all his little
Skill in puzzling Accounts, he has not been able to do.

For Methods sake, he begins at the Last Epistle; from whence he cites these
words; (...), and says, the Sophist was careful to mention such Cities (he
means, People) as he knew were in Sicily Disser. p. 15.
Which is unluckily said just in this place, because the Sophist (if he be one)
happens to mention a People that were not in Sicily; for in all the Copies of
Phalaris it is (...). Indeed I guessed it should be (...), and am therefore
obliged not to bear hard upon him for making use of my Conjecture. Granting it
therefore to be (...), whether any of the Sicilian Hybla's be here meant is
dubious, and therefore he says nothing to it: but when he comes to Phintia,
which everybody owns to be in Sicily, he brings abundance of needless
Authorities to prove it is there. One of these, Diodorus, says, that Phintia was
built by Phintias of Agrigent, long enough after the Time of Phalaris; upon
which Dr. Bentley begins to triumph a little too hastily; imagining, he has
certainly proved this to be the Phintia mentioned by the Mock- Phalaris.
Whereas he ought to have considered, that Diodorus, in the very place he cites,
says, that the Phintia built by Phintias was a Maritime Town (...)
: but there is another Phintia, which both Ptolemy Geogr. l. 3, c. 4.
, and Pliny Not. Hist. l. 3, c. 8.
tell us is a Mediterranean Town. Now if Phalaris's Friends should be as
Positive as Dr. Bentley sometimes is with less reason, that it is the
Mediterranean Phintia that is mentioned in this Epistle, how would he disprove
'em? This has certainly as good a Title to be there as his Maritime Phintia
has; nay, according to his way of arguing in the next Paragraph from the
Company that Towns keep, the case is evident in its favor; for Hybla, which it
is here joined with, is Mediterranean. Perhaps the Dr. will bravely stand to
what he has here inconsiderately said, that all these Authors mean the same
place: If so, (which I am far from Granting) why may not Diodorus be mistaken
as much in the Date of this Town, as two Good Witnesses prove him to be in the
Situation of it? unless this Phintias be such another Place as Agrigent, a
Seaport Town in the middle of Sicily Dissert. p. 50.
.

From Phintia the Dr. marches on victoriously to Alaesa; where he finds
Stesichorus in danger of being snapt Ibid. p. 16.
, in his intended Journey from thence to Himera. And here again he appeals to
Diodorus, whether there was any such place as Alaesa in the Days of Phalaris.
Diodorus gives him a less satisfactory answer than he did in the Case of
Phintia; and tells him, that there was indeed one Alaesa built by Archonides in
the 94th Olymp. (which, according to the Dr's Arithmetic, is above 120;
another man would have said, above 140 Years after the last Period of Phalaris)
but that there were several other Alaesa's in Sicily; and therefore Archonides
gave this City the Appellation of Archonidium. So that we are at liberty to
choose any other of those Alaesa's for Phalaris; unless Dr. Bentley by his
Arbitrary Power can confine us to Archonidium. He says he can, and by this
Stratagem: Alaesa is here joined with Himera and Alu^tium; and the Alaesa of
Archonides is upon the same Coast with these Two Cities: therefore it is evident
from the Situation that this Alaesa of Archonides is meant in the Epistles. A
Surprising Argument! and I verily believe his Own! If he be not too
unreasonably fond of it, I desire to borrow it for One Moment, to prove just
the Contrary to what He has proved; that this Alaesa is not upon the same Coast
with Aluntium. Tully says; Hal^sini, Catanenses, Panonmitani, etc. and again,
Halesini, Catanenses, Tyndaritani, etc. Orr. in Verr.
It Is Evident therefore that Alaesa is upon the same Coast with Catana; that
is, upon the Coast directly opposite to Aluntium. I could confound all the
Geographers in the World with this argument; but must detain it no longer: I
return it to the Dr. with Thanks, and with a Promise never to use it again. If
anybody be of so slow a Judgment, as not to be affected with the Evidence of
this proof, the Dr, who is a man that guards against all possible Cavils and
Exceptions, has another ready to support it; which plainly shows, that Alaesa
of Archonides must be meant in the Epistles, because there was no other Town of
that name in the days of the Sophist Dissert p. 17.
. The Question is, whether these Epistles could be written by Phalaris? No,
says Dr. Bentley; because the Alaesa of Archonides is mentioned there. But how
does it appear, that, among the several Alaesa's in Sicily, this of Archonides
must needs be meant there? That, says he, is plain; because there was no other
Town of that name in the days of the Sophist: i. e. If a Sophist writ these
Letters, he must needs mean the Alaesa of Archonides, because there was no
other then standing. But the Dr. forgets that he is disputing with a strange
sort of People, who will not allow that a Sophist writ these Letters* and if he
could prove that a Sophist writ 'em, they would still deny his Consequence: for
might not a Sophist mention a Town he had read of, though 'twas not standing in
his time? If he might not, 'twill follow, that a Sophist could not write these
Epistles; where we find the names of As^ypalaea, Hiniera, Zancle, etc. Towns
out of Date long before the Days of the Sophist. It has been the Dr's fortune
in this Section to use such perverse arguments, as will sooner serve to any
purpose than to what he applys 'em. Instead of proving the Epistles Spurious,
he has proved 'em Genuine, instead of settling the true place of one City, he
has unsettled all the Geography that ever was writ.

However he is not discouraged with this ill Success at Alaesa, but proceeds to
give Battle to the Zancleans, upon the strength of an old saying and a true,
(...) Disser. p. 30.
Phalaris in the 85th Epistle says, (...), and inscribes the 21st Epistle
(...); upon which Dr. Bentley makes this Remark: Here we have mention made of
Zancleans and Messenians, as if Zancle and Messana were two different Towns
Ibid p. 24.
: and again, the Zancleans, by the reckoning of Pausanias, had been an obsolete
forgotten Word 100 Y^ars before the date of these pretended Epistles Disser. p.
27.
. If the Author had mentioned Zancle and Messana too, Dr. Bentley might have
said with some Grounds that he mistook 'em for two different Towns: but to say,
he did so, from his mentioning the Zancleans and Messanians, is a Consequence
too nearly related to some we have lately parted with. For from the Messanians
taking Zancle, and calling it after their own Name, does it follow, that there
were no Zancleans left in the World? Were these poor people annihilated upon
the Loss of their City? A man less rash in pronouncing their Name forgotten and
obsolete might have Suspected, and a man better acquainted with History might
have Known, that they continued many Ages in a Distinct Body, and under the
same Name. Pausanias Eliac. p. 346.
, where he observes, that, during the Messanians absence from Peloponnese, but
Two of their Nation won the Prize at the Olympicks, adds, that the Sicilians
say, these were not Messanians, but descended from the old Zancleans (...).
. This implys, that the Zancleans were not swallowed up by the Messanians, but
kept their Families unmixed with their new Conquerors. And this appears more
clearly from Diodorus, who tells us Lib. 11.
, that in the 79th Olympiad the Zancleans recovered their City out of these
Strangers hands, that had possessed it so many Years. Nay, so far were the
Zancleans from being obsolete 100 Years before Phalaris, that we are sure they
preserved themselves in a Separate Body even till L. 3, c. 8.
Pliny's time, who expressly distinguishes 'em from the Messanians; and tells
us, Messana was a Free City, but the Zancleans were Tributaries. These
Testimonies will sufficiently justify Phalaris for mentioning the Zancleans;
and if we can bring him off as well for mentioning the Messanians, that
inexcusable Ignorance in this matter, which Dr. Bentley presses so hard upon
the Sophist, must lie at his own Door, till he can remove it. But this, the Dr.
says, Thucydides will not suffer, who relates that, at the time of Xerxes 's
Expedition, Anaxilaus King of Rhegium besieged Zancle, and took it; and called
it Messana. Thucydides L. 6, 5.
says indeed, that Anaxilaus beat out the Samians from Zancle, and called it
Messana; but fixes the time of this action no otherwise than only by saying,
'twas not long after the Samians, flying from the Medes, possessed it. Dr.
Bentley calls this Xerxes's Expedition; as if the Medes had never made an
Incursion upon Greece till the time of Xerxes. I don't know how he will excuse
himself for misrepresenting that Excellent Author, but only by pleading that he
has dealt as freely with others. For, after the Words last quoted from
Thucydides, he adds; the same says Herodotus; whereas what Herodotus L. 6.
says, is so far from being the same, that it contradicts both the Story which
Thucydides himself tells, and that which Dr. Bentley makes for him. For he
says, not that Anaxilaus expelled the Samians from Zancle, but that he assisted
'em to take it; not that this was done at the time of Xerxes's Expedition, but
in the Reign of Darius. A common Reader would be surpised to hear him profess,
immediately after these Two fair Citations, that he loves to deal ingenuously
Disser. p. 25.
: but I begin now to understand his Figurative Expressions; when he offers an
argument, that has no Consequence, or Meaning in it, then his Phrase is, it is
Evident: When he has transcribed two or three Pages together from another man,
then he cries out, a Discovery: and when he would put a false Color upon any
thing, then he loves to deal ingenuously. But to deal a little more ingenuously
than He does, I will give his Authorities all the force that they will bear,
though not all that he lays upon 'em; and then consider, how far the Positive
Testimony of Pausanias may prevail against 'em. That Anaxilaus changed the Name
of Zancle into Messana is agreed between Dr. Bentley and Me; the only question
is about the Date of this Change. Thucydides fixes upon no date: Diodorus
places the Death of One Anaxilaus in the 76th Olympiad, but does n't say, this
was the Anaxilaus* that named Messana. Herodotus, in the place cited, says
nothing about the Change of the Names, but tells a Story of the Samians seizing
Zancle, a little after Miletus was taken; that is, about the 70th Olympiad: and
all the Ground we have, from this Passage of Herodotus, to conclude the Change
of the Name Zancle into Messana to have happened after this time, is, his
calling the City Zancle, and not Messana, throughout this Story: which, I
think, proves nothing more, than that the Old Name was not yet yet so utterly
abolished, but that it was called indifferently either Zancle, or Messana
still: and this I take to be the most Natural Interpretation of another Passage
in Herodotus (...)

L. 7, 164.
, (which I shall produce in Terms because Dr. Bentley has not) where, having
occasion to mention Zancle, after the Samians had possessed it, he calls it
Zancle still; only letting us know, that it had also a New Name, Messana. So
that hitherto we have had no direct and positive Testimony about the Time of
Zancle's changing its Name. Pausanias is the only Author, that speaks fully up
to the point: and He expressly affirms this to have happened in the 29th
Olympiad, and tells the Story with a great deal of Solemnity and Circumstance.
He says, the Flight of those Messanians [who named Messana] was after the
taking of Ira by the Lacedaemonians, in the 28th Olympiad, when Chionis the
Spartan carried the Prize the first time P. 259, 260.
: that, upon their Flight, Anaxilaus Prince of Rhegium, who had War with the
Zancleans, invited 'em to join with him; that they did so, and together with
his Forces took Zancle; and had it given 'em to inhabit, and new named it
Messana, in the 29th Olympiad, when the same Chionis won the Prize the Second
time P. 260, 261.
. That this Anaxilaus was the Great Grandson of Alcidamidas, who fled with his
Family from Messene to Rhegium, after the taking of Ithome, and the Death of
Aristodemus P. 260.
; which happened (he tells us in another place P. 251.
) the first Year of the 14th Olympiad, that is about Threescore Years before;
so that all the little particulars of Pausanias's whole Story are adjusted with
the utmost exactness. He speaks home to the point, so, as to leave no possible
room for interpreting his Words to any other Sense: and we have as much reason
to depend upon him in This, as in Any Era of Chronology whatever that he has
laid down throughout his Writings. And that Pausanias, who gives us this
account, was not unacquainted with what Herodotus had said, appears from his
quoting Herodotus (...), etc.

Eliac. p. 340.
, in relation to Micythus, the Servant of Anaxilaus: so that this cannot be
thought an Error of his, owning to his want of Memory, or sufficient Light; but
his fixed and settled Judgment after the Matter had been by him thoroughly
considered: And doubtless, when he laid down this Account so peremptorily and
with so much Exactness, he had such Authorities in his View, as he judged
sufficient to bear him out in it; and to be more than a Counterpoyse to the
Testimony of Herodotus; which he rejects, not only as to the Age of Anaxilaus,
but as to the Circumstances of his Life also; giving us a very different
relation of them. The most Eminent Chronologers, and Men best versed in these
things, (having never seen that whole Tenor of History confirmed by so many
Synchronisms and Concurrences, which, I suppose, Dr. Bentley keeps by him in
reserve) fall in with this account of Pausanias. Vbbo Emmius follows it, in his
History of Ancient Greece L. 1, p. 18.
; Lydiat, in his Notes on the Chronicon Marmoreum; Joseph Scaliger, in his
Animadversions upon Eusebius P. 27.
; and in his (...) It was composed by Scaliger himself, though many Learned Men
have quoted it since, as an Ancient Piece.
so does Petavius too Rat. Temp. par. 1, p. 38.
, who never agrees with Scaliger when he can help it; and Meursius Lect. At.
l. 2, c. 23.
, who has a distinct Chapter on this Subject. To sum up our Evidence then;
against an Indirect and Dubious Proof, built chiefly on a Disputable Passage in
Herodotus, we have the express, and full, and undoubted Authority of Pausanias;
and the Opinions of Vbbo Emmius, Lydiat, Scaliger, Petavius, and Meursius, to
counterpoise Dr. Bentley's: and if These are not Enough to do it, I promise the
Dr. to throw half a dozen more into the Scale, the next time he and I talk
together.

In the same Epistle, from whence Dr. Bentley took an occasion of giving us
this large and ingenuous account of Zancle and Messana, the Tauromenites were
mentioned with the Zancleans; [(...)] upon which I expected, that when he had
dispatched the Zancleans, he would have fallen upon the Tauromenites: but to
show his Aversion to any thing that looks like Order or Method, he postpones
'em, to intermix some Proofs of a different Nature. I have already excused my
self from following him in his Rambles, and shall consider Tauromenium here in
its proper place. The only Authority he has brought to prove Tauromenium so
named since the time of Phalaris, is that of Diodorus, which I mentioned in my
Preface; and owned to be a clear Proof against Phalaris, if it might be relied
on. But Diodorus is in two Stories, which, as Dr. Bentley (after his way of
citing Authors) has put 'em together, look plausibly enough; but, as Diodorus
himself tells 'em, are utterly inconsistent. In his 14th Book he says, that
some Sicilians planted themselves upon Taurus, and from their Settlement there
called the place they built, Tauromenium: In the 16th Book, he says, that about
40 Years after this, Andromachus planted some of the Old Naxians upon Taurus,
and from his long stay there called the place where he planted 'em,
Tauromenium. Thus Diodorus plainly gives us Two different accounts of the Time
when the Place was named; either of which, I confess, would serve Dr. Bentley's
purpose: but since they contradict one-another, neither of them is to be
depended on. If Dr. Bentley pleads, that they do not contradict one-another,
because the Place might be twice called so, for One and the Same Reason; why
will not the Same Reason equally hold for its being called so, long before
Phalaris lived? Doubtless the Sicilians had often before his time resorted to
the Strong Holds of that Mountain. Nay, Thucydides expressly tells us L. 6, 15.
, that there were of old People that inhabited the Hilly parts about Naxos: and
it is not improbable, that These might be called (...), before they were formed
into any Politic Body; and afterward, when they were collected together, and
a City was built (though we don't know when that was) that City might be called
Tauromenium. It Is observable that Phalaris, though he has very often occasion to
mention these People, yet never names any such Town as Tauromenium; never calls
'em Citizens, nor uses any such Expression as implys, they belonged to any
City. This could scarce have happened, if a Sophist had writ these Letters: but
it is no wonder that Phalaris should write so, because there might be
Tauromenites, as there was a River Tauromenius (if Vibius Sequester be to be
credited, who says the Town had its Name from thence) before there was a
Tauromenium. So that Dr. Bentley would have no reason to triumph over the
Defenders of Phalaris, if he could prove Tauromenium of a Later Date; much
less, since he cannot prove it, ought he so insultingly to call upon 'em, Where
are those that cry up Phalaris for the florid Author of these Letters, who was
burnt in his Own Bull above 150 Years before Tauromenium was ever thought of
Disser. p. 31.
? E're I answer this Question, I desire to ask Him one: Where does he find that
Phalaris was burnt in his Bull? Does this Great Historian take up with the
Trifling Author of the Verses upon Ibis, when so many Grave Writers have given
us a different account of Phalaris's Death? In another place indeed he cites
Heraclides for this Story; but, as I have already observed, falsely. However,
Phalaris's being burnt in his Bull before Tauromenium was thought on, was so
refreshing a Quibble, that he would rather venture upon False History, than
lose it. The Witticism is something remote, as it stands here; but when he is
at leisure to put this Dissertation into Latin, 'twill receive a Great
Advantage.

It Was not to be hoped, that these Obscure Points concerning the Building and
Peopling Ancient Towns should be so far cleared and settled, as to make 'em
amount to a Plain and Direct Proof against the Epistles: However it was a piece
of Learning not unworthy of a Scholar's Pains; and by a Skilful Hand might have
been made useful to some Other purpose. I would not therefore be thought to
disparage Dr. Bentley for enquiring into this matter, though he has happened to
leave it more obscure than he found it; His Attempt was Commendable, whatever
his Success has been: but Now, methinks, he stoops very low; from the Rise and
Aera's of Cities, to the Chronology of Old Sayings and Proverbs. This would
make a much more suitable Appendix to a Vocabulary, than to an History of
Ancient and Modern Learning. It Is so dry and fruitless, and so little to the
purpose, that I am almost tempted to break my promise, and leave this part of
his Dissertation unexamin'd. While Men of Different Times have a Like Frame of
Soul, and meet with Like Accidents of Life, i. e. while they have the same
Faculties, and the same Occasions of thinking, what Wonder is it, that they
should happen upon the same Reflection? or that Authors, who write in the same
Language, and upon the same Subject, should put the same Two Words together?
Yet this is what astonishes Dr. Bentley; he cannot believe, that there should
be so strange a Iumping of Good Wits, without some silching Dissert. p. 33.
and therefore concludes, these Letters must be writ, not by Phalaris himself,
but by a Secretary Ibid. p. 38.
of his; who is not so Dutiful as a Secretary should be in attending his
Master, for he comes a Thousand Years after him.

The Dr. takes this Secretary tripping Ibid. p. 27.
in his use of the Proverb (...); of which the Dr. can prove Croesus to be the
Author; because when he sent a Message to the Lampsaceni, that if they did not
set Miltiades free, he would extirpate 'em (...), the men of Lampsacus
understood not the meaning of that Expression: The Phrase, he says, puzzled the
whole City Ibid.
; What if it did? must an Expression needs be New and Unheard of, because the
Mayor and Aldermen of Lampsacus, and perhaps the Recorder too, did not
apprehend it? But how does he prove, it puzzled the WHOLE City? plainly!
because One of the Eldest Citizens hit upon it, and told the meaning of it. This
is very Nice Reasoning: but he goes on to refine upon it; and suspects that
Herodotus himself was the first Broacher of that Expression: for (says he)
those first Historians made every-bodys Speeches for 'em. Therefore Herodotus
made this, which is no Speech, but only a Message! However, let Herodotus have
worded this Message; does the same Herodotus tell us, that the Lampsacenes were
puzzled with an Expression invented by Herodotus? Were the Men of Lampsacus in
Croesus's time at a Loss to understand a Phrase, that was not thought of, till
Herodotus an Hundred Years afterward coined it? It Is wonderful to Me, how such
a Piece of Reasoning as this could ever enter into an Head, that has Brains in
it! All the Dr. has to countenance it, is the Title of a Lost Chapter in
Gellius: from whence he takes occasion to guess at what is Lost there, and to
give us a wrong translation of what is Left: Caesam, which in Herodotus's Greek
is (...), he renders Lop'd, instead of Cut down: Now, that a Pinetree perishes
by Lopping, is, I believe, as he says, News to the Naturalists. I could not
avoid taking notice of this little Mistake, because he repeats it over and over
again; and endeavors, in his awkward way, to squeeze Mirth out of it. Gellius
indeed, remembering a Passage in Herodotus, where it was affirmed, that the Pine
was the only Tree, which would not shoot out after it was cut down, might say,
Quod parum vere dixerit Herodotus, etc. because he did not nicely examine upon
what Occasion this was brought in by Herodotus; or what was said in Herodotus
he might in a Quotation say well enough, was said by him: but to tell us the
Story of the Lampsacenes being at a Loss to understand the Message of Croesus,
and yet to think this Expression first broached by Herodotus, is such an
Instance of Oscitation P. 119.
, as I could not easily imagine, that even Our Dissertator could be guilty of.
He tells us of Dreaming Pedants, with their Elbows on their Desks; but surely
the Man that writ this must have been fast asleep, for else he could never have
talked so wildly. If Herodotus is to be believed, Croesus used this Expression;
if he is not to be believed, why is he brought to prove any thing? Herodotus is
so far from asserting that Croesus was the Author of this Proverbial Saying,
that from this very Story we may gather, that he was not the Author of it. For
when he sent a Message to the Lampsacenes, which he expected should immediately
be obeyed, would he put it into such a Phrase as they were not likely to
apprehend? It stands to reason, that he thought the expression Common enough;
or else he would not have used it on this occasion. All that we certainly learn
from Herodotus is, that this Saying must be as Old, at least, as Croesus; from
whence one would be apt to conclude it to be probably as Old as Phalaris, who
is placed but very few Years above him.

When the Dr's head ran upon Old Sayings, how came Nihil est dictum quod non
dictum prius, to escape him? This One, well applied, would have done him more
service than all the Greek, Latin, and English Proverbs with which he
embellishes his Dissertation; it would have showed him how vain it is to
pretend to trace the Originals of Words and Phrases; and that even the Aera's
of Cities may be fixed much sooner than They. However the Dr. launches still
out into further Discoveries of this kind; he has met with a Sentence of Moral
Disser. p. 33.
, (...), which notable Saying, he tells us, had not Phalaris modestly hinted
that Others had said it before him, we might have taken for his Own. He seems
here to blame Phalaris for being modest, and for hinting that he borrowed this
Expression from others, when he might as well have put it upon us for his own:
the Dr, I believe, will never be blamed upon either of these accounts. But
would he really have taken this Saying for Phalaris's Own, if there had been no
hint of his borrowing it? and yet when Phalaris says, it is Older than himself,
will he take it to be Younger? He reckons up several Authors that pretend to
it, Democritus, Simonides, and the Lacedaemonians; and decides in favor of
Democritus, for a very good reason; because otherwise it would be of no use to
him in the present Debate. But I am so far from yielding it up to Democritus,
that I say Democritus lays no claim to it. Plutarch says, (...); perhaps he had
met with this in some Passage in Democritus's Works; but it will not follow
from hence that Democritus was the Author of it. Many Proverbial Gnomae, in all
Languages, are to be met with in the Dr's Dissertation; but Nobody will allow
his Way of Arguing from 'em: Either these Gnomae are Dr. Bentley's own, or else
he is a Sorry Plagiary. Laertius, the other Witness produced for Democritus, is
as far from making Democritus the Author of this Sentence, as Plutarch is. In
his Life of Democritus we find, (...). But in another place he tells us Life of
Solon.
, Solon used to say, (...): So that Democritus, according to Laertius's
account, and Dr. Bentley's Reasoning, must still have filch'd this Saying. And
from the Variety of Opinions concerning the Original of it, I have more reason
to suppose it older than Phalaris, than Dr. Bentley has to presume it Later.
Here are Four Authors, that have an Equal Pretense to it; and if it be given to
any of the Four, except Democritus, Phalaris might have used it after 'em: but
I rather think that none of 'em have any Title to it. It is not an Observation
of so deep a Reach, but that it might have been hit upon an hundred Times, by
Men no wiser than Dr. Bentley, or my self, before the Pens of Phalaris or
Democritus made it famous.

Dr. Bentley goes on detecting Phalaris's Thefts; but for Ornaments sake, the
Phrase is varied. He finds him, in the next Paragraph, filching a Moral
Sentence Dissert. p. 35.
; in the Last, it was a Sentence of Moral: which is the Only Change of Style,
that I have observed in Dr. Bentley's Dissertation for the better; and
therefore I ought to give him the Praise of it. The Moral Sentence is this,
(...), which is stolen, he says, from an Iambic Verse cited in Aristotle's
Rhetoric, (...). But why might not this Iambic Verse be as well stolen from
Phalaris? or why might not both the Poet and the Prince be equally beholden to
a Moral Sentence more ancient than either of them? Were there no Moral
Sentences before the Days of Phalaris? Or, supposing Phalaris had this Jambic
Verse in his Eye, how does it appear, that this Verse was not Older than He?
Aristotle, who cites it without a Name, leaves us in the dark, as to the Time
of it. And how will the Dr's Conjecturing Faculty help him out here? will he
pretend by the Thread and Color of it is Style to judge to what Century it
belongs? Ay, but it is a Proverbial Gnome, he says, and therefore PROBABLY
borrowed from the Stage; and CONSEQVENTLY must be later than Phalaris, let it
belong to what Poet You please, Tragic or Comic Differ. p. 35.
. Why more probably borrowed from the Stage, than from Archilochus's Iambicks?
the Fragments of which are full of those Wise Sayings, which Dr. Bentley calls
Proverbial Gnomae; and which do not, I think, look a whit the Wiser for having
that Hard Name given 'em. But should I grant him his Probably, yet his
Consequently I can never allow: because I am very well satisfied, that there
were both Tragic and Comic Poets before the Days of Phalaris. I shall talk with
the Dr. about the Age of Tragedy in another Article; here I shall consider
Comedy only. The Chronicon Marmoreum informs us, that it was brought into
Athens by Susarion; or rather, that a (...), etc. Ep. 40 (...). in Scen^
Tabulata.
Stage for the acting of Comedies was by him first erected in Athens: the Date
is indeed worn out of the Marble; but it must be before the Tyranny of
Pisistratus, with which the next Epoch begins: and the Tyranny of Pisistratus
Dr. Bentley owns Differ. p. 41.
to have been something before that of Phalaris. Those Learned Men, who have
taken pains to illustrate this Chronicle, have by the Concurrence of Other
Histories plainly shown, that the time of Susario must fall between the 610th
and 489th Year before Christ. Take fairly the Middle of this account; and it
falls out before the Reign of Phalaris. Mr. Seldom indeed, and some others,
would have Susario the same with Sannyrio, which would bring him down to
Aristophanes's time; but the Excellent Bishop Pearson, in his Vindiciae
Ignatianae P. 2, 10, 11.
, has proved beyond all Controversy, that Susario is a distinct Poet from
Sannyrio, and older by above 140 Years. But Comedy was yet Older than Susario
himself; for it was Older than the Word by which it was called in Susario's
time, and had the same Common Name with Tragedy, long before the Division of
Dramatic Poetry into those Two distinct Branches was formed; as I shall prove
from Atheneus hereafter, in my Enquiry into the Origin of Tragedy. Susario was
only the Improver of Comedy, as I shall show Thespis to have been of Tragedy:
He polished it first perhaps, and gave it something of a Regular Cast; which
was handle enough for Diomedes Grammaticus L. 3.
, the Scholiast on Aristophanes In Prol^gom.
, and Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. l. 1.
, to attribute the Invention of it to him. But that he was not the Inventor of
it, the Marble it self does more than intimate, when it says only of him, that
he first erected a Stage in Athens, to act Comedies upon. Indeed the Cities
were beholden to the Villages for the Use of both Tragedy and Comedy; as we
learn from Aristotle Poet. l. 1
: In the Country they began, and continued some time rude and unformed, till
the City took 'em out of the Peasants hands, and polished 'em. Allowing then
Dr. Bentley all his unreasonable Demands; that Phalaris had a regard to the
Jambic Verse cited by Aristotle, and that That Verse belongs to the Stage: yet
we see, it might belong to the Stage, and be more ancient than Phalaris.

Our Critic himself seems but ill satisfied with this Proof, (a Thing which
rarely happens to him!) and therefore casts about for Another; and will find
this Saying somewhere else. I see the Charge of Thest begins to clear up; we
shall easily Quash an Indictment, that is thus laid in Two Places. Well! but
who is this Second Author, that Phalaris has purloin'd? why, Euripides, in his
Philoctetes. And, says Dr. Bentley P. 36.
, from Aristophanes the famous Grammarian (who (after Aristotle, Callimachus,
and Others) writ the (...), a Work (were it now extant) most useful to Ancient
History) we know, that this very Fable Philoctetes was written Olymp. 87; which
is CXX Years after the Tyrant's Destruction. Was ever Scholiast urged to clear
a more Knotty Point; or urged more Knottily? He might as well from the
Chronicon Marmoreum compared with Langbain's Fasti have undertaken to prove,
that Thespis was before Dryden. Euripides's Words are, (...),
(...)
(...) --


Now (says the Dr.) to him that compares these with the Words of the Epistle,
'twill be EVIDENT, that the Author had this very Passage before his Pen: there
is (...) and (...); not only a Sameness of Sense, but even of Words, and those
not necessary to the Sentence: which could not fall out by Accident. All that
is Evident, I think, is, that there is a Sameness of Reasoning runs throughout
the Dr's whole Dissertation: let Phalaris shift for himself; I am resolved not
to answer this Argument. Instead on it, I shall be bold to make an Objection to
the Dr, which I desire him to answer; and that is, whether it were proper and
prudent in him, to accuse Phalaris of a Theft by a Pair of Quotations pillaged
from my poor Notes on this Epistle? and whether, among his other Proverbial
Gnomae, he should not have considered That about the Old Woman in the Oven?

Hitherto Phalaris has stolen discreetly, and borrowed Expressions proper for
him to use; but now, it seems he steals without Decency or Distinction, out of
Callimachus, and Pindar. For we find Two Words close together in Him, that are
found as near one another in Each of those Authors. Phalaris has (...), Pindar
has (...), and Callimachus (...): the Dr. is in a Quandary here to determine,
which of these Phalaris plundered; Pindar he should be inclined to guess, but
that he is more inclined to guess it is Callimachus. Indeed Callimachus,
Dorizing in this point, is One Letter farther off from him, than Pindar: but
then again in Another place, which has nothing to do with This place,
Callimachus has Two Other Words exactly the same. So that between Pindar and
Callimachus, and Callimachus and Pindar, the Dr. is, as I observed, in a Great
Quandary. To relieve him in this Straight, I take leave to give him my Opinion,
that Phalaris might rob neither: for I can see nothing so Extraordinary in
these Words, but that a much less Man than Phalaris might have hit upon 'em.
The Dr. fancies, he sees a Quaintness something Poetical in the Expression; a
Man, that dealt less Tenderly with Him than I, would be apt to fancy he saw a
Quaintness something Pedantical in the Observation. Which of the Words is
Poetical, (...) or (...)? (...) has no other Sense here Phalaris's Words are,
(...). Ep. 12.
, than it has wherever it is used in any Prose Author: for the Dr. may refine
upon it, as he pleases; it signifies here neither more nor less than Another;
though being opposed to (...), this Other Fortune must, by construction, be
understood to mean Ill Fortune. Is (...) then Poetical? it is taken here for
(...); in what Author almost is it not taken so? I could be very Learned here
in my Citations; and, if I followed Great Examples, 'twould be a proper
occasion, for there is no Need of 'em: I will only in the Margin point out to
the Dr. a Place or two from Dionysius Halicarnasseus (...). P. 172. -- (...).
p. 180.
, and Aeschines (...). In Ctesiph. p. 94. Ed. Ox.
; and put him in mind of those words of Eustathius, (...), etc.

Tully, in his Third Philippic, has these Two Expressions, Fatum extremum
Reipublicae, and Magna Vis est, magnum Numen unum and idem sentientis Senatus.
Fatum extremum and Numen here have, in my Judgment, something more of the Air
of Poetry in 'em, than (...); and accordingly we find the First of them once, and
the Last often used in that Sense by Virgil. But I suppose Nobody will be so
wild as to infer any thing from thence to the disadvantage of that Philippic.
The same is to be said for the Words (...) in the 122d Epistle, which with
great Sagacity he finds in Callimachus. The Latin of that Greek, Invenere
Tormentum, is in Horace: will he reject at Random any Prose-Writer, in whom I
can find these Two Words together? if he will, I Will engage, at a venture, to
find 'em. But till I know his Mind, I desire to be excused from the Trouble:
for, begging the Dr's pardon, I take Index-hunting after Words and Phrases, to
be, next Anagrams and Acrosticks, the lowest Diversion a Man can betake himself
to.

As trifling as these Two Criticisms are, yet Dr. Bentley is so fond of 'em,
that, to make 'em immortal, he has lately reprinted 'em, with his Fragments of
Callimachus. It Is the only part of his Dissertation, which, notwithstanding his
Threatenings, he has yet thought sit to put into Latin: and, if I guess right,
it is the only part that he ever will.

THE Last Sort of Proof the Dr. has employed to show the Epistles Younger than
Phalaris, is the use of some Terms, or Words of Art, which were invented, he
says, after Phalaris's time: he instances in these Three, Thericlean Cups III.
, Philosophy X.
, and Tragedy XI.
.

In the 70th Epistle, among other things with which Phalaris presents his
Physician, mention is made of Ten Couple of the Cups of Thericles; whom our
Critic thinks he can prove to be a Corinthian Potter, that lived an CXX Years
after Phalaris. Before he proves it, I beg leave to interpose a Guess, about
the true Reading of this Passage; which, if accepted, may save both Him and Us
the trouble of his Learned Argument. The Text of Phalaris, as it stands now,
is, (...); what if it should heretofore have been (...) etc? It Is a very
inconsiderable Alteration, and yet it salves all: for that there was such a
Cup, named from Hercules, and therefore Old enough for Phalaris to use, we need
go no further than Athenaeus to be informed; who, in his Catalogue of Cups,
mentions the (...) as a distinct sort, in one place P. 469.
, and (...) in another Vid. Casaubo^ Anim. p. 782
. This small Alteration, which I take the Liberty to suggest* might easily
creep into the Old MSS, which were in Capitals, without any distinction of
Words: There the Original Reading might have been (...); and afterward, by a
slight Change of an A into an I, it might be corrupted into what it is Now by
some Transcriber, whose Head was full of the Thericlean Cup; and who lived,
when the Heraclean Cup was disused and forgotten. And this is not the Only
Instance we have of Copyers mistaking One of these Names for the Other; the
Archon in the 61st Olympiad, whose Name in Dionysius Halicarnasseus (...). p.
244.
is Heracles, in Diodorus (...). Excerpt. e Diodoro. p. 241.
is called Thericles: and such a Change, I hope, might happen in these
Epistles, as has certainly happened in One of these Authors. A Candid Reader,
that considers, what ado there is made about the (...) in Greek Writers, and
how rarely the (...) is mentioned, will perhaps think this Conjecture not
improbable, and grant me the benefit of it. But Dr. Bentley, I believe, will
enter his Protest: I remember a Saying of his, with relation to a Word in
Tully, which Quintilian read otherwise than He would have had him; Ego vero,
says he, Ciceronem it a scripsisse ne Ciceroni quidem ipsi assirmanti
crediderim Epist. ad Millium in fine Malalae, p. 80.
: and despairing therefore to get this Poor Guess of mine to pass with him, I
must even take the Term as I find it in Phalaris, and see how far it affects
our present Argument.

To fix the Age of Thericles, from whom these Cups are presumed to have their
Name, the Dr. cites Athenaeus, One Witness indeed, but as GOOD as a Multitude,
he says, in a matter of this nature Differ. p. 19.
; he might as well, I think, have said as Many: for why should One Witness be
as Good as a Multitude in Cases of this Nature? in Other Cases, I am sure, it
is not: He may attaint Phalaris indeed upon a Single Evidence, but he can never
in the Common Course of Justice convict him; and yet the Dr. promised us to
give him a Fair and Impartial Trial P. 19.
. If now there are several material Circumstances that disparage this One
Witness's Testimony; if he lived at a great distance from the Time he writes
of; if he speaks by Report and Hearsay only, without vouching any Authority; if
he expresses himself so, that we have room to doubt, whether we know his mind;
or, should we know his mind, yet if he contradicts himself immediately
afterward: I say, if these things appear against him, then this One Witness is
so far from being as good as a Multitude, that he is as good as None. And I
believe That will appear to be the Case, after I have examined him.

Had Athenaeus given us an Account of the Author of an Invention in his Own
Time, or a little before him, we could easily have credited him upon his Word:
but when he speaks of an Invention of 600 Years standing, and pretends nicely
to fix the Date of it, without telling us from what Author he drew his Account,
we may be allowed to suspect his Exactness. His mistakes, where he depends upon
his Memory, or even upon his Commonplacebook Saepe Athenaeum peccare graviter
dum suo^um Excerptorum fidem sequitur, neque ad fontes ipsos adit, multis locis
probatum nobis satis superque. Anim. p. 377.
, without consulting the very Authors themselves, are frequently taken notice
of by his Learned Editor, and he could not mistake in a point that less
deserved to be remembered than this. Had he known himself from what Author he
drew this account, he would without fail, have told us; for he treads not a
single Step without an Authority, if he can have one: and we may therefore
conclude, that he had none; and that the only reason, which determined him to
fix the Age of Thericles about Aristophanes's time was, that he had not set
down in his Adversaria, nor did at present call to mind a mention of the
Thericlean Cup in any Writer more ancient than He. For observable it is, that
among the Several Quotations in which he abounds on this head, there is none
that runs higher than the Age of that Poet. One there is, and but One, brought
from a Lost Play of his, Philonides; where the Thericlean Cup is mentioned, at
large, but not a word said, by which we can make any Guess at the Age of
Thericles. Our Critic indeed is of opinion, that in all probability Athenaeus
had this Indication [about the Age of Thericles] from some Play of Aristophanes
now Lost, where that Corinthian was mentioned as one then alive Disser. p. 19.
But in all probability, Athenaeus had not this Indication from any such
Passage, because Then, in all Probability, he would have been so Communicative
as to have let his Readers have it too. Had Aristophanes named Thericles, as
Living, in any of his Plays, and had this been Athenaeus's reason for making
'em Cotemporary, is it credible, that among so many other Passages he produces,
relating to Thericles, he would have omitted This, that was worth all the rest,
and settled that very point of Chronology past dispute, which he was then
laying down? especially, since he had not overloaded us on this Head, with
Aristophanes's Verses; having cited him but Once; whereas Alexis, a Writer of
much less Character, is produced four times to it, within the compass of Twenty
Citations? Could he be so Lavish, where there was no need of it? and so Sparing
where the very Stress of the Point lay? I have no great Opinion either of
Athenaeus's Judgment or Exactness, (and when I say so, I speak but the Words of
Casaubon Ejus Ego quidem Diligentiam in nonnullis, Judicium in multis requiro.

Animadv. p. 375.
however I cannot think him Injudicious and Careless to such a Degree as this:
and therefore I conclude, that he brought no Quotation of this kind out of
Aristophanes, because he had none to bring.

Indeed, as he quotes Nobody for this account of the Age of Thericles, so he
speaks of it himself with distrust. Dr. Bentley, it is true, in his Translation,
has put him into the Positive Style; and made him roundly affirm, that the Cup
WAS invented by Thericles, a Corinthian Potter, in Aristophanes's time: but
Athenaeus expresses himself with greater Reserve. His Words are (...). P. 470.
, One Thericles, a Corinthian Potter [ who lived about the Time of Aristophanes
the Comoedian] IS SAID, or IS REPORTED to have made this Sort of Cup: and FAMA
EST a Corinthio Figulo Thericle factos, says the Honest Latin Translator. Which
manner of speaking is the more to be observed, because it appears from several
Passages in him, before and after this, that He himself was not satisfied of
the Truth of this Report: for he immediately gives us some other accounts of
the Original of the Word P. 471.
, without the least Intimation which he preferrs. I allow that these
Derivations are forced ones, and to be given up: for that the Name of the Cup
came from the Name of a Man, is not to be doubted, I think; at least it was not
to be doubted, till Dr. Bentley attempted to prove it. Let us step out of our
way so far, as to hear his Extraordinary Argument. Does not Common Analogy
show, says he, that as from (...) comes (...), and as from (...) comes (...);
so from (...) (not only may, but) MVST come (...) P. 21.
? Wonderful! Who would have thought that such Certain Conclusions could be
built on the Rules of Analogy? or that there was so near an Affinity between
Logic and Grammar? Let us try it, in another Instance: as from (...) comes
(...), so from (...) the Philosopher must come (...) Virens: Here is the same
Analogy, and yet the Inference from it is stark naught. The Dr. then was too
rash in asserting, that (...) must come from (...) by the Rule of Analogy: it
does come from it, I grant; but does and must are very different Things. The
English Rhyme goes a Truer and Surer way to work; As from Goose comes Goslin,
So from Sir Pos. comes Sir Poslin.
But to return to our Serious and Weighty point; Athenaeus, I say, proposes
some other Derivations of (...) beside that from (...); and though Dr. Bentley
and I are pretty well agreed, that they are frivolous ones, yet it does not
appear any way, that He undervalu'd 'em; or determined which had the better
claim to (...), They, or Thericles: which is a Sign, I think, that He himself
was not fully satisfied in the matter. And another Shrewd Sign it is, that but
a few Lines before this famous Passage, he cites a Fragment from a Play of
Alexis, where, as he interprets it (...) (says he) (...); and does not Alexis
introduce Hercules drinking out of a Thericlean Cup? In the Passage from
Alexis, as it now stands in Athenaeus, Thericles is not mentioned: but it is
plain Athenaeus thought, from some Expressions in it, that this Cup might be
intended; or else he would not have asked a Question about it.
, Hercules is brought in, drinking out of a Thericlean Cup: and this he does
without taxing the Absurdity of the Poet; which he could hardly have omitted to
do, if he had believed the Invention no Older than Aristophanes: for, at this
rate, the bringing Hercules, and a Thericlean Cup upon the Stage together,
would have been as ridiculous, as if one of Our Dramatic Poets should represent
William the Conqueror drinking in Dwight's Ware. Alexis, one would think, could
not have committed such an Absurdity, who lived but Threescore Years after
Aristophanes; at least Athenaeus could not have passed it by uncensur'd, if
that Report about the Age of the Thericlean Cup had stuck with him.

But that it did not, we have this further Reason to believe; that he qoutes
Lynceus Samius, in the 469th page, for a Passage, wherein this Cup is
represented (not as a Corinthian, but) an Athenian Invention: for that, I
think, is the Natural Construction of Lynceus's words; which I shall produce,
and leave the Reader to judge of them Lynceus Samius is brought in by Athenaeus
saying, that the Rhodians did ((...)) work a sort of Cup ( called (...)) in
imitation of the Thericlean Cup^, made at Athens. This Expression of Lynceus
was probably in his Epistle to Diagoras mentioned in another place of Athenaeus
( p. 647.) where Lynceus does ((...)) compare the finest Athenian Manufactures
with those of Rhodes. This implys, I think, that the Thericlean Cup was an
Athenian Invention; at least, we have Lynceus Samius 's word for it, no
Contemptible Writer, and of pretty Early Date; as being the Scholar and
Acquaintance of Theophrastus. I know the Words ((...)) are capable of another
Sense; but it is a forced and unnatural one.
.

Now if Lynceus Samius's Testimony be received, there is an end of Athenaeus's
Report about the Corinthian Potter. The Authors of that Report, whoever they
were, might be as well out in the Time, as in the Country of Thericles: If he
were no Corinthian, but an Athenian; he might possibly be no Potter neither,
but an Archon, or some Great Man: and the Thericlean Cups (as the (...) and
(...) mentioned by Plutarch together with them In Vit. P. Aem^l.
) might be called so from him, that used 'em first, and not from Him that
invented 'em. Which their Size and Worth also would make us apt to believe: for
Athenaeus tells us, they were Extraordinary Large, and of a Vast Price; and
could therefore be the Purchase only of Great and Wealthy men, till the
Rhodians found out a way of making 'em Slight and Cheap; and then they grew
Commoner Athe^^^. p. 469.
: and therefore it is probable, I say, that some Great Man who first used 'em,
gave 'em their name; and not He that invented 'em. And if the most Learned Mr.
Dodwell's Opinion about the Age of Phalaris take place, (whom I hear he brings
down to the LXXth Olympiad) we have the mention of an Archon preserved in
Diodorus, who lived early enough to give the Name to these Cups: for he must
be, by this account, above Thirty Years Older than Phalaris (...) was Archon in
Olympiad the ^^st; as before, Page the 147 of these Pap^rs.
.

But let this be as it will -- From what I have produced out of Athenaeus, I
think, it manifestly appears, that no Weight is to be laid upon what He says in
the point, who talks so loosely and waveringly about it; who produces Opinions
on one side, and Opinions on the other, who takes up a Report, an Hearsay in one
page, and contradicts it by a Substantial Testimony from an Approved Author, in
another; and is all over Inconsistency, and Confusion. A Witness that thus
talks forwards and backwards, in a breath, ought to be set aside by consent of
Both Parties; and leave the Merits of the Cause to be decided by clearer
Testimonies.

And now what becomes of the Pompous Character, with which Dr. Bentley
introduces this Single Evidence? One indeed, but as good as a Multitude! I
agree with the Dr. if he means a Multitude of such Suborned Witnesses as he has
brought to blast the Credit of Phalaris; One good Honest Downright Witness were
worth 'em All: but Such, I think, I have proved Atheneus not to be in the
Present Debate. However, if after what has been offered, the Reader should
still be inclined to believe this One Hearsay Witness, I desire him to
remember, that his Evidence lies within a Narrow Compass, and that he affects
but One Epistle: So that should That, where the Thericlean Cup is mentioned
prove Spurious, yet the other 147 may, to our Comfort, be Genuine still. And
this Consideration I hope the Reader has carried along with him through all the
Particular Proofs, that they touch only those Particular Epistles from whence
they are taken, but do not affect the whole Body of 'em; for a Passage, or Part
of a Book may be Spurious, and yet the Book it self not be Spurious: especially
when it is a Collection of Pieces, that have no Dependence upon one another, as
Epistles, Epigrams, Fables; the First Number of which may have been increased
by the Wantonness, or Vanity of Imitators in aftertimes, and yet the Book be
Authentic in the main, and an Original still.

There are some Other Important Controversies which Dr. Bentley has
occasionally handled in this Paragraph; as whether Thericles was a Turner, or a
Potter Dissert. p. 18.
? whether Bulls and Cows may be properly called (...), as well as Lions, and
Tigers Ibid. p. 20.
? But these things making neither for, nor against our Argument, I am not at
leisure to dispute 'em with him. The Misfortune of it is, that this Great
Variety of Reading which the Dr. produces on a very Trifling Point may perhaps
mischief him in the opinion of an Intelligent Reader; and make him thought a
Man, who, with Ill Judgment, employs most of his Time on those things that
deserve it least. To take off those Suspicions, and to do his Character right,
I assure the Reader, that he went no further for all this Learning than his
Dictionaries, and what One of those ^esych. in voce (...) and the Notes upon it.
referred him to, Casaubon's Notes on Athenaeus. However, since he was so much
obliged to that Great Man, I wonder that Common Gratitude, and Common Sense
should not hinder him from falling upon Him, as he does, at the very time he is
transcribing Him. Casaubon, in a Passage of Athenaeus relating to this
Controversy, was willing to read (...), instead of (...); and gave his Reason
for it, that he found it so in the ancient Epitomizer of Athenaeus: to which
our Dissertator, with an Air of Superiority, replys, One may be CERTAIN 'twas a
Fault ONLY in that Copy of him that Casaubon used: for Eustathius, WHO APPEARS
NEVER to have seen the true Athenaeus, but only that Epitome, read it in his
Book (...), etc. Dissert. p. 20, 21.
Which is said with an Equal Degree of Truth, Decency, and Reason. For, in the
first place, it is certain that Eustathius had seen, and does sometimes quote
Athenaeus himself, though he generally uses the Epitome of him: and therefore
Casaubon says only of Eustathius, that he did SAEPE uti Epitome, integro
Athenaei Codice neglecto; and that he did NON RARO sequi lectionem quae in
Excerptis, spreta ea quae in Contextu long interdum melior ac verior Ani^ad.
p. 2.
: and I Will tell the Reader One Reason among an hundred, why he should sooner in
this case trust Casaubon than Dr. Bentley; it is, that Casaubon had the
Excerpta of Athenaeus entire, and could compare 'em therefore with Athenaeus
himself, and with Eustathius: whereas Dr. Bentley will not pretend, I suppose,
ever to have seen the Excerpta; for they are unprinted All, but so much of 'em
as supplys the Room of what we have lost of Athenaeus himself.
to this day: and when therefore he pronounces it to be apparent, that
Eustathius never saw the true Athenaeus, he talks of a thing that he knows
nothing of, and can know nothing of, but from Casaubon; and yet ventures to
contradict him. Had I not reason to make the Itch of opposing Great Names upon
very slight or no Grounds, a Chief and Distinguishing Mark of Pedantry?

But what if Eustathius had seen only the Epitome of Athenaeus? and his Copy of
the Epitome had differed from Casaubon's? does it follow, that all the Rest did
so too? This is our Critic's admirable Inference; because in Eustathius's Copy
'twas (...), and not (...), therefore one may be certain it was so in all the
Copies, but that which Casaubon used. I can easily bear his Contempt of Me and
my Knowledge, when I find him opposing one of the Greatest Men that ever the
Commonwealth of Learning produced, without so much as the Shadow of an argument
to back him in it.

The Reader, I hope, will pardon me, if I wander a moment or two from my
Subject, to give him a Like Instance of the Unreasonable Freedom Dr. Bentley
takes in reprehending Learned Men, even where there is no manner of Ground for
it. In his Epistle to Dr. Mill At the End of Malala.
, upon mentioning an Anapaestic Verse of Grotius, [ Prisca domos dedit
Indigena] he takes occasion to reprove Him, and with Him Joseph Scaliger, and
All the Moderns, that have written in this sort of Verse, for not knowing the
True Measure of it; which, he says, will never admit of a Trochee, or a a
Tribrach in the End of it, but when there is some kind of Stop and Rest there:
and for this reason Seneca the Tragoedian, he assures us, has not employed a
Trochee in that place above once or twice throughout all his Plays, and then
only when there was a Full Close of the Sense: and concludes, that if Scaliger,
Grotius, and the Rest had lived in Athens or Old Rome, and taken this Liberty
in their Plays, they would have been hissed off the Stage with Infamy for it
Tribrachys est Lo'o Anapasti: quod viti^m commune est Grotio cum Ios.
Scaligero, Flor. Christiano, Al^^sque opinor Omnibus qui Saeculo hoc and
superiore vel Tragoedias Graecas Latin verterunt, vel ipsi scripserunt novas:
quibu^ solenne est Anapaestos suos passim, ubi nulla Clausula est, nec
interpunctum, Trib^achi, vel Trochaeo, vel Cretico terminare. Nae isti, si olim
stante Re Graeca vel Romana suas Fabulas edidissent, Sibilis and (...) Scena
explosi fui^^ent. p. 26. Quin and Seneca Tragicus, ut scias eum de Industria
tem^eravisse, semel tantum atque iterum Trochaeo Anapaest^s clausit, nec nisi
finita senten^ia: qui scilicet Paroemiaco Locus esset, nisi is Scriptor, nescio
cur, versum illum repudiasset. Ibid.
. One would think that Dr. Bentley, with all his Stock of Self-sufficiency,
could not have allowed himself to use such insulting Language toward such
Eminent Men, but when he was perfectly sure of his point: and yet nothing can
be falser and fuller of mistake than what he has here asserted. It is Usual
among the Greek Tragoedians to end their Anapaestick Verses with a Trochee or a
Tribrach, even where there is No Pause; of which I will give him several
Instances out of One Play of Aeschylus........... (...)
(...).
(...). 122
(...)
(...). 156.
(...)
(...) -- (...). 191.
(...)
(...) -- (...). 565.
-- (...)
(...) -- (...). 1084.

: and Seneca is so far from having done this not above once or twice, and where
there was a full Close of the Sense, that I believe he has done it at least
forty or fifty times, where there is either no Close at all, or none beyond a
Comma. I shall give the Dr. as many Instances out of Seneca Trucibus monstris
stetit imposita
Pelion Ossa -- Agam. (...). 337.
-- Spargeret astra
Nubesque ipsas. Med. (...). 334.
Nos Cadmaeis Orgia serre
Tecum s^litae. Oet. v. 594.
Nec Parrhasia lentior arce
Soeva cessit -- Oet. v. 1282.
-- Nunc Corybantes
Arma Idea quassata manu.
Oet. (...). 1877.

, as I have done out of Aeschylus; and then ask him, how he durst oppose men of
Grotius and Scaliger's Character, with such groundless Assertions, as it was in
every-body's power to disprove, that did but cast their Eye on Seneca, and the
Greek Tragoedians?

But to return to our Business -- I have now examined, I think, all that is
material in Dr. Bentley's Objection about the Thericlean Cups, as far as the
Authority of the Letters is concerned in it: his Exception against My way of
Translating the Word shall not be forgotten in its proper place; when I come to
consider the Faults he has found with my Edition and Version.

This has I confess been a Long Article; but the next will make us amends; for
I can hardly persuade my self to say any thing to it. He finds fault with the
Letters, for making Phalaris, in his Address to Pythagoras, call his Doctrine
Philosophy; and Him, in another place, Philosopher Dissert. p. 38.
: why? because Pythagoras himself invented these words Dissert. p. 38.
. Could Phalaris therefore pay him a greater Compliment, than by using 'em?
Queen Elizabeth first coined the Word Foeminilis in a Speech of Hers, as I
remember, to One of the Universities; could that Body have showed her an
handsomer piece of respect, than by using that very Word to Her afterward as
freely, as if it had been of the best Age of Latin? Phythagoras affected to be
called Philosopher, and framed the Term to that very End and Purpose: Before
his time, not only the Wise and Learned, but even Ordinary Artificers, that
were Skilful in their Way, were in Common Speech The use in some measure
continued afterward, as we learn from Aristotle.

Ethic. l. 7, c. 7.
styled (...) (...), etc.

Nic. Geras. l. 1, Arith.
; and Pythagoras, I suppose, had a mind to distinguish This I take to be a
truer account of his assuming the Name, than the Pretense that is usually made
for it, his Modesty.
himself from 'em. Would Dr. Bentley have had Phalaris, when he designed him an
Honor, rob him of the Title he was most fond of? He knew better how to Please
the Man he was to Profit by: as little Good Nature as he had left, yet he had
some Civility, and a great deal of Sense; and by the help of these, escaped
that Absurd Management, which Dr. Bentley, I find, had he been advised with,
would have put him upon.

But how came the Fame of so small a Business [as Pythagoras's assuming this
Name] to reach Phalaris 's Ear? He may as well ask, how he came to hear his
Name was Pythagoras? Fame, that told him the One, must tell him the Other too,
after once Pythagoras had set up his Pretensions; and I desire Dr. Bentley to
prove that Phalaris ever named him so before: and till he does That, the
Epistles are safe from any Harm that this small Objection can do 'em.

Before I go further, I must observe to the Reader an Instance of Dr. Bentley's
great Goodness, which deserves to be taken notice of: I could show (says he)
from a whole Crowd of Authors, that Pythagoras first invented the word: but I
content my self with Two. To content himself with Two Quotations, when he could
produce so Many; and that upon so Clear and Manifest a point, that he need not
have produced Any, (in which Cases He is usually most Liberal of his Learning)
is no Common Favor; and I ought therefore (as I do) thankfully to own it. It
almost tempts me to drop a Question or two that I had to ask him here; as, what
he means by saying, that Pythagoras first named Philosophy? whether, that he
first named That Philosophy, which before was called Wisdom? and why, if he
meant so, he did not say so (...), says Laertius, whom he translates; but it
follows presently, (...): which makes the Expression not so improper in
Laertius's Greek, as Dr. Bentley's English.
? And what again he would be at, when he tells us, that Pythagoras invented the
word first? and who it was that Invented it Last? Something too I had to say to
him about Nurses talking Philosophy Dissertat. p. 39.
: But he has been very merciful in this Paragraph; and I forgive in my Turn.

There is still behind One Exception to the Credit of the Epistles, taken from
the Names of some Tragoedians, there, and no where else to be found; and from
the Age and Date of Tragedy it self. The Section in which this Argument is
managed is a short one, but very fruitful in Mistakes, and those of the First
Rate; for which reason, and because it is the Last trouble of the kind I am
likely to give the Reader, I shall insist upon it somewhat largely.

Aristolochus and Lysinus, he says, are Two Tragic Poets that Nobody ever
heard of P. 39.
, and in another place, with great Humor, he calls 'em Two Fairy Tragoedians P.
120.
: though methinks One of 'em at least seems not to be of the Race of those Little
Beings; one would guess Aristolochus, by his Name, to be rather a Giant than a
Fairy. But to let that pass, -- Is he sure, that Neither of these Poets can be
traced in Old Writers? what does he think of the Numerus Aristolochius In the
Text, as it stands printed Now, it is Archebolion: upon which Ludovicus Carrio
has this Note, Vulgo Aristolochium, Membranae Aristodolium: so that Some
Editions (from Some MSS, I suppose) have it Aristolochium; or if the Editors
made this change without the authority of MSS, 'twas because they knew more of
this Aristolochus than I own I do.
in the Nameless Piece usually printed with Censorinus? does it not come from
Aristolochus, a Poet; as the Numerus Aristophanius in the same Chapter does
from Aristophanes? But because the MSS differ in this passage, I will not
insist upon it. I will allow him, for the present, that Nobody ever heard of
either of these Tragoedians but in Phalaris; and I will give him a good reason
for it: neither their Works, nor their Names were worth preserving. Phalaris
has drawn their Characters in short; the One of 'em he calls a very foolish
Fellow (...)

Ep. 97.
* and the other a Sorry Poet, and an Impotent Adversary (...)

Ep. 68.
: and the Writings of such Men can never last; nor even their Names, but by the
Help of better Writers: and by the way therefore I would advise Dr. Bentley not
to be too Vain upon his Performances. Bavius and Moevius had a Scornful Verse
bestowed upon 'em by Virgil; and That it self would have made 'em
Scandalously-well known to Posterity, though No one else should ever have named
'em. If Sir William Temple should make such a Slighting Mention of Dr. Bentley
in any of his Future Writings, He too will Live by that means, and not
otherwise. Will the Dr. expunge out of the Catalogue of Mankind, (as his
Terrible Words are Dissert. p. 118.
) all Poets that have the III Luck to be mentioned but Once in Old Authors? I
thought, as a Critic, and a Philologer, he would have had more Regard for an
(...). What, at this rate, will become of Poor Xenocles and Pythangelus? (Two
Tragoedians, just of the same size with our Two Fairy ones) whom Aristophanes
once mentioned with contempt, as Phalaris does These, and Whom (at least the
First of 'em) Dr. Bentley will be hard put to it to find mentioned by anybody
besides him. But not having considered This Piece of History sufficiently, I
will not be positive in it: there is Another, in which I have somewhat better
Grounds to go upon; it is the Instance of Chlonthachonthlus. He was no Poet
indeed, but pretty near akin to one, a Lymaker by Profession, and a famous
Misrepresenter. Perhaps the Dr. has never heard of him to this day; and perhaps
he will know as little of him two or three Years hence, as he does now: and yet I
assure him He Is to be met with in a Celebrated Greek Author, in Whom he lies
buried, and unknown to many of the Great Lights of the Commonwealth of
Learning, because that Good Author has the Misfortune to be put out without a
Good Index. Now I Will undertake to trace Aristolochus, or Lysinus, as soon as
Dr. Bentley shall Chlonthachonthlus: and when he lights upon him, he will find,
that the Author, where he is, is confessedly Genuine, notwithstanding he
mentions this unheard of Monster of a Man, whom nobody ever mentioned since or
before him.

But Dr. Bentley has a better Objection than the Silence of Authors against
these Tragoedians; he says, they could not have a being in Phalaris's time,
because there was then no such thing as Tragoedy it self: neither the Word nor
Thing being known, while Phalaris tyrannized at Agrigentum. But Thespis was the
first Inventor of it, who acted his First Tragoedy twelve Years after the Death
of Phalaris: and both the Name and the Thing were then (and not till then) born
together Dissert. p. 90.
. In Opposition to this, I shall endeavor to make out these Three things:
first, that, granting Thespis to have been the Inventor of Tragoedy, yet he
found it out early enough for Phalaris to have the use of the Word from him: in
the next place, that Tragoedy was much Older than Thespis; and that He was only
the Improver, but not the Inventer of it: and yet further, that the Word
Tragoedy was more ancient than the Thing, which we now understand by it. I
think these Three Points to be clear beyond dispute: if the Reader, after I
have produced my Proofs, thinks so too, he will, I suppose, have a less Opinion
of Dr. Bentley's Learning and Modesty than even he has already, and be
something nearer toward thinking these Epistles Genuine.

Let us suppose for the present, that Thespis was the Inventer, (or as Dr.
Bentley Emphatically speaks) the First Inventer of Tragoedy; it is plain,
Phalaris might have the use of the word from him. That Thespis was Cotemporary
with Solon, Plutarch Vit. Sol.
and Diogenes Laertius in Solone.
expressly affirm; telling us very particularly what passed between ' Solon and
Thespis, in relation to the Plays of the Latter. And this account of Thespis's
age Our Dissertator himself, in his Soft Epistle to Dr. Mill Neque Thespis ea
quarentur tempestate vixit; nam Solonis aequalis suit. P. 46.
allows. Now Solon was Archon Olympiad XLVI. 3 Sosicrates, quoted by Diog.
Laert. in Solon. Eusebius in his Chronicon, puts it a Year later.
; Phalaris began his Reign Ol. LIII. 3, and ended it Ol. LVII. 3, according to
the account which Dr. Bentley Dissertat. p. 15.
allows. So that between the Beginning of Solon's and the End of Phalaris's
Government there are full 44 Years: Time enough in Conscience, for the Word
Tragoedy to come from Athens to Agrigent! And Eusebius's Chronicon allows near
as much Room for it, placing the Rise of Tragoedy at the 47th Olympiad, a
little after Solon's Archonship. But to take our account at the very lowest,
let us suppose that Thespis's first Plays were those that Solon saw, toward
the Latter End of his Life. Solon died at the end of the LIII, or the beginning
of the LIVE Olympiad Plut. Vit. Sol.
, that is, a Year or two after Phalaris took the Tyranny upon him. Take Two or
Three Years before Solon's death, when Thespis is supposed by this Low account
first to have written; and from thence to the End of Phalaris's Reign there is
a space of about 17 Years, for Phalaris to hear of Thespis's Tragoedies: for it
does not appear, but that those Letters, where the Word (...) occurrs, might
have been written at the very End of his Tyranny. However, let 'em have been
written in the middle, or at the very beginning of it, yet still there will be
time enough for Phalaris to learn this new word in. That Pisistratus seized the
Government of Athens some Years before Solon's death, Dr. Bentley, I dare say,
will grant me: that he was turned out in, or rather before Phalaris's Reign, he
will not I hope deny me; because he has owned it in Terms, p. 41. of his
Dissertation. Allowing then that Solon and Thespis were Cotemporary, there can
be no doubt, whether Phalaris might hear of Thespis's Tragoedies.

All that can startle us in the case is the Authority of the Arundel Marble,
which fixes the acting of Alcestis, one of Thespis's Plays, as low as the 60th
Olympiad. But that all the Aera's of that Marble are not rightly adjusted, is
certain, and Learned Men have proved beyond dispute: and if there be mistakes
in it, why may not this be one of 'em? when what is said there is contradicted
by such an Universal Concurrence of almost all the History of those times,
which we have left? Dr. Bentley I am sure ought not to insist on the Authority
of the Marble in this case, because He himself has quitted it in an Instance of
the like Nature. The Arundelian Marble indeed (says he) differs from all these
in the periods of Gelo and Hiero; which would quite confound all this
argumentation from Notes of Time. But either that Chronologer is quite out; or
we can safely believe nothing in History. Dissert. p. 85. The Mistake of the
Marble may be in putting Thespis's name instead of Phrynicus his Scholar: and
Alcestis the name of the Play would make one think so, which Suidas expressly
mentions as one of Phrynicus's; but is no where, that I can find, reckoned
among Thespis's. And such a Mistake might easily, I suppose, arise from the
Negligence of the Graver, who, when he had gone as far as (...), might throw
his Eye upon a Lower Line, where there was an account of Phrynichus's Age, and
finding the Word (...) there exactly in the same Situation, might think himself
right, and go on with the rest that followed it: which is a Case that is known
often to have happened in the copying of MSS; and may the rather be supposd to
have happened here, because the next Era in the Marble falls as low as Olymp.
67; before which time it is not to be doubted but the Alcestis of Phrynichus
(that Phrynichus, who was Thespis's Scholar) was acted.

But without the help of this Conjecture, and without laying aside the
Authority of the Marble, what is said there may possibly be true, and yet
Plutarch's and Laertius's accounts be true too, and the Epistles Genuine. For
some of Thespis's Plays might be acted in Solon's time, that is, about the 53d
Olympiad; and yet his Alcestis be shown not till about the 60th; which being a
Play written after a great Experience, and when he was in his Maturest
Judgment, might be the Best of his Works, for ought I, or Dr. Bentley, can
tell, and That by which he carried the Prize from his Rivals; and the fittest
therefore to be taken notice of to Posterity. The Dr. indeed says, it was his
First; and says it in such a manner, as if the Marble had said it before him:
but that is only according to his Usual Way of putting History upon us. All the
Inconvenience that arises from hence, is, that Thespis must then be supposed to
have written Plays at the distance of at least Seven whole Olympiads: and what
if he be? there was yet a greater distance between Aristophanes's First and his
Last Play; even the Interval of Nine entire Olympiads, or 36 Year. And I
believe, it is much about the same time, since Mr. Dryden wrote his First Play;
and the World has lately had a very convincing Instance, that he is not yet
disabl'd. Should Dr. Bentley pretend it is improbable, that if Alcestis were
Thespis's Best play, it should not be mentioned by Suidas; my answer is, that I
think it is as improbable, that Suidas should not mention it, if it were his
First: and therefore I have told him my Opinion before, that it was neither his
First, nor Last; but Phrynichus's Play erroneously applied to him by the
Marble-Graver.

I have not mentioned Suidas's Testimony about the Age of Thespis, because I
think it of no manner of Consequence; he being so often and so egregiously out
in things of this nature, by the faultiness of the MSS we now have of him or
the Errors of those Authors which he at a venture transcribes. I confess, as he
stands now, he seems to bring Thespis somewhat lower than even the Marble may
be supposed to do; for he says, he flourished (...), in the 61st Olympiad: but
it is observable, that the Decads in this Number are not expressed by a Word,
but a Numeral Letter, which is more liable to alteration; and a (...) therefore
might easily creep into the place of a (...): the restoring of which would make
his account consistent with better Authorities Itaque ut rest monuit Meursius
in Solone, graviter errat Suidas, qui in (...) Olymp. 61 eum fabulas primum
docuisse scribit. Menag. Comm. in Solon.
However that may be, Dr. Bentley must remember, that He himself has produced
P. 46.
this account in his Letter after Malala, as Consistent with Plutarch's Story,
which makes Thespis contemporary with Solon; and is obliged therefore to
reconcile the One with the Other, as much as I am: and he must remember too,
that Suidas in the same place tells us, that Thespis was the Sixteenth
Tragoedian from Epigenes Sicyonius; and if he admits This part of his account,
he will lose as much by it, as he gains by the Other.

For whether Thespis was as ancient as Solon it matters not much, if Tragoedy
was yet more ancient than He: and that it was so, there are such Plain and
Pregnant Testimonies as are not to be withstood. Plato's words on this occasion
are very remarkable and full. Tragoedy, says he, is of ancient Usage in this
Country, nor did it take its Rise from Thespis and Phrynichus, as Some Imagine
(it seems, for Dr. Bentley's comfort, there were Men Ignorant enough, even in
Plato's Time, to think so) but if You consider the thing well, You will find,
that it is extremely ancient (...) etc.

Plato in Minoc.
: and the Reason of his introducing this Reflection shows, that he thought it
almost as ancient as Minos. I was aware of this Objection from the Date of
Tragoedy, when I put out Phalaris; and thought therefore that I had prevented
it by a short Note on the 97th Epistle, where I referred the Reader to this
Passage in Plato. Dr. Bentley, who has made so free an use of many Hints in my
Book, against Phalaris, should not in Justice have overlooked this Note, which
made so strongly for him: but I find he has the Secret of seeing nothing in an
Author, but what serves to countenance his Own Opinions.

Plato's Testimony needs no Support with any man that justly esteems him; which
for fear Dr. Bentley should not, I will produce another Witness, whose
Character and Works, I believe, are better known to him: It is Diogenos
Laertius, who in the Life of Plato has these Words, ANCIENTLY (says he) the
Chorus did alone sustain the Tragoedy; AFTERWARD Thespis found out One Actor,
and gave the Chorus time to breathe (...) etc.
: to whom Aeschylus, he tells us, added a Second; and Sophocles, a Third. So
that Tragoedy, according to His Opinion too, was more ancient than Thespis; and
He only an Improver of it.

Laertius's account falls in exactly with what Aristotle has said on the same
Subject, as far as Aristotle goes; only it is more particular and full.
Aristotle In his Poetry.
, reckoning up the Gradual Advances that had been made toward the perfection
of Tragoedy, after its First Establishment, tell us, just as Laertius does,
that Aeschylus improved it mightily, by bringing a Second Actor on the Stage;
and that Sophocles perfected it by the addition of a Third. Thespis's Invention
of a First Actor is here implied also, though it be not expressed: and indeed it
was not to Aristotle's purpose to mention it, when he was considering the
Improvements of Tragoedy, as an Artificial Poem, which had a Fable, and an
Action distinct from that of the Chorus; that is indeed, as it came out of the
Hands of Thespis, who in this respect must be owned to have been the Founder
rather than the Improver of it. The not considering these Two different States
and Conditions of Tragoedy is what has bred great Confusion in the Writings of
the Critics, and led Dr. Bentley into all his Numerous Errors in this point.
If he will suffer himself to be taught by so Inconsiderable a Writer as I am, I
will endeavor to set him right, and to give him a Clearer Account of it.

Tragoedy at first was nothing but an Hymn to the honor of Bacchus, sung by a
Number of Peasants, after their Vintage was over, whilst the Goat lay bleeding
upon the Altar. The Company that performed this Sacred Song, either
alternately, or all together, as it happened, were what in Succeeding Times was
called the Chorus; in which therefore it must be remembered that the Foundation
of Tragoedy was laid. Afterward the Subject of Tragoedy was much altered and
varied: for the Composers of those Songs together with the Praises of Bacchus
joined the Encomiums of Great and Famous Persons; and Satirical Reproofs Ibid.
also of the Vicious Men, and Manners of their Times. But still All this was
performed by the Chorus; and (as Laertius observes) continued so to be till
Thespis's time. He, to please the Audience, and relieve the Chorus, brought a
Single Actor upon the Stage; who, at fit Intervals, came out from the Rest, and
imitated the Actions of some Illustrious Person, and retired again, when the
Chorus had taken breath; which was still the most Considerable Part of the
Entertainment. However by this Invention a new Turn was given to Tragoedy, the
Business of the Chorus was lessened, and part of it brought into the hands of a
single Actor, and something like a Plot, or Fable was introduced. Aeschylus
improved upon this Model, and grew still more upon the Chorus, by adding a
Second Aeschylus employed sometimes a Third Actor too, but rarely.
Actor, and diversifying the Fable; and Sophocles at last completed the Poem,
by the addition of a Third. And by this time the Chorus, which was at first
Essential to Tragoedy, and did all in it, was grown only an Accessory Ornament
of it; and employed to relieve the Actors in the same manner that the Actors
were at first found out to relieve That. Nay, to see the fate of things, the
Chorus, which was anciently the Play it self, now served only to represent the
Spectators, and to suggest such Reflections as They, observing what passed upon
the Stage, were supposed to make.

Tragoedy being now a thing so very different from what it was before, and
Thespis having made the first Step toward this great Change, it is no Wonder
that He should be called sometimes the Author of it; that is, the Author of
that Sort of Tragoedy, which consisted in Imitation, and a Fable, exclusive to
the Necessity of a Chorus; and which had now, among the Men of Art, who spoke
nicely, and reasoned subtly about things, almost engrossed the Name. I say,
exclusive of the Necessity of a Chorus: for though, in remembrance of the first
Rise of Tragoedy, and in compliance with the Ceremonies of Religion, the Chorus
was still retained; yet it came in only by the bye as it were, and the Action,
upon which the Play turned, was Entire and Perfect without it.

What was said of Tragoedy then in the Second and more Confined Sense of the
word, Dr. Bentley in his great Wisdom and Learning took as said of it at large,
and pronounced at a venture, that there was no such Thing as Tragoedy before
Thespis's time, because there was no such thing as that Sort of Tragoedy which
Thespis invented: which is as if I should say, the Italians first found out
Opera's, a Bastard Sort of Tragoedy, in these Latter Days; and therefore the
Italians first found out Tragoedy. There is no difference in the case but this,
that what the Italians did was a Debasement of Tragoedy, whereas Thespis's
Invention was an Improvement of it; but still Tragoedy it self was equally
before the Improvement of the One and the Debasement of the other.

Our Critic was not contented to make but One Mistake on this Point; He has
doubled it, by urging also a mistaken Authority for it: for those Verses of
Horace, which He, out of the Depth of his Reading, produces on this occasion,
are far from countenancing his Rash Assertions. At first sight indeed he might
think they did; but a Second Thought (and such Thoughts, one of his Greek
Proverbs says, are the Best) would have informed him, that Horace had expressed
himself with the utmost Caution in this matter; and distinguished Critically
between that Sort of Tragoedy, which was before Thespis's time, and That which
Thespis himself introduced. Ignotum Tragicae Genus invenisse Camaenae
Dicitur, and Plaustris vexisse Poemata Thespis.
It was Ignotum Genus Tragicae Camaenae, an Unknown Kind of Tragic Poetry,
which Thespis found out; and that implys, I think, that there was Another Kind
of Tragic Poetry in use before him. And that this is no New Interpretation of
the Words, made to serve a Turn, the Dr. may be satisfied, if he pleases to
consult the Commentators on the place: they are not in Greek indeed, but they
speak as Good Sense, as if they were; and some of the Best of 'em give this
very account of it.

Upon this Bottom we can answer for all the unwary Expressions, that may have
dropped at any time from the Pens of Old Writers, in relation to Thespis;
particularly for that Passage in Plutarch In the Life of Solon.
, where he represents Thespis, and those of his time as (...) What he means by
that Ambiguous Phrase, may be disputed; whether it be not, that They first gave
Life and Motion to Tragoedy, as they certainly did, by taking it in some
measure out of the Hands of the Chorus, and making it an Imitative, or Dramatic
Poem: but whatever he means, I think I have proved, that he could not mean,
consistently with History, that there was no such thing as Tragoedy of any kind
before the days of Thespis. I add, that neither could he mean this, and be
consistent with Himself: for he expressly tells us in another place In the Life
of Theseus.
, that the Acting of Tragoedies was One part of the Funeral Solemnities which
the Athenians performed at the Tomb of Theseus.

The Reader may remember a Reflection quoted from Vellejus Pate^culus toward
the beginning of this Discourse, where Homer is represented as the Author of
Epic Poetry, and Archilochus of Iambicks, or the Epode: not that they were
either of them so, strictly speaking; for Aristotle tells us, that there were
many Epic Poems before Homer, though they happened to be lost; and that Homer's
Margites was written (interchangably in Heroic and Iambic Verse) long before
Archilochus. Paterculus's meaning was, or should have been, that they each of
'em brought the several Sorts of Poetry they practiced, and which before them
were rough and unfinished, to such a degree of perfection, as that they justly
deserved to be called the Fathers of 'em. And in This Sense it is that we must
understand those Authors, who make Thespis the Inventor of Tragoedy; or allow,
that they spoke inconsiderately, and against the Clear Truth of History. I
question not, but some Hundreds of Years hence, Butler will be thought the
Author of English Burlesque, though there were many Little things written in that
way, before His Hudibras: but He having so far outstripp'd those that wrote
before him, and carried that Sort of Verse up to such a Pitch of Excellence,
will probably be esteemed and called the Inventer of it; and his Predecessors
not be thought worth mentioning or remembering.

By this time I hope the Reader is satisfied, that Two of the Three points
which Dr. Bentley has advanced on this head, are altogether mistaken; that,
allowing Thespis to have been the Author of Tragoedy, yet he might have
invented it time enough for Phalaris to hear of it; and that Thespis was not
the first, but (to comply with the Dr's manner of speaking) the Second Inventer
of it. His Third Assertion is yet more extravagant, and further from all Color
of Truth, than either of the former: it will be easy to confute it, if we can
but understand it.

Neither was the Name of Tragoedy (says he P. 40.
) more ancient than the Thing -- What does he mean? Names I thought were
invented to signify Things; and that the Things themselves therefore must be
before the Names by which they are called: but he opens himself, -- as
sometimes it happens when an Old Word is borrowed and applied to a New Notion.
Right! it sometimes happens that a Word is Older than the Thing to which it is
applied; but Names can never be before the Things they belong to. But to
forgive him This want of Exactness, among a Thousand, I agree perfectly with
him, that the Word Tragoedy was not more ancient than the Thing; they were, as
he says, born together, or at least pretty near one-another: but for that very
reason I infer, that the Word Tragoedy was long before Thespis, because I have
proved that the Thing it self was: and he could not therefore favor my
pretensions more, than by allowing that they were born together. However, this
Twin-Birth must be understood of Tragoedy in its first Infant State, as it took
its rise from the Dithyrambicks of Bacchus; for the Name of Tragoedy was
undoubtedly more ancient than the Thing, that is now, or has generally been for
Two thousand Years understood by it. It cannot reasonably be questioned, but
that those Bacchic Hymns they sung in Chorus round their Altars (from whence
the Regular Tragoedy came) were called by this Name; the Etymology of the word
shows that it belonged to 'em; for whether it be derived from (...) [ vindemia]
or from (...) [ hircus], joined with (...) in which the Grammarians are divided
There is a Third Etymology of the word from (...), the Lees of wine, and (...):
but the Reason of it falls in with that of the first.
) either way it very naturally expresses some of the Great Circumstances of
that Solemnity: according to its First Derivation, it points out the Time of
it, which was upon the Gathering in of their Vintage (...) Exce. Athen. p. 40.
; according to its Second, the Sacrifice it self, at the Offering of which
these Odes were sung.

But as to This we are in the dark, and have only Probabilities to guide us; it
may with more assurance be said, that under the word Tragoedy both Tragoedy and
Comoedy were at first comprehended: which double Use of the Word continued
also, after these Two Sorts of Dramatic Poetry were sufficiently distinguished;
as we may learn from Athenaeus (...) etc. as above.
, from Aristophanes, and his Scholiast In his Notes on this Verse in (...),
Act. 2, Sc. 5. (...) And again in his Notes on this Verse in (...) etc. p. 476.
And in the 12th book of Athenaus, c. 13, there is a Fragment of Aristophanes's
(...) preserved, where (...) signifies a Comoedian, -- (...) -- (...) The same
word (...) signifies Tragoedy, properly so called, in this Passage of
Aristophanes, (...) -- (...) ((...). Act. 2, Sc. 3.) for This is spoken of
Euripides. Beside These, there are Two other Passages in the Prolegomena to
Aristophanes: -- (...) etc. Prol. ad Arist. (...) -- (...) Ibid.
and from Hesychius Hesych. in Voce (...)
If This be so, and Comedy was more ancient than Thespis, as I have proved
before P. 140, 141.
in these Papers, it is clear that the Word Tragoedy was before Thespis too. I
will detain the Reader no longer upon so plain and known a point, and which I
did not think any man, that had the least Skill in these matters, would have
put me to the trouble of proving.

I have mentioned once or twice the Early Mixture of Satyr and Ridicule that
crept into this Serious Poem; it certainly did so, and continued very long in
it, even after Comoedy set up for a distinct sort; and it is to be thought,
even to the days of Thespis himself, if not afterward. His movable Stage, a
Cart, was not probably free from that Scurrility and Buffoonery which were so
usually uttered from that place, that (...), and ( b) (...), (...). -- Demosth.
contra Aesch. 37.
became Proverbial Expressions for Satyr and Jeering. I desire this may be
observed, because it gives us an easy and natural account of that expression
in Phalaris [(...)] which Dr. Bentley has made such hideous work with: for the
meaning of that is no more than this, that they wrote Lampoons, or Satirical
Verses upon him; with which the Tragoedies before and about his time (I have
said) were usually twisted. So that though Phalaris could not be the argument of
Tragoedy while he lived, (as our Critic learnedly objects) yet he might be the
argument of that Sort of Satyr which usually accompanied Tragoedy: and the Dr.
may perhaps, before he dies, have a convincing Proof, that a Man may be the
Subject of such Tragoedies, while he is Living.

And now, upon the whole, is not Dr. Bentley a most Discreet Writer? who has
chosen out such an argument to prove Phalaris Spurious, as his best Friends
would have pitched upon to prove him Genuine? for (...) in the days of Phalaris
took into its signification somewhat of a Lampoon, or Abusive Copy of Verses,
according to the Use of it in the Epistles: but it had nothing of that Sense in
the Sophist's time, let the Dr. place him as high as he can.

I have nothing more to say to the Dr. upon any of his Arguments against the
Authority of Phalaris; I have considered 'em All, with great Fairness, I am
sure, and, I fear, with more Exactness than they will be thought to deserve. I
will not follow his Pattern so far, as to shut up these Reflections by saying,
that I have had too much Regard to him in giving him the Honor and Patience of
so long an Examination Dissert* p. 65.
: the Regard I had was to my Self, and to those Excellent Persons, who were
injured on my account; and, to do right to Them, averse as I am to Employments
of this nature, I could think no Trouble too great, no Task too mean.

If I am capable of judging either of Dr. Bentley's Performances, or my Own,
the Case stands thus between us: Of the Five General Arguments he has produced,
the Four first are Evidently against him; neither the Dialect, nor the Age of
the Greek, nor the way of Counting by Talents, nor the Matter and Business of
the Letters, can in the least shock a Considering Reader; the Only Point that
can possibly prejudice him, is that of their Lying hid for a Thousand Years:
and how far I have taken off the Force of this Objection the World must judge.

Among his Particular Proofs, That which relates to the Towns is so involved in
Obscurity, that I must own it is perfectly cleared on neither Side: that Three
of 'em, notwithstanding what He has said* may be as Old as Phalaris, I think I
have made out; and for the Fourth, Tauromenium, I have shown that the Single
Author he depends upon gives Inconsistent Accounts of it: and should either of
those accounts be admitted, I have further shown, that the Epistles no where
necessarily imply, that there was such a Town when They were written.

The Proverbs and Expressions found in Later Authors, are such Slight and
Insignificant Objections, that it is no piece of Vanity to say, I have
effectually removed 'em

And as to his Words of Art, the First of 'em, about the Thericlean Cups, has
indeed a Show of Proof, but no Proof at the bottom; the Next, taken from the
Term Philosophy, has not so much as the Show of a Proof: and the Last, from
Tragoedy, is indeed a Proof, and a Good One; but it makes directly against him.

There are then in his Whole Dissertation but Three Points, that can be thought
to affect the Epistles even by a Careless Reader; That of their Lying hid for a
Thousand Years, that of Tauromenium, and that of Thericles: Of these the Two
First he borrowed from Me -- Sunt cur dubitem an Phalaris jure vendic^t suas.
Neque enim facile poterant Literae and a Viro tam insigni scriptae, and in suo
genere absolutae, ultra mill annos ignotae penitus latere --

Quod si vera refert Diodorus Siculus, Tauromenium, ad cujus cives hic Auctor
scribit, and conditam fuisse, and eo nomine donatam post Naxum a Dionysio
Juniore dirutam, actum est de Phalaridis Titulo, and ruit omnis male sustentata
Conjecturis Authoritas. Praef. Phalar.


, without acknowledging the Debt, or making the least Improvement of Either;
the Last he was probably so happy as to light upon in turning a Dictionary: all
that Glitter of Quotations, with which he shines upon this Article, was drawn
from Honest Hesychius, one of the great Storehouses of his Alphabetical
Learning.

The only thing in his Piece, that is clearly made out, and may seem material,
is his Proof of Ocellus Lucanu^'s being Genuine: but it is such an one, as
proves at the same time, that Phalaris too may be Genuine, and destroys the
force of all he said upon the Article of the Dialect; and is so far from being
New and his Own (as he has the Modesty to pretend) that it is taken Word for
Word out of an Author Vizzanius.
that writ above fifty Years ago; the Scarcity of whose Book, and the
Probability of not being traced, encouraged him to set up for a Discoverer.

This is a Short and True Account of Dr. Bentley's Whole Performance: if he be
of Opinion, that I have undervalu'd any of his Arguments, I am willing, Weary
as I am, to try 'em upon Another Subject; to propose 'em in their Natural Light
and Force, and see whether he will admit the Conclusion.

IF Dr. Bentley's Dissertations should outlive some Centuries, which I am far
from thinking they will; and should be read, which I am still farther from
suspecting: and should the Critics of succeeding Ages start an impertinent
Dispute, whether they be Genuine or not; I am of opinion as Strong and
Concluding Arguments may be brought to prove 'em Spurious, and falsely ascribed
to Dr. Bentley, as any the Dr. has used to show the Letters now in Debate to be
a Thousand Years Later than Phalaris. They may carry the Dr's Name in the Front
of 'em, as the Letters do that of the Tyrant; but Those who examine 'em
closely, and try 'em by the Rules of Criticism, which the Dr. has here
established, will easily Discover the Imposture. For we will suppose, that
after those Papers have lain hid and neglected for some Ages, they may
unluckily fall into the hands of a Critic, who has Leisure and Ill Nature
enough to trouble Himself and the World with a Nice Enquiry, whether they are
Genuine, or not: I think he would, or might, in Dr. Bentley's Way and Manner,
and for the most part in his very Words too, argue against their being truly
His to whom they are ascribed. The lines that have Comma's on the side are in
Dr. Bentley 's own Language.
The Sophist, whoever he was, that wrote these Loose Dissertations in the Name
and Character of Dr. Bentley, (give me leave to say this now which I shall
prove by and by) had not so bad an Hand at humoring and personating, but that
Some may believe it is the Librarian himself who talks so big; and may not
discover the Ass under the Skin of that Lion Disser. p. 11.
in Criticism and Philology. But I shall examine Dr. Bentley's Title to these
Dissertations, and shall not go to dispossess him by an Arbitrary Sentence in
his own Dogmatical Way, but proceed with him upon a Lawful Evidence, and a fair
Impartial Trial. And I am very much mistaken in the Nature and Force of my
Proofs, if ever any man hereafter that reads them persist in his Opinion of
making Dr. Bentley the Author of these Criticisms Ibid p. 13.
.

Had all other ways failed us of detecting this Impostor, yet his very Speech
had betrayed him, for it is neither that of a Scholar, nor an Englishman;
neither Greek, Latin, nor English, but a Medley of all Three: He had forgot
that the Scene of these Writings was London, where the English Tongue was
generally spoken and written; as, besides other Testimonies, the very thing
speaks it self in the Remains of London Authors, as the Gazetts, the Cases
written by London Divines, and others. How comes it to pass then that our Dr.
writes not in English, but in a Language farther removed from the true English
Idiom than the Doric Greek was from the Attic Ibid. p. 40, 41.
? Why does Dr. Bentley, an Englishman, write a New Language, which no
Englishman before ever wrote or spoke? How comes his Speech neither to be that
of the Learned, nor that of his Country? but a mixed part colored Dialect,
formed out of both? Pray, how came that Idiom to be the Court-language at St.
James's Dissert. p. 41.
?

But should we allow, that in some Past Age such a Manner of Speech might have
prevailed among Englishmen, yet there will still lie another Indictment against
the Credit of these Dissertations, on the account of the English of the true
Age of Dr. Bentley not being there represented, but a more Recent Idiom and
Style, that by the whole Thread and Color of it betrays it self to be written
in an Age very distant from His. Every Living Language, like the Perspiring
Bodies of Living Creatures, is in perpetual Motion and Alteration; which in
Tract of time makes as observable a Change in the Air and Features of a
Language, as Age makes in the Lines and Mien of Face. All are sensible of this
in their own Native Tongues where continual Use makes every man a Critic: so
that there is no Englishman but thinks himself able from the very Turn and
Fa^^om of the Style to distinguish a fresh Composition from another an hundred
Years old Dissert. p. 57.
. Now when we compare these Dissertations with the Writings of Archbishop
Tillotson, Bishop Sprat, Sir William Temple, and Others, we find the Style of
that Age had quite different Turn and Fashion from that of our Dissertator.
Should I affirm that I know the Novity of these Dissertations from the whole
Body and Form of the Work, none perhaps would be convin^^d by it, but those
that, without my Indication, could discover it by themselves. I shall let that
alone then, and point out only a few Marks and Moles in 'em, which every one
that pleases may know them by Dissert. p. 52.
. In the 14th page, the most timid; for which the Ancients would have said, the
most doubtful, or scrupulous: in the 46th, Negoce; for which they would have
said Dealing, Commerce, or Intercourse: in the 47th, repudiated their
Vernacular Idiom; for which they would have said, laid aside their
Mother Tongue: in the 16th page, a small Dose of Sagacity; for which they
perhaps would have said a small Share: in the 59th, Manufacture, for the
forging of a Story; never used by the Ancients in that Sense, but always for
the work of the Hand, not that of the Brain. They that will make the search,
may find more of this sort, as brittle Compliments P. 22.
, incurable Botches Ibid.
, broaching of expressions P. 28.
, lopping off branches of Evidence P. 29.
, a Scene of Putid Formality P. 58.
; Men springing up like Mushrooms out of Rotten Passages of Authors P. 118.
, and many others of the same Strain: but I suppose these are sufficient to
unmask the Recent Sophist under the Person of the Old Librarian P. 53.


But were it possible to produce an Author of the same Country and Age with Dr.
Bentley, who wrote in the Language of this Dissertation, yet still it is absurd
to think that one of his Education, Character, and Station should be the Author
of it. For Dr. Bentley is known to have appertained to the Family of a Right
Reverend Prelate, who was the Great Ornament of that Age, to have had an
University-Education, to have conversed much in the City and at Court; and with
these advantages he could not but be more refined than the Writer of this piece
of Criticism: who by his manner of expressing himself shows, that he was taken
up with quite other thoughts and different Images from those that use to fill
the Heads of such as have had a Learned and Liberal Education. For this Sophist
is a perfect Dorian in his Language, in his Thoughts, and in his Breeding. The
familiar expressions, of taking one tripping P. 27.
, coming off with a whole Skin P. 32.
, minding his hitts P. 34.
, a friend at a pinch P. 36.
, going to blows P. 57.
, setting horses together P. 65.
, and going to pott P. 63.
; with others borrowed from the Sports and Employments of the Country, show our
Author to have been accustomed to another sort of Exercise, than that of the
Schools.

Some Persons perhaps may Gratuitously undertake to Apologize for Dr. Bentley
about this matter of the Dialect Dissert. p. 43.
: they may plead in his behalf, that he was born in some Village remote from
Town, and bred among the Peasantry while Young; and for that reason might ever
after have a Twang of the Country Dialect. Now if any one know an Express
Testimony that he was bred in the Country, he can teach me more than I at
present remember. This I know in general P. 45.
from Anthony Wood, and others, that many have come from the Employments of the
Country to be Doctors in the University; and so He may come in among the rest.
But then must his Language be ever afterward Doric, because he had once
Footing in a Country Town Ibid.
? The same Author tells us of several born and bred in the Country, who yet in
Process of Time have learnt to speak a different Dialect from that of their
Mother-Village. Why then must Dr. Bentley's Dialect still needs be Doric? and
that so tenaciously, that twenty Years living in the Universities and City
could not at all alter it in one of that Education P. 46.
? He was part of that time a Library Keeper to a Learned Dean, and afterward
to His Majesty; a Member of one University, and a Sojourner in the other; a
Chaplain in Ordinary to the King, and a Tutor in Extraordinary to a Young
Gentleman: and could not that Perpetual Negoce and Converse with Gentlemen and
Scholars bring his Mouth by degrees to speak a little finer? Would not he that
aimed at the Reputation of a Polite Scholar, and for that reason had applied
himself in a particular manner to the belles Lettres, have quitted his Old
Country Dialect, for that of a Londoner, a Gentleman, and a Scholar? and not by
every word he spoke make the Ridiculous Discovery of his being a Perfect
Stranger P. 46.
to all Polite Learning, and Gentleman-like Conversation?

But let us hear a Second Apology that may be made for the Dorism of Dr.
Bentley: He may perhaps be defended from the like Practice of others, who being
Londoners born or bred, have repudiated the Vernacular Idiom of the City for
that of the Country; as Sir Roger L'Estrange in his Aesop's Fables, Sir John
Suckling in his Ballad, and Mr. Dryden in his Harvest home. So that though Dr.
Bentley be supposed to be a Native of London, or bred Liberally, yet here is an
Excuse for his quitting the City Language. But I conceive, with submission,
that this argument is built upon such Instances as are quite aliene from the
case of our Dissertator. For Doric might indeed be proper for Fables, or
Ballads, where Brutes, or Peasants are brought in speaking; or for Scotch
Songs, and the Chorus of a Comedy, on the account of the Doric Music: but it
has not Grace and Majesty enough for the Subject Dr. Bentley is engaged in.
What affinity then is there between Dr. Bentley's case, and that of Writers of
Fables, Ballads, and Comedies? what mighty Motives can Here be for assuming a
Foreign Dialect? His Pieces are dated in the midst of London, directed to the
very next Street, addressed to a Scholar, about a Controversy in Criticism,
designed for the view of men of Literature, and not written to express the
humor of the Country, or to entertain men of Low Rank and Character. If any
will still excuse the Dr. for Dorizing in these Circumstances, it is hard to
deny them the glory of being the humblest of his Admirers and Vassals Disser.
p. 50, 51.
.

The same Apology that is made for the Doric way of speaking may perhaps be
urged also in favor of that Mixed Language which runs throughout these
Dissertations. The Speech of Alexander Bendo by the Earl of Rochester, the
Pedant in Ben Johnson, and other Writers of Comedies, do show, that the Author
of these Reflections, though he carries this way of speaking farther than any
ever before him did, is not Singular in the Use of it: but this Plea also will
admit of a Ready Answer; that though this manner of speaking may be proper for
Mountebanks and Pedants, whose business it is to appear Learned to the
Ignorant, yet that does not justify the use of it by one, who was reckoned a
Scholar, in a Discourse addressed only to Scholars. It Is very strange that a
Critic, and such a Critic as Dr. Bentley, should so dote on the Dialect
peculiar to Pedantry, who was so eminently (...) -- the hater of Pedants
Disser. p. 41.
? and so well known to be so, that even our Sophist in these very Dissertations
represents him as One whose Aim, Profession, and Employment it was to pull off
the Disguise from those little Pedants, that have stalkt so long about in the
Apparel of Heroes Ibid. p. 29.
.

But I love to deal Ingenuously; and will not conceal One Argument, which though
it will not do the work, let it go however as far as it can P. 25.
, in favor of their Opinion who may ascribe these Dissertations to Dr.
Bentley. There is still extant a Letter of Dr. Bentley's to Dr. John Mill,
which is confessed to be Genuine, in which there are frequent Scraps of Greek
intermixed with Latin; which might give occasion to our Sophist to think that a
Cento of Different Languages was a Characteristic of this Author: but the case
of this Epistle is widely different from that of these Dissertations. For the
Author of the Epistle writing to One who had a particular Value for the Greek
Tongue, showed an Excellent Judgment in passing such a Compliment on that
Language, as to use it instead of Latin, even where Latin would have done as
well. But besides, he had occasion to express himself in Terms of Archness and
Waggery, which the Latin Tongue would not come up to. For Iohannule was not in
use, and therefore (...), or Little Iacky, was the only word that could serve
to express that in short, which the Latins cannot say but by a Periphrasis.
Whereas these Dissertations were designed for the benefit of English Readers,
who had as great an Esteem for their own Tongue, as either for Greek, or Latin;
and the Uncouth Words here interspersed do not add any Beauty to the Style, nor
do they convey the Author's thoughts to our Understanding with more Dispatch or
Clearness than plain English would do.

I doubt not but our Sophist had that Letter of Dr. Bentley to Dr. Mill before
his Pen P. 36.
, when he counterfeited these Dissertations in the Name of that Reverend
Doctor. For it is very observable that the Preface of this Letter to Mr. Wotton
is borrowed from the Preface of that to Dr. Mill; which begins with the
Author's remembering a Discourse between Him and Dr. Mill about Malela Or
Malelas, or Malala, or Malalas: for that weighty Controversy about the right
Spelling this Word is not yet fully decided.
, and a Promise that Dr. Bentley had upon that occasion made to his Friend, of
which he was to acquit himself in that Letter: this our Sophist transcribes,
changing only the Names, and ascribes it to the same Dr. Bentley. Had that Dr.
really wrote these Dissertations, his Invention was not so narrow and stinted,
that he should be forced to borrow from Himself; especially having so large an
Acquaintance, as he appears to have had, with Works of the same Stamp and
Character with the Epistle he was writing; as Prefaces, Prolegomena,
Apparatus's, Introductions, etc: but it was Natural Enough for a Sophist in his
Mock-Bentley to filch an Exordium from the Undisputed Writings of the true Dr.
Bentley.

The same Letter to Dr. Mill, which has furnish^d us already with one Detection
of the Imposture, will, if strictly examined, make a Second Confession from
these Words. Haec habui, Milli Iucundissime, quae de Alcmaeone and Alcmaeonide,
ore ut opinor alio indicta dicerem: non enim placet eorum ratio, qui cum merae
Corniculae sint* emendicatis hinc inde Plumis germanos Pavones se pollicentur
P. 20.
. Now here again am I concerned for our Sophist, that he is taken tripping. For
he values himself highly, and expects great Thanks for a Discovery P. 47.
about Ocellus Lucanus, which had been long before made and published by
Vizzanius, in his Edition of that Author; and whence it is evident it was
transcribed by our Sophist into his Dissertation. Now would Dr. Bentley, who
professes himself such an Enemy to borrowing, have thus plumed himself in
borrowed Feathers? It is a very Notable Discovery, and we are much obliged to
the Author of it: but then there was either a strange Jumping of Good Wits, or
the Dissertator is a Sorry Plagiary. What shall we say to this matter? Dr.
Bentley had the Character of a man of Probity and Parts, who had neither
Inclination nor Need to filch the Sayings of Others P. 33.
. Those must be unacquainted with his Character, who think he would say in his
Own Name what he found said to his Hands. In the Letter to Dr. Mill he omits
several things very proper to his purpose, ne sort qui Me minus norunt, Pauli
me Leopardi Scrinia compilare existiment Ep. p. 4.
. Would he be there so afraid of being thought to transcribe Leopardus? and
would he here value himself upon Discovering first what he plainly copies from
Vizzanius? Must those who think he could borrow be such as did not know him?
and can we, when we know him upon his Own Declaration to be so averse from
borrowing, imagine he would borrow That from another, for which he solemnly
bespeaks Thanks from the Learned World? This bears hard upon the Author of the
Dissertations: but how can we help it? he should have minded his Hitts better,
when he was minded to act the Doctor.

But that Letter to Dr. Mill will afford us still greater Conviction that this
Dissertation could not be the Genuine Work of Dr. Bentley. For that Letter, in
the Page above mentioned represents Dr. Bentley proving, that he could not
easily be deceived in knowing whether a Greek Verse were ascribed to its proper
Author: Nam in his Rebus verba mihi dari haud facile patior; qui, ut scis,
Fragmenta omnium Poetarum Graecorum cum Emendationibus, ac Notis, Grande Opus,
edere constitueram: nunc, ut ajunt, (...) Ep. p. 20.
. Now is it probable, that One who had collected the Fragments of all the Greek
Poets, amended them, and wrote Notes upon them, could mistake Empedocles for an
Epic Poet? But I shall not insist upon this; since the Passage produced carries
in it a more Direct and Express Proof that Dr. Bentley could not write these
Dissertations. He had designed once it seems, to publish his Grand Work, the
Fragments of the Greek Poets: but he was now, he tells us, engagd in another
way of Life, and must therefore apply himself to another sort of Studies: for
that I take to be the Import of the Greek Proverb. Now the Dissertations in
dispute bear date after this Declaration; they pretend to be written by Richard
Bentley Dr. of Divinity, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty; they would be
thought to come into the world some time after his Lectures were printed in
Defense of Religion. He was now therefore engaged in another Profession; and
would not, we may be sure, meddle with a Subject to foreign to the business of
a Divine, nor handle it in a manner so ill becoming that Character. He who
scrupled publishing those Fragments, which might have been of good Use to the
Learned, and might some of them have fallen in with Divinity, would much less
have taken up with such Thin Diet, and misspent so much of his precious Time
upon so fruitless Enquiries as those are which are pursued in these several
Dissertations. There is another thing, besides a pretty Invention, useful for a
Liar, and that is a Good Memory. We will suppose our Author to have once known
something of this Declaration of Dr. Bentley; but he had, it seems, unhappily
forgot it, when he ascribed these Pieces to him Dissert. p. 17.
.

The Sophist is not more happy in personating Dr. Bentley, when through the whole
Course of those Dissertations he represents him as a Fierce and Angry Writer;
and One, who when he thinks he has an advantage over another Man, gives him no
Quarter. For the Writer of the Epistle to Dr. Mill, when he had just occasion
to be very Severe on some, who had taken wrong measures in deducing the
Etymology of a Greek Word, thus represses his Indignation: Sed nolo aliquid
inclementer dicere; non nostrum est (...) Ep. p. 4.
. This shows him to have been a Man of Temper, and Good Nature: but our Sophist
represents him as one that has no Mercy upon his Adversary, when he thinks he
has him in his power. The supposed Editors of Phalaris for an imagined mistake
in a point of Criticism are exposed as Nonsensical Blunderers, Persons who had
neither Skill nor Industry, neither Knowledge nor Ingenuity; to be like
Leucon's Asses, a degree below Sorry Critics, to write directly against
Grammar and Common Sense; and are set out to the world under this Low and Rude
Similitude: Here are Your Workmen, to mend an Author, as bungling Tinkers do
Old Kettles! What a difference is there between the Two Letter-writers? Mr.
Bentley is calm and forgiving, but Dr. Bentley is furious and unrelenting: Dr.
Mill's Friend scorns to insult over the Prostrate; but Mr. Wotton's friend
pursues his Blow: and don't You yet begin to suspect the Credit of the
Dissertations Diss. p. 62
?

Dr. Bentley was celebrated amongst the Learned Men of his own and other
Countries for one, who was much versed in the Learned Languages: and, as it
appears by his Letter to Dr. Mill, he was very conversant in Suidas, Hesychius,
and other Greek Vocabularies, Onomasticons, Etymologicons, Lexicons,
Glossaries, Nomenclators, and Scholia; so that he must at least have been
acquainted with the Significations of Greek Words: but it appears from what
this Sophist offers about the Sense of some Greek words From the 62 d to the 68
th page of this Book.
which he finds in Phalaris, that he was not only a perfect Stranger to the
best Classic Authors, but that he wanted that Light which any Ordinary
Dictionary would have afforded him. The Librarian was so well read in One of
these Instructive Writers, Hesychius, as to assure Dr. Mill, between Verse and
Prose, that whenever a New Edition of that book came forth, he could, if he
would, correct five thousand faults in it, more or less. Id Tibi de plano
possum promittere, Milli, Quinque plus minus millia mendorum M^ correcturum
esse, s^ libucrit, quae aliorum (...) and laboriosam diligentiam hactenus
illuserunt Ep. p. 39.
. Now could any thing that actually is in Hesychius, escape his knowledge, who
had such a Deep Insight into what is not, but ought to be there? could He who
had discovered what had escaped the Utmost Diligence of Others, miss what was
obvious to every one that looked into Hesychius? Would Dr. Bentley have given
us such a Cast of his Skill in construing Greek Words, as to tell us, that
(...) anciently signified to pursue, when that which fled feared and shunned
the pursuer; and that it never signified to follow, in any other Sense; when
Hesychius gives us no other words for (...), but (...), which are far from a
Persecuting Sense?

Dr. Bentley is known to have lived in the same Age, and at the same Time, that
the Edition of Phalaris, with which this Sophist is so angry, came out: it
appears, from the Editor^s Preface, that the Dr. being then Library Keeper at
St. James's, denied a Common Favor to the Editor, which is complained of in
that Preface: This doubtless gave occasion to our Sophist to forge these
Dissertations in the Dr's name, to show his pretended resentments of that
Complaint. Now the Dr. himself could not be ignorant, that this Edition was put
forth by Mr. Boil, whose Name it still bears. But Our Sophist, who lived at a
greater distance from those Times, supposes it the Joynt-Work of several: he
talks of our Late Editors, of those Great Genius's, with whom Learning, that is
leaving the World, has taken up her Last Residence; of these Annotators, of our
Ingenious Translators Disser. p. 66, 71.
: whereas these Editors, Genius's, Annotators, Translators, could not but be
known to one that then lived, and were known to Dr. Bentley (as appears by a MS
Letter of his to Mr. Boil, now in being) to be one and the same Person. It is
true, that in the Preface to the Edition there are these Expressions, Quantum
scimus, and Nostro Labor; and in the Dedication, Tua open adjutus, which might
lead our Sophist into a mistake, that this Edition was the Work of More than
One; and that the Person, to whom it is dedicated, had assisted in it: as if it
were unusual for the Plural Number to be put for the Singular; or as if a
Person in that Station could no otherwise assist a Young Gentleman of his
College in the Edition of a Book, than by collating Manuscripts, translating
the Text, and writing Comments.

Dr. Bentley is known to have enjoyed the advantage of a Public Lecture
instituted by the Honorable Mr. Robert Boil, and by reason of that Post must
be supposed to have had a due respect for his Name and Family; so that it
cannot rationally be presumed, he would treat a Gentleman, who had the Honor
to be nearly related to that Noble Person, with so much Contempt and Indignity,
as is plainly expressed in several parts of that Dissertation.

Dr. Bentley did also flourish during the Life of Sir William Temple, whilst
that Eminent Person was in great Reputation for the Signal and Extraordinary
Services he had done for the Protestant Interest, to the English Nation, and to
the King who then reigned; as also for his Learned Writings, which were then in
very great Esteem amongst all those who had a true relish for Sound Sense, and
Noble Thoughts, expressed with all the Beauty and Force of proper and
significant Language. Now though the Dr. might without any offense differ in his
Sentiments from that Worthy Gentleman, yet it is not credible that a Scholar, a
Courtier, and a Divine would so far break in upon all the Rules of Modesty,
Decency, and Civility, as to insult over a Person of Sir William's Character,
and Merit, as an Ignorant and Illiterate Pretender to Learning; who could
neither discover the true Time, nor the true Value of his Authors; and whose
Choice of Phalaris and Aesop, as then extant, for two great inimitable
Originals, was a piece of Criticism of a peculiar Complexion, and must proceed
from a Singularity of Palate and Judgment.

It must needs be a great Wonder to those who think these Dissertations
Genuine, how or where they have been conceal^d; and in what Secret Shop, or
unknown Corner of the World they have lain hid, so that no one has ever taken
notice of 'em for so many Ages. Had these Dissertations been seen and read,
somebody sure would have quoted somewhat out of 'em; especially since so many
have had occasion to do so Disser. p. 63.
: for all those who have written concerning Sophisms, and Ill Consequences in
arguing, might have furnished themselves from hence with all Kinds of Loose and
Incoherent Thinking. And those that have published their Censures upon the
Incongruities of Language, and Innovations in Speech, might from every Page of
this Author have fetched proper Instances of the Grossest Improprieties. So
that, by their Silence and Praetermission, they do as good as declare expressly,
that they never saw our Dissertation Disser. p. 64.
.

But that which ought to weigh most with those who have any Honor for Dr.
Bentley, toward clearing him from any suspicion of having written these Pieces,
is this Consideration; that That Learned Doctor was chosen out by the then
Fathers of the Church, as a fit person to vindicate the Truth of Religion
against Atheists, Deists, and all other Opposers of Divine Revelation: whereas
this Sophist is found to make use of such Arguments Vide p. 121 st of his Book.
to disprove the Epistles of Phalaris, as are of Equal weight to prove the
Writings of Moses and the New Testament to be of much Later date, than they can
be consistently with the Pretenses of the Jewish and Christian Religion. So
little regard had this Bold Writer to fit his Discourses to the Character of
that Reverend and Learned Person; and I have had too much Regard to Him, in
giving him the Honor and Patience of so Long an Examination Disser. p. 65.
.

SInce I have had the Patience to examine all the tedious Proofs Dr. Bentley
has heaped together against the Epistles, which I was not in the least
concerned to vindicate; I am obliged to say something to his Criticisms upon
the Edition that relate entirely to my Self. I shall consider 'em with the same
Indifference that I did his Arguments: for as I never professed my self a
Patron of Phalaris, so neither was it ever in my Thoughts to set up for
Exactness in that Dry Sort of Learning. I entered upon the Work merely as an
Exercise of my Pen; I saw that Life and Smartness, which I still relish in
these Epistles, quite lost in the Loose Periphrases, and plain Country Latin
(as the Dr. calls it) of the former Interpreters. This put me upon trying
whether I could express the Style as well as the Sense of the Original in
another Language; and represent it with such advantage, that They who are no
Masters of Greek might see some faint resemblance of the Author's Spirit and
Genius, in a Translation: in which whether I have been successful, and to what
degree, must be left to the different Humors, and Opinions of Readers. I abhor
Vanity, and the more since I have read Dr. Bentley's Book, where I see it makes
so unbecoming a Figure: yet This I will be bold to say, that even in those
Translations of the Greek Authors, which are esteemed the Best, would a man of
some knowledge in Criticism exercise all the spite and skill he has that way to
find out Mistakes, he might be able to muster up such a Plentiful Number of 'em
as would keep my Poor Version and Notes in Countenance. I question not but
there are Errors and Oversights enough in my Translation; I was very Young when I
did it; and, to confess the Truth, after I had got a little way into it, and
made my first Essays, went through the Rest of it without any Great Gust: and
it is no wonder therefore if I should not be awake sometimes in a Work that I
was not very fond of. However, as Many, and as Easy to be found as my Faults
are, Dr. Bentley has yet had the Ill Luck to miss 'em; and to except against
such Passages as can, I think, to any Unprejudiced Man, be fairly accounted
for. The Town I own is Weak and Defenseless enough in conscience; but he has
had the Judgment to attack it on that side, where perhaps it lies least
exposed. Upon Scouring the first Epistle (as he Cleanlily expresses himself) he
finds these Words there, (...) etc. (...). Which, in my Latin, runns, [ Animi
autem Morbum M^dica Sanat Mors, quam quidem nulli gravem, etc. expecta]. He is
pleased to render it thus, [ For a Disease of the Soul the only Physician is
Death: do You therefore expect a most painful one] and says, My Translation of
(...) [by nulli gravem] produces a flat and far-fetched Sense Disser. p. 69.
. I must own I do not yet see why it is more flat to say a Villain shall dye an
Unlamented Death, that that he shall dye a Painful one: and I as little
apprehend why he calls this a far-fetched Sense; I suppose he cannot mean by a
far-fetched Sense, a Sense that the Word (...) is not commonly used in, because
I never could meet with it used in any other Sense, till Now he has thought fit
to translate it most painful. All the Critics before him render it by non
gravis, non invidiosus, or by some word Equivalent to these: and Hermogenes
thought this a proper sense of the word, when he intitul'd a Chapter (...);
which I would advise the Dr. to read, not only to get a better acquaintance
with the Word in question, but to learn too the modesty and discretion not to
commend himself so often, with so very ill a Grace. I am sure he wants to be
taught this; and since he has just now taught me what I knew nothing of before,
I could do no less than make him this Grateful Return.

He goes on to instruct me. The Greek, says he, is in the Superlative degree,
let 'em put it then, nulli gravissimam, and 'twill show 'em the Error of their
Version Dissert. p. 69.
; that is, let Me translate it for 'em, and I Will undertake to make neither
Grammar nor Sense of it. But if he will give me leave to translate it my self,
since it must be in the Superlative degree, instead of nulli gravem, I would
put minime invidiosam; and then I do not yet see any Error in the Version: and
I am the more inclined to think there is none, because the Dr. slides off, and
takes Refuge in his Strong and Secret Hold, the MSS. The MS, he says, reads it
(...); and They (as he calls Me) might have embraced this Reading, when they
saw it there. What MS. is this? None of the Bodly-MSS read it so; nor the
Arundel, a Collation of which the Learned Dean of York sent me, after my
Edition was finished* Sure the Dr. cannot mean the King's MS; he knows I never
saw That my self; and I hope I am not answerable for my Collator's Eyes. And,
since Nobody can see it but Dr. Bentley, I have no great Reason to depend upon
His Ingenuity. However, if this be the Reading of the King's MS, it is frivolous
and fit to be neglected: for to Me the Common Reading seems to have rather a
Quicker Sense, and (having shown Dr. Bentley to be no great Master in Propriety
of Speech) I may venture to say, as much Propriety. Perhaps the Dr. might have
thought so too, but that he has a Peculiar Fondness for the Parapleromatick
Particle (...), which he takes to be a rare and quaint usage Disse^. p. 70.
: and having met with it Here therefore, is resolved not to part with it. To
diminish his fondness for it, I promise to furnish him upon demand with 30 or
40 Instances from Homer, and the Greek Testament (to go no further), where the
Particle (...) is used as Parapleromatically every whit as it would be here,
should his Reading prevail.

But to wave entering into a Controversy with him about Particles; let us see
whether he be not as Exquisite a Judge in Latin as he is in Greek: He charges
me with Barbarism, Nonsense, and New Discoveries in Language for translating
(...), Scelera non invita; for he is very positive that Invitus always means
the Agent, is always spoken of the Person, never of the Thing, etc. But I hope
Propertius, who lived in the Purest Age of Latin, may be presumed to understand
his own Tongue as well as Dr. Bentley: He ( El. 16; L. 1.) expostulating with
an Unkind Mistress, says, that though she was Cruel and Unrelenting, yet if she
did but hear his Complaint, Non -- ipsa suos poterit compescere Ocellos
Surget and invitis spiritus in Lachrymis.
Is Invitis here joined with the Person or the Thing? if Propertius had said,
as he does in other places, that Tears would flow ab Invitis Oculis; though an
Eye be improperly called a Person, yet in that case I might allow it to be
taken Personally: or had he attributed any Action to Tears; as, if he had said,
invitae surgent Lacrymae, Lacrymae might be considered as an Agent: but as it
stands here, Invitae Lacrymae must be rendered Involuntary Tears; and to
explain it otherwise is, I think, contrary to Good Sense and Good Language too.
Were Dr. Bentley as well acquainted with the Latin of the Great Men in
Augustus's Age, as with that of the Pedants in This, he would have another
Taste, and another Style: To know the Grammar of a Tongue, and to have a just
sense of the Proprieties and Elegancies of it, are two different things; as
different almost as Construing Euclid's Words, and being Master of his
Demonstrations. Anybody that will take the pains may be Critically exact in
the Signification and Syntax of Words; but to enter into the Spirit and Beauty
of good writing is an Happiness that None have but those who are Born with it;
nor All of them neither: for a Long Conversation with Bad books may destroy a
good Natural Taste. I don't say, this is Dr. Bentley's case; for I am not a
Judge whether he ever had any.

To come a little nearer to his Ages of Latin, I will give him a Couple of
Instances of the same kind out of Statius; One of them from the 9th Thebais,
where Young Drya^, after he was mortally wounded, sends this Message to his
Mother, -- Merui, Genetrix, poenas; invita capessens
Arma Puer rapui, nec To retinente quievi. v. 891
. Invita is here applied not to the Person his Mother, but to the Thing Arms
taken up against her Will. In the 7th Thebais the Graecians are encouraged by
Jupiter to make a furious assault upon Thebes; and Bacchus in his Speech to
Jupiter on this occasion, says, Esto olim invitum jaculatus nubibus ignem;
Credimus: en iterum atra refers incendia terris,
Nec Styge juratus, nec Pellicis Art rogatus?
v. 158. Jupiter, by his Vow to S^mele, was obliged, against his own
Inclination, to grant what she asked: and therefore the destruction he brought
upon her was Involuntary: I think Invitum can bear no other sense here, and I
therefore leave these Passages with Dr. Bentley to consider at his Leisure; Let
him try his Skill upon 'em next time the angry Fit of Criticism returns.

I see there is no way of pleasing an Incensed Dissertator; I have just cleared
my self from the Imputation of using a Word in a different sense from other
Writers; and now he accuses me for using a Word in the same sense with all the
Authors that ever writ. I translate (...) Hortaris, which I interpret by
Provocas, as Budaeus does; who in his Learned Commentary has these words,
(...), provocant, cient; and usuc est satis frequens: and I translate it so,
because I could find no other Signification of it in any Greek Writer; and Dr.
Bentley himself owns as much, that it is not otherwise used by any of the
Ancients. Now I never designing to make a Noise with the Corrections and
Improvements of Old Vocabularies; was contented to use words in the same Sense
that everybody had used 'em before me; and for this Error of mine my
Indictment runs, that I am an Illiterate Fatherer of an absurd, ridiculous, and
incongruous Sense upon my Author. My plea is* that it seems to Me no more
absurd, or ridiculous, that Phalaris should say to one of his Enemies, You
provoke me to be cruel, than that he should say (as Dr. Bentley would have him)
You upbraid me with Cruelty. And I believe his Cavil against the Syntax of
(...) is no better grounded than that against the Sense. He will not indeed find
(...) in his Grammar with a Dative Case, but he may please to enlarge it from
this very place Dissert. p. 75.
: and as for his (...), or (...), we have no occasion for either of 'em: in the
days of Sophocles (...) was no more absurd and incongruous, than Quae me
hortaris was in Tully's. But Dr. Bentley thinks he has shown already, that
(...) signifies to reproaoh Dissert. p. 71.
; where has he shown it? he has no where said any thing of it, but in the 52d
page; and there he only says, that (...), to accuse, is an Innovation in
Language, for which the Ancients used (...): so that positively to averr, and
assume the thing in question is in his Language to show, and prove it. Let us
see how whether his Second Thoughts furnish him with any better proof of (...)
signifying to accuse. One would expect that he should produce the Authority of
some Greek Author, that uses (...) in this sense: but he has given this
argument quite another turn, and proves, that it is used so here, because it is
never used so by any ancient Author before the Sophist Ibid. p. 72.
; he might have added too, nor by any Modern Author since. This is a surprising
way of arguing, but I find it familiar, to Dr. Bentley; he has another just of
this strain in the 115th page: he says there, One may know Sabirius Pollo to be
a Roman; how so? does he find any such Family among the Romans? no, that^s too
Obvious a Way of arguing for a man of his Parts: he knows him to be a Roman,
because he does not find such a Family as the Sabirli, or such ae Surname as
Pollo: and he improves this Acquaintance with Sabirius so far, that within
Three pages he calls him his Friend Sabirius Pollo. Such are the New Ways of
Reasoning made use of by this Incomprehensible Author: He has furnished us with
several; and, to show that he is not yet exhausted, he brings This argument to
prove that (...) signifies to reproach: (...) and vitio vertere signify to
reproach; therefore (...) does so too: and in the same Paragraph, he after the
same manner makes it out, that (...) is no perservere; is not (...). exactly
the same with pertendo? (meaning, I suppose, that (...) is per, and (...)
tendo) and is not pertendo to p^rsevere? I always thought that Use was the only
Rule and Measure of the Signification of words; but Dr. Bentley, a great
Adventurer in new ways of thinking, will determine it by dint of Argument.
Would he allow Others to argue as He does, from One Compound Word to Another,
and from One Language to Another, we might enlarge our Dictionaries without
End; and soon produce not only (what he pretends to Epistola in ^ine Malalae,
p. 39.
) five thousand, but five Millions of Emondations and Additions to Hesychius;
though not Such as are worthy to keep Company with the Admirable Bishop Pearson's
Observations on that Author: and therefore should they hereafter come together
(as it is said they will); and should the Bishop's Name not happen to be set to
His part (as it is possible it may not); it will be no difficult matter to
distinguish between 'em. According to the Dr's Rule (not to go far from the
words he plays with) because (...) signifies to differ, therefore by a Like
Metaphor, and Analogy, we may use (...) to express the same notion Dissert. p.
13.
: And thus again I can prove, that praeverio is to exhort; for is not praeverto
exactly the same as (...)? and is not (...) to exhort? or that (...) is to
pe^severe; for is not (...) exactly the same with persisto? and is not pesisto,
to persevere? So that for ought I can see, it must be allowed, either that all
words may be used even as we please, or else that (...) must signify, as it
has done for above Two thousand years, hortari; that is, not always to Exhort,
(a Word he makes such wretched Mirth with) but to excite by any other methods:
unless when Virgil says, Iam Vitulos hortare; and Ovid, Hortaturque Canes, they
mean, that Dogs and Bullocks are to be made tractable by good Advice and
Exhortation.

If our Critic is unalterably determined, that the Sense of this Passage must
be [ the Crimes which You upbraid me with] why should he not choose rather to
read (...) than (...)? for though I no more know an Instance of (...) than of
(...) being used for (...), yet the Formation of the Word will more easily and
naturally allow of this use: (...) may well enough signify, quae mihi vitio
vertis; but (...), in that sense, is, I think, a very improper and unnatural
Innovation in Language.

One would wonder that Dr. Bentley should be so eager in imputing this Mistake
to my Translation, which he is so little capable of making out; but he had a
double End in it: My Explication of the Word offended him so much the more,
because it spoilt an Argument that He urges, to prove the Epistles Spurious: I
shall draw it up in short, but in its full force and strength; and leave it to
the Consideration of the Reader. (...) was never used for (...) in any ancient
Author before the Epistles, nor by any modern Author since the Epistles; nor in
the Epistles themselves: therefore the Epistles are Spurious. This Weighty
Point is shut up with a Piece of History, that is worse founded than his
Criticism; and proceeds from Something which was always thought a greater
Blemish to a Divine, than want of Judgment. He says, The edition of ascribed to
Cujacius, and another of Aldus, though the Two Principal of All, and Both of 'em
in the Public Library at Oxon, had yet the Odd Fortune to lie all the while
concealed from our Late Editors that lived there Disser. p. 73.
. I am at a Loss how to deal with a man of this Extraordinary Confidence, that
can so boldly assert what it is impossible he should know. What shall I say to
One, who will face me down, that I never saw, what I know my self to have often
seen and used? nay, and will prove this to me out of my own Preface? the place
he quotes is this, Codices Impressos quatuor prae manibus habui qui eodem plane
Textu utuntur; apud quos Versiones sunt duae, altera a Naogorgo, altera in Usum
Schol. Soc. Jes. edita Vide Praef. p. 3.
. Two of the Four Books I here particularly mentioned, how does he know but
those he mentions are the Other Two I mean? as indeed they are. I had no
occasion to name 'em, because I found little Difference in 'em from those which
I had in my Own Study: the Version ascribed to Cujacius, is exactly the same
with That, put out for the Schools of the Jesuits, which I have expressly said
I made use of. A man of any Candor and Fairness, or indeed of any Common
Modesty, would not have presumed, upon so slight Grounds, so positively to
assert, that I had overlooked what lay so plainly in my way: but I am the less
surpised to hear this from Dr. Bentley, who would fain persuade me that I
never saw my Own Edition.

In the Body of this Dissertation there are Two other Mistakes, which the Dr.
has found in my Version: I took no notice of 'em where they lay; but, to avoid
Confusion, reserved 'em for this place. The First is, my rendering (...),
poculorum Vitreorum, as Suidas, Etymologicon Magnum, and Favorinus had done
before me. These are Eminent Names in that Sort of Learning, which Dr. Bentley
seems best acquainted with and most to value himself upon; and therefore, one
would think, should be able to excuse me with him: but his Maxim is, to value
nothing any further than it is to his purpose. When Suidas is brought in for
preserving some few Fragments of Babrius Dissert. p. 140.
, then he is a man that converses with Writers of Size and Quality: but when he
is produced for that, which will leave us not the least Footstep of our
Corinthian Potter Ibid. p. 27.
, and whereby the argument about Thericles would vanish into nothing Ibid.
; then he is a trifling Scribler, his Lexicon consists of Excerpta from
Scholiasts and Glossaries Ibid.
. If once he begins to quarrel thus with his Good Friends the Lexicographers, I
can expect no mercy from him: But I would ask him, why he says that in the
particular passage before us neither the Use of Language nor Good Sense will
allow (...) to be translated Glasses? When Phalaris is said to send Cups of
Gold and Silver, and besides (...) Ep. 70.
Ten Couple (...), to me it seems agreeable to Good Sense, that these Cups,
which are here distinguished from Cups of Gold and Silver, should not be as Dr.
Bentley conceives, Silver at least, if not of a more precious Metal: unless
there be some other Metal, besides Gold, more precious than Silver. He may be
as Merry upon these Glasses as he pleases, and call 'em Odd and Stingy
Presents, Cheap and Brittle Compliments; I am not answerable for Phalaris's
Generosity. Besides I freely own my self Ignorant how cheap Glasses were in
Sicily two thousand Years ago; for ought I know, they might be Great Rarities,
and fit to bear the Rest of his Presents Company; especially being of so Vast a
Size as they appear to have been, and sent in so much greater Number than the
Other Presents were: for the Epistle tells us, there were but Two Cups of
Silver, and Four of Gold; and Ten Couple of those of Thericles. From whence one
would be apt to conclude, that they were of a Baser, and not of a more Precious
Metal than Silver and Gold, as the Dr. imagines. I can bear all his Raillery
upon Phalaris here for a Stingy Present: but why is he offended with Me too for
a Present I never designed him? He says I have presented him with an Emendation
of P^^ulorum Vitreorum, whereas the former Interpreters honestly translat^d it,
Thericlean Cups. But I must put the Dr. in mind to quote those Honest
Translators honestly: he knows One of the Two translates it Poculorum
Vitreorum, as I do; I mean Cujacius (or whoever else be the Author of that
Version ascribed to him) whom the Dr. is pleased to say, I never saw.

With the same Sincerity he tells me, that whereas I have rendered (...), in
morem arundinis Ep. 92.
; the Translation in the former Editions was, instar pinus Disser. p. 29.
. Here again I have followed the Version, which he advises me to consult in my
next Edition Ibid. p. 75.
, the Version of Cujacius, which has it, in morem Arundinis: and this I did,
because I thought it would be a greater piece of justice to my Author, to make
the Passage in him Clear and Intelligible, than to translate a Greek Proverb
Literally, which would have been no Proverb in Latin. Dr. Bentley would
probably have interpreted it Literally, on purpose to have had an occasion of
explaining it; I could have done so too, and have crammed a Page of Erasmus
into my Notes, as He has here into his Dissertation: but I am glad I translated
it as I did; for it is pity the Dr. should have wanted an Opportunity of showing
how excessively Witty he could be upon this Proverb. (...), says Phalaris, I
will extirpate them like a Pine Tree; and this Tree (according to the Dr's
Natural History) perishes by Lopping. He takes this Hint to tell me, that I
have lopped off a Branch of his Evidence P. 29, 30.
, that I have executed this Proverb upon it self, and extirpated the Pine Tree
out of my New Version P. 29, 30.
; that I have rooted up the Pine Tree, and transplanted Reeds P. 29, 30.
thither: which he confesses is above his Small Understanding in Gardening P.
29, 30.
. What a Deluge of Wit is here! all these fine things are said within the
Compass of half a Page: who can resist a Writer, that thus takes care, that his
Fancy shall sti^l keep pace with his Judgment; and that the One shall not
Instruct You more than the Other Entertains You? However, after he has
refreshed himself a little, he must give me leave to tell him, that his
Understanding in Gardening is indeed very Small (as small as his Knowledge in
Natural History) if he thinks that it has any thing to do either with Reeds or
Pines; which, I take it, grow as rarely in Gardens as Mushrooms arise out of
Rotten Passages in Authors. Dr. Bentley must indeed be allowed to understand
Some parts of Gardening very well; particularly Transplanting and Weeding: The
First of these he has proved his Skill in by those Few Notions that are worth
any thing in his Piece; for they are transplanted from Other Men's Prefaces, the
Nurseries of all his Critical Learning: His Skill in the Second is made out by
all the Rest of his Appendix; which is nothing else but a Collection of Ill
Weeds, pulled up out of Good Writers. There is, I remember, a Passage in
Athenaeus, where this Happy Talent of Weeding Authors is very well expressed: I
shall give it the Learned Reader, together with three or four Lines that
introduce it; because it is, all together, one of the Shortest and Liveliest
Accounts I have met with of a Man possessed with the Spirit of Criticism.
(...), says Cynulcus to Vlpian, (...) The Epitomizer of Anthenaeus, at the very
entrance, tells us, this Vlpian was such an insufferable Pedant, that he would
neither Eat nor Drink any thing, till he had asked the Questions (...)? and
satisfied himself in what Greek Author the Word, by which it was called, was to
be found; from whence, he says, he got the Name of (...): which I desire Dr.
Bentley may be added to Chlonthachonthlus, as a Like Istance of the Name of a
man but once mentioned in old Authors.
; (...); (...),

(...) L. 3, C. 17. A Character, which will fit the Vlpians of Our Time, as
well as those of Athenaeus's; for the Race of 'em is not yet extinguished.

I have followed our Dissertator through a long Scene of Impertinence; and am
come at last to That Part, where he places his greatest Strength; that is
indeed, the most Trivial Part of all, the MSS* I told the Reader in my Preface,
that I only made use of such different Readings in the MSS, as conduced to the
better understanding the Text; for I always thought it a Ridiculous piece of
Pedantry to load a book with Various Lections to no purpose: but this I find
Dr. Bentley calls Skill in using MSS. He and I differ in our Notions about
these matters; and I hope we always shall.

In the 64th Epistle, the Printed Copies read (...) I saw the MSS here had a
Various Reading (...), which I passed over with that Contempt it deserved, and
guessed it should be (...); a Reading, that with a very small Alteration made
my Author speak Sense: Let us see, what Dr. Bentley, and his MSS make of it.
Phalaris says, (...) Which I would render thus, I am not so much as seen by my
Nearest Relations; and I now the more carefully avoid mankind, because I have
found no Faith nor Trust, not only among Other Persons, but even among my
Friends themselves. Dr. Bentley says* we must take (...) here for a certain
Correction. But since the Tyrant is giving a reason for his present Recluse way
of Living in opposition to his former freedom and openness, methinks (...)
cannot well be spared here. Besides [ I avoid all mankind less than I ought t^
do] seems to Me a very improper expression; especially after a Man has said,
that he avoided all mankind to such a Degree as not to be seen by his Nearest
Relations, would he add immediately, that he avoided Company less than he ought
to do? What would Dr. Bentley have him do more? or how can a Man be more
retired than by seeing nobody? I desire the Dr. to have Some Regard to Sense,
as well as to MSS.

This (...) returns again in the 68th Epistle, (...) Now here too, he says,
Every one of the MSS have it (...). As for the King's MS, no body knows what it
has, or has not; and this Epistle is wanting in one of the Bodly MSS: so that
all these MSS that I have overlooked prove at last to be but One; in which
perhaps I might not observe this Various Reading. But if I had observed it, I
think I should scarce have made use of it; for if we put (...) in the room of
(...) must be an Adverb, and referred to (...): and the Rules of good Language
will hardly allow, that the Adverb should be joined in Place to one Verb, and
in Sense to another, at such a distance: not to insist on the Ambiguity that
arises from its Neighborhood to (...), to which it seems to be naturally joined
as an Adjective; and it is with some difficulty, that we bring our selves to
understand it otherwise, even after the Correction of (...) into (...) is
allowed to prevail. Had the Author intended (...) for an Adverb, he would
probably have put it after (...), and not before it. I am so used to Dr.
Bentley's Language, that I can easily bear his telling me here, that I make
mere Nonsense of the Context: whether I do or no, must be left to those who
will take the trouble of considering it. Indeed such a fair and ingenuous
Translator as Dr. Bentley, that renders (...), than I want Money to give, may
make Nonsense of any thing.

There is yet one Instance more of Unskilfulness that he charges upon me,
(...), I translate, perpendens suam Conditionem, considering the Circumstances
he is in, as Naogcorgus had translated it before me; the Dr. renders it,
persistens in proposito, proceeding in his present ways, according to Cujacius:
neither of us produce any Instances of our Use of the word (...), nor pretend
to do it; we are merely upon the Guess, what it must signify, by its relation
to the Sentence; and which of us guesses best, is to be determined by our
Readers. Had I been never so much out, he might have taken a more Courtly way
of letting me know it, than by saying, that Leucon carries one thing, and his
Ass another; that is, the Writer of the Greek Epistle means differently from
the Ass his Editor: This is such a Compliment as there is but one Proper Way of
Returning; Gentlemen do not use to resent such Language with their Pens only.
But I forgive him; it is a Mode of Speech familiar to him, I find, and which he
bestows on every one he has to deal with. In the 11th page, the Sophist is an
Ass under the Skin of a Lion; in the 59th, Phalaris himself is a mere Asinus ad
Lyram. Since he is so fond of Asinino Proverbs, I will throw him in One out of
Aristophanes, to complete his Collection. It is, (...); upon which Erasmus has
this Remarkable Gloss; Asinus portans Mysteria, in eos dicebatur qui praeter
dignitatem in Munere quopiam versantur; velut siquis ignarus literarum
Bibliothecae praeficeretur: in English thus, The Proverb of an Ass carrying
Mysteries was applied to Those who were preferred to some Place they did not
deserve, as when a D^nce was made a Library Keeper. And if that Library Keeper
should so far mistake his Office, as to think he was put there, not to show
Books to Gentlemen that came to see 'em, but to keep the Door shut, he would be
still more unfit for the Place. I have had Worse Treatment than this from Dr.
Bentley: for he has not only denied my Collator the use of the King's MS, but
dealt with me all-along, as if I had seen it, and used it my self; once before,
in the case of (...), and here again in relation to (...). Having no Authorities
to countenance my Version of (...) by expedens, I laid hold of a different
Reading in the King's MS, sent me by my Collator, where he assured me it was
(...)* Dr. Bentley puts on his Critical Spectacles, and finds, that though it be
(...) now, it was originally (...); and that the (...) has been eras'd by a
modern hand, as appears by a Void Space: and upon this he triumphs over my
Skill in perusing the MS, when he knows it was fifty Miles off of me, all the
Time of the Edition. What Void Spaces now appear in that MS, how many Erasings
there are, or by what Hand, it matters not much to dispute or enquire. I own I
overlooked the false accenting of these words, which he charges me with: but to
set down my translation of (...), ob ea, and at the same time to say, I make it
an Interrogative, is according to Dr. Bentley's way of representing things: he
should either have been less severe with Me Nos Phalarin Grammaticum habemus,
qui perperam scripta etiam capite punit. Cic. in Pison.
on the account of My mistakes of this kind, or have taken more care to prevent
his Own; Some of which, since he condescends to these Trifles, I shall so far
comply with him, as to give the Reader an account of.

P. 8. (...) for (...). P. 19. (...) for (...). P. 18. (...) for (...) P. 21.
(...) for (...). P. 35. (...) for (...). P. 45. (...) for (...). P. 48. (...)
for (...). Ibid. (...) for (...). P. 61. (...) for (...). P. 70. (...) for
(...). P. 94. (...) for (...). P. 129. (...) for (...). P. 138. (...) for
(...). P. 139. (...) for (...). Ibid. (...) for (...). Ibid. (...) for (...).
Ibid. (...) for (...). P. 146. (...) for (...) etc.

The Reader will think the Controversy runs low when we begin thus to dispute
about Accents and Encliticks; and indeed I think so too: but how can I help it?
My Excuse must be, that I was obliged to engage the Dr. in what way he liked
best, and had not the Choice of my Own Weapons.

And now are not These, which I have gone through, Mighty Blemishes to my
Edition? and fit to be insisted on by the Dr, in order to Humble Me and my
Teachers? He takes care to tell me, that he can produce more Instances of this
kind; I question not but he may: but if he can find out no more Considerable
Mistakes than these, I think he may leave off Criticizing upon this Subject.

For my part, I am not much concerned what the Men of Letters think of my Skill
in Languages or Manuscripts: but it concerns Dr. Bentley to consider what the
Men of Sincerity will think of his false and disingenuous Dealing; what the Men
of Modesty and Humility will think of his Lofty Insulting Language; what the
Men of Good Nature and Candor will think of his Fierce and Vindictive Temper:
how the Men of Taste and Breeding will relish his Scurrilous Language, his
Frigid Jests, his Low and Clownish Expressions; how the Men of Reason and
Judgment will approve his Weak and Inconclusive Ways of Arguing: it is a mighty
Imputation upon Him, to have any of these Bad Qualities, or to want any of
these Good ones: but it is no Great Blot upon Me, if I should appear not to be
exactly well skilled in the Learned Languages.

I was satisfied from some Books lately written, what a wide difference there
is between a Man of Close Arguing, and Rambling Learning; and how unnatural a
Step it is for an Amanuensis to start up a Professor of Divinity. This indeed
made me not expect much from Dr. Bentley in the Reasoning Way: but when he came
to Matters of Pure Criticism, I thought One, who had bent all his Thoughts and
Reading that way, One who has now the sole Use and Power of the King's Library,
and had for many Years attended upon one of the Greatest Scholars in Europe;
One that set out with all these Advantages, I thought, might easily have
confounded a Young Writer, that never aimed at being a Critic in the Greek
Tongue, or made the Niceties of it his peculiar Study and Business. But, to
consult the several Editions, to collate the Manuscripts, to turn over
Dictionaries, nay, and to make 'em; and all this ado, only to find a false
Accent, and an Escape in perusing a Manuscript (which I have shown to be the
utmost of the Dr's Achievement on this Article) seems to Me to savor too much
of the Character of those men, who, as he himself makes the Observation,
without considering whom it hits, love to make a Noise about Trifles; or (not
to wrong him of his Own more Elevated Expression) to make a Tide and a Flood in
a Basin of Water.

Nothing has done Learning more disservice among the Sensible part of Mankind,
than that indiscreet Value, which Men of Letters oftentimes put upon the most
trifling parts of Knowledge; that (...) in the way of Scholarship, of which
Theophrastus has given us a Character, as it relates to Human Life and Affairs
It Is this that has brought so ill a Report upon Critics and Criticism, and
sunk extremely the Value of that Sort of knowledge, which has been of such
Excellent Use to the World when wisely employed.

A Good Critic is a Name that deserves Honor; for it carries in it Probity,
Learning, Relish, Good Nature, and Good Sense, with a great many Other very
desirable Qualities: but as the Word is now generally employed to signify a
Captious, Vain, Opinionative, Half-learn'd, Ill-natured Censurer of other Men's
Labors, I must confess, I think nothing can be more despicable. Let us stop a
while, ever we take our Leave of this argument, to consider their several
Characters.

A Good Critic distinguishes himself always by the Choice of his Subject; it is
some Point of Importance, and worth determining: an Ill One is ever busied in
things of no manner of Use nor Consequence; and yet is as full of Himself, and
his Performances, as if the Commonwealth could not subsist, without 'em.

A Good Critic is Modest and Decent in his Censures, Candid and Impartial; he
treads warily, uses his Judgment much, but distrusts it more: speaks with
Respect of those he differs from; never takes a pleasure in insulting over
their Mistakes, or lessening their Reputations. Isaac Casaubon, Ger. Vossius,
and Grotius, were all men of this Cast; and so was Menage too, till Baille^,
toward the Latter End of his Life, provoked him. The Character which our
Excellent Pearson In his Letter to Menage before Diogenes Laertius.
gives of him, is very remarkable, and fit to be considered by Dr. Bentley
before he appears again in the way of Criticism. Quanta animi moderatio! quantus
Candor! veram Criticam cum nullius famae dispendio exercere* nullius
Existimationem loedere, nullius Erroribus insultare, nusquam ex Mustaceo
Laureolam quaerere; per quos profeccris aperte profiteri; a Viris Doctissimis
non, nisi salvo eorum honor, aperte dissentire: ut exclamare cogar, O Iecur
vere Criticum sine Spleen! In which also he drew his Own, as well as Menage's
Character.

Salmasius and Scaliger had nothing of this in 'em, they were all Gall, and
Pride, and Pedantry; which made the Vast Learning they were Masters of sit so
ill upon 'em, that the World hated and despised 'em, at the same time that it
was profiting by 'em: Mr. Wotton tells us, There are some now alive whose Fame
will one day equal that of the* Scaligers (or, as it is in his Last Edition,
the Salmasius's) and Grotius's of other Nations Reflect. upon Anc. and Mod.
Learning, p. 385.
. If he had put Salmasius into Grotius's, and not into Scaliger's Room, I would
so far have agreed with him, that there are some now alive, who will inherit
Their Fame, as to One great Part of their Character; for they have All their
Ill Qualities in Perfection -- with but a slight Mixture of any of their Good
ones. For my part, were Dr. Bentley as great a Scholar, as Some say he is, or
even as He thinks himself to be, yet I had rather not know the Greek Alphabet,
than have his Knowledge and his Manners together: for as much as I value
Learning, I value Good Sense, and Common Civility more.

A Good Critic is rich in his own Store; he has a sure Fund of Good Judgment
and True Knowledge, which he can trust to upon all Occasions, without needing
to rifle his Neighbors: but an Ill Critic, who sets up the Trade without a
Stock to manage it, must be perpetually upon the Plunder: the great Employment
of his Sagacity is, to find out Hints in Odd Corners of Books, where it is
probable nobody else will look for 'em; the chief Exercise of his Judging
Talent lies in distinguishing, what Borrowed Notions he may most safely put off
for his Own, and with the least danger of being Discovered.

A man of a sound and well-weigh'd Judgment is afraid always of standing by
himself in a New Opinion; but a Smatterer in Criticism is bold, and forward;
loves to maintain Paradoxes, and to defy the World. It Is enough to make him
think a thing true or false, that everybody else has thought the contrary: for
he has no way of Distinguishing himself, but by being Singular.

A Critic Really such, always proportions his pains to the difficulty of the
matter he is engaged in, and dwells upon things more or less, as they want more
or less to be dwelt on: but a Pretender is constantly improper and impertinent
in his Learning; where the Knott of a Dispute is, there You find him very
reserved and silent; but he lets loose all his Criticisms upon You in plain
points, that Nobody is in danger of misunderstanding.

So have I seen the lost Clouds pour
Into the Seas an Useless Shower;
Whilst the vexed Sailors cursed the Rain,
For which Poor Shepherds prayed in vain.
To complete the Character of a Critic, it is requisite, that he should write
well in that Way he pretends to censure, and be a Good Pattern, in order to be
thought a Good Judge. The Ancient Critics were generally so, as Aristotle, and
Longinus, Tully, and Quintilian: but Some now alive have ventured to Criticize
upon the Performances of very fine Pens, while they themselves had the worst in
the World; and have set up for Judges of Good Writing by a Taste formed upon the
Opinions, and in a Style drawn from the Expressions of Modern Prefaces and
Comments.

'Twere endless to reckon up all the Particulars that distinguish their
Characters; instead on it, take a Reflection or two which Monsieur St. Euvremont
Oeuvres melees, Troisieme Tome, p. 28.
, (a Fine Writer, and a Good Judge) has made on this Subject.

I have seen (says he) of Late Years, Great Critics in abundance, but few Good
Judges. That Learned Tribe is my Aversion, who are perpetually busy in
restoring corrupted Passages, that when restored are at last worth nothing.
They set the highest Price on such Knowledge, as one would choose to be without,
and know least of those things which most deserve to be known. Having no fine
way of thinking and speaking themselves, they can never enter into the Delicacy
of another Man's Thought or Expression. They would succeed very well in
explaining and commenting upon a Grammarian; for His mind is thrown into much
the same Mould with Theirs, and his Studies have lain the same way; but when
they come to one of the Sensible and Wellbred Writers of Antiquity, they
neither relish, nor understand him: his Sense and way of Thinking must needs be
locked up to 'em, it is so very different from their Own. In History, they know
nothing of Men, or Affairs, they turn all to Chronology; and so they be but
able to tell You, what Year Such an One was Consul, they care not whether they
are acquainted with his Character, or the Great Events that happened in his
Time. Cicero with them goes only for a Maker of Orations, Caesar for a Writer
of Commentaries; the Consul, and the General are lost to 'em. The Genius that
animates their admirable Writings is not felt; the Remarkable and Instructive
Passages there are not observed.

I beg the Dr's Pardon for leading him into such Writers as Bruycre, and St.
Euvremont, who think well, and speak Justly, and quote little; I know, upon all
these Accounts, they are not for his Taste: to oblige him therefore, I will
throw in a Little Latin here from the Preface of a Modern Critic; and I hope it
will go down with him the better for the sake of the Place where I find it. Hic
Criticum, says my Author, non Poedagogico Fastu tumentem, aut Farragine quadam
Iejunae Eruditionis onustum formare aggressus sum, sed non minus Iudicio quam
Memoria sua utentem; and qui probe cal'e t, quam pauca penitus in Veterum
Monumentis intelligamus, ideoque Modeste de alii, judicet, and ab Omnibus
discere sit paratus. Volo e^m^ante omnia niti intelligere quid Veteres velint;
and sibi diligenter cavere, ne Opinetur se Scire quod Nesciat Le Cler. Praef.
ad Art. Crit.
. Which Good Measures had Dr. Bentley, in his Critical Studies and Attempts,
vouchsafed to observe, he had saved himself and Me the trouble of this Public
Dispute about Phalaris: He had not rashly entered the Lists upon an Argument
which he is by no means a Master of; nor begun an Indiscreet Controversy,
without considering where it might End.

He threatens me and the World with some further Remarks of this kind in Latin:
I am not, I confess, very apprehensive of that; because, if he had intended to
write in that Tongue, it had been proper to have done it at first: for in that
Tongue the Reflection, that has given him all this Uneasiness, was written; and
in that Tongue therefore one would think it should have been answered, and this
whole Controversy managed. But whatever He may do, I cannot promise him that
No other Language will be employed against him; nor that the Enquiries of Some,
whom he has affronted, will not be extended a little farther than these
Dissertaetions.

I was indeed in hopes, when I first put pen to paper, that the Dispute would
have lain purely between Us Two, and have been decided by an Appeal to the
Learned Men of our Own Nation: but I find the matter is not likely to rest
here; Dr. Bentley's Boasts of his Correspondence abroad, and of the Compliments
that from thence have been paid him, have made it necessary to set Him and his
Performances in as true a Light toward Foreigners, as they do or will appear
in here at Home: particularly to let Monsieur Spanheim, and Monsieur Graevius
know how mistaken they have been in placing their Civilities upon One that does
not deserve 'em; and can never be valued, but where he is not known.

If therefore I have not made use of all the Advantages against Dr. Bentley,
which he has given me, nor displayed Him fully in all his Colors, those
Defects, I hope, will soon be supplied by a Better Hand, that intends to do
right to the Subject, and to the Dr's Character, in a Tongue that will last
longer, and go further: for since Dr. Bentley has appealed to Foreign
Universities, to Foreign Universities he must go.

Dr. Bentley's Dissertation UPON THE Fables of AESOP, EXAMINED.
I Had laid together some Short Remarks upon the Rest of the Dr's Appendix,
which were intended to accompany These: but I shall be obliged to leave England
before I can put 'em into Order. However, I cannot part with the Dr, till I
have given him my Thoughts of his Performance on Aesop; and examined, whether
he has any better Grounds for opposing his Judgment to Sir William Temple's, in
the case of the Fables, than in that of the Epistles. I cannot stay long enough
on the Subject to do right to it; but what I shall be able to say, will, I
hope, sufficiently prove, that the Reasonings and Discoveries in this latter
part of his Work are perfectly of a piece with those we have already had to do
with; and, let him dispute against Phalaris, or Aesop, or what else he pleases,
that Dr. Bentley will be Dr. Bentley still.

He sets out well -- I am glad, says he, to find a good part of the Work done
ready to my hand. For Monsieur Bachet, Sieur de Meziriac, has writ the Life of
Aesop in French Dissert. p. 35.
. Which Life the Reader now supposes that Dr. Bentley has read, and found to
agree exactly with his own Sentiments; but to his Surprise 'twill appear, that
the Dr. has neither read it, nor seen it: for in the Next Line he confesses
that he could never meet with it. So that he finds his Work done to his hands
in a Book that he has not yet found: Books Lost, and Books not yet come to his
View, are as instructive to Him as any Books in his Study. There is no dealing
with such a Profound Scholar as this, who is as well read in what he has not
seen, as in what he has. But perhaps here, as in Other cases, he has his
accounts at Second Hand: not so neither, he is purely upon the Conjecture; and
can guess from the great Learning of the Author known to him by his Other
Works, that he has in a manner exhausted the Subject. That is, by his
Mathematical Notes upon Diophantus he can guess what he says upon Aesop's
Fables. But, methinks, it is a little nicely guessed, that Meziriac has in a
manner exhausted the Subject: why should not a Man that had written so well
upon Diophantus, have quite exhausted it? I begin now to guess something too,
and may be able to make out my Guess e're I am a Month Older: I am going into a
Country where Meziriac is, I suppose, to be had; and when I have seen him,
perhaps I shall find, that Dr. Bentley has seen him too -- though he has
forgotten it. For he pretends to present us here only with such Things as have
escaped the Observation of Others, and I now know him so well, that I suspect
him a Course whenever he sets up for Discoveries. The Business of Ocellus has
given us One Remarkable Instance of this kind; and this small Piece we are upon
will presently, even without the help of Meziriac, afford us Another.

The first of his few loose Things which he fancies have escaped the
Observation of Others, is, that it is very uncertain if (he would say whether)
Aesop himself left any Fables behind him in Writing. This Hint has I believe
escaped the Observation of Others: for they that have observed any thing about
it have observed the contrary. The Phrase of Antiquity is the same when they
mention any thing of Aesop's, as it would have been, had they thought Aesop
really to have wrote it; the Ancients quote him just as they do Other Authors:
When Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, Galen, Themistius, Gellius cite any thing from
him, it is (...), inquit, etc: and how would they have expressed themselves
otherwise, if Aesop's Writings had confessedly lain before them? Dr. Bentley
sure will not be so Captious as to say, that these Forms of Speech are not
express enough; among all Authors that quote from others, (...) and (...), are
Equivalent, and used indifferently. Bishop Pearson has largely proved this, in
his Vindiciae Ignatianae Par. 1, p. 83.
, against Daillee, who laid hold of this C^^^l to disparage the Epistles of
Ignatius: And I the rather referr the Dr. to that Incomparable Work, because he
confesses with some Shame, that he had either never read it, or utterly forgot
it Dissert. p. 113.
A good account of his Acquaintance with One of the First Books in the World,
in the Way of his Profession! They that read Books at this rate, will be sure
to write Books that will be so read. But not to forget our business -- The Word
(...) it self is applied to Aesop, as an Author, by Suidas, Aphthonius (...)
and others: What Suidas says deserves a Reflection; his Words are, (...). he
wrote Two Books of what befell him at Delphos; but Others are rather of Opinion
that he wrote nothing but Fables Suidas explains (...) by (...), in that very
place.
. So that though some doubted whether he wrote any account of what happened to
him at Delphos, yet, according to Suidas, nobody doubted but that he wrote
Fables. Eustathius calls him expressly not (...) only, but (...); expounding the
one by the other Ad initium Iliadis A.
. The Words too of the Old Scholiast on Aristophanes are so full, I think* as
not easily to be eluded; (...), says he, (...) Sch. in Plut. 11*
. That Few say in Terms, he was a Writer, is because Nobody had any Suspicions
to the contrary: and when the Doubt was not started, nor thought of, there was
no need to guard against it. I have produced some Ancients that say, he did
write; Dr. Bentley does not pretend to instance in any that say, he did not:
instead of that, his best Arguments for this New Point are These that follow.

The Old Man in Aristophanes (says he P. 136.
) learnt his Fables in Conversation, (...) In which of his Dictionaries does
(...) signify Conversation? Or is it necessary, that what was learnt at a
Feast must be learnt in Conversation? might it not be a part of their Festival
Entertainments, to have some agreeable Book read to them? and might not Aesop
sometimes be that Book? If this might be the Case, then the Old man might learn
his Fables at a Feast, and yet learn 'em out of a Book too. But suppose he did
not, allowing that he learnt 'em in Conversation; what follows from thence?
that, because the Fables of Aesop were in every-bodys Mouth, and told at their
Meals, by way of entertainment, therefore there was no written Collection of
'em, they were preserved all by Memory. If this be Criticizing, I am sure,
Criticizing has nothing to do with Reasoning. By the same way of Deduction will
I prove, that we have not a Written Creed now, nor ever had one: for have not
all People from the Rise of Christianity down to this Time learnt it, without
the help of a Book? and is it not plain therefore that the Creed is preserved
by Memory only, and has never been committed to Writing?

The Dr. produces a Second Passage in Aristophanes, where one man reproaches
another Ignorance thus, (...), You have not read so much as Aesop; for so he
himself translates it: from whence, he says, one might conclude that Aesop
wrote his Own Fables. If they were his Own Fables, one might pretty safely
conclude that he wrote 'em; for those Writings are the most properly a man's
Own, which he writes. But Dr. Bentley, it seems, concludes from this very
Passage, (I cannot imagine How) that Aesop did not write 'em. Till he tells us
by what Wonderful Means he got to this Conclusion, I can say nothing to it. But
as for his Occasional and Weighty Debate, whether or no (...) be a Proverbial
Saying spoken of Illiterates Dissert. p. 136.
, I can see no manner of reason why it was brought in here, but merely for the
pleasure of contradicting Erasmus and Scaliger: Proverb, or no Proverb, I
think, it equally proves, that there were Fables at that time, which went under
the Name of Aesop; and what advantage can be made of this, must be against Dr.
Bentley.

The Closing Argument, that winds these Proofs up into a Demonstration is a
Passage in Plato's Phoedo, where Socrates says, (...): Among the Fables of
Aesop I had at hand, and remembered or, knew to be His,
I put those into Verse that first occurred to me: from whence the Dr. shrewdly
observes, that Socrates does not say he made use of a Book of Fables; and from
his not saying so would have us believe that there was no such thing as a Book
of Aesop's Fables in Socrates's time. Socrates was now in Prison, and in
obedience to a Divine Admonition thought himself obliged to do something in
Poetry: he pitched upon Aesop, putting into Verse such of his Fables as
occurred to him; and, if we may guess by what we have left of his doing, such
Fables occurred to him as were nearest his Own Cafe. Now what need was there of
having recourse to a Written Aesop for that which he and everybody remembered?
or what wonder was it, that he had not the Book by him in Prison? why, we are
not sure that at the particular point of time, when he did these Fables in
Prison, he had so much as Pen and Ink allowed him.

This is the Irresistible Evidence, with which Dr. Bentley has taken upon him
to confront the Opinion of Two Thousand Years; such Evidence as one would not
admit against Simmias Rhodius, to rob him of the honor of his Egg, or his
Hatchet. Is it fit, that men should make use of their little Skill in Letters,
their Conjectures, their Fancies, their Dreams, to attack the Reputation of our
first Masters in good writing? is it grateful with such groundless Suspicions
as these to fall upon the Father of Moral Fable, whose happy way of conveying
knowledge has been ever spoken of with so much Respect, and been of such
standing Use to Mankind? Has Dr. Bentley sworn to be at defiance, with every
man that writes Masterly in his way? Sir William Temple may be at Ease, he sees
he is affronted in Good Company. Let me tell our Critic, what I have heard from
Wise Men, that Confidence and Paradoxes are not the true way to a Lasting
Reputation; that the first point of Modesty and Sense is, never to Contradict
the whole World Needlessly, and the next to that, to be sure never to do it
without very good Grounds.

The Dr. often gives me an Occasion to put him in mind of this Truth; and more
than Once in the very Passage we are upon: where he has laid hold of a Careless
Expression in Laertius (a Writer of his Own Form) to oppose Plato's Account of
Socrates, or rather Socrates's Account of himself. Laertius, he says, seems to
hint that Socrates did but One Fable: and this seeming Shadow of an Hint, even
from Laertius, is to bear down the Express Authority of Plato, who says he did
Several See the Passage before quoted p. 236.
. The very Spirit of Athenaeus is got into him, who L. 2, c. 15.
undertook to disprove some of the most Remarkable Particulars of Socrates's
Life recorded in Xenophon and Plato, by the very same Negative Way of Arguing,
that Dr. Bentley makes use of against Phalaris and Aesop; the Silence and
Praetermission of Authors Disser. p. 64.
: nay, and expresses himself in the same Mannerly Way too, calling Plato, the
best-bred Man in the World, Dog and Liar; covertly indeed, whereas Dr. Bentley
has bestowed much the same Titles Leucon carries one thing, and his Ass
another. P. 74.

-- something useful to a Liar besides a pretty Invention -- p. 17.


on those He disputes against, bluntly and openly. But the Impartial Casaubon
takes the part of those Great Men against his Author; reproves his Rudenoss,
and confutes his Reasonings; and shows him to be, as Confident Clowns generally
are, all over mistaken Dr. Bently has ventured to make use of these very
Exploded Arguments of Athenaeus, to discredit Socrates 's Epistles; and ushers
'em in with this Glorious Character, Among Other Errors in Chronology for which
Athenaeus chastises Plato. Diss. p. 93.
. The Men of Letters, I hope, will excuse this Freedom; No man is readier than
I am to value Athenaeus for what he ought to be valued, the Fragments and
Remains of Antiquity which he has preserved: but to see him insolently
trampling on Great Names, is what I cannot bear without Indignation.

I need no Transition from hence to Dr. Bentley; who taking it now for granted,
that Aesop did not write his Own Fables, will tell us Who wrote 'em for him.
Demetrius Phalereus he thinks to have been the first that committed them to
Writing P. 138.
: And if Others should think that he was not the First, they would have
somewhat better Ground for their Thought than He has; for they have
Aristophanes, and his Scholiast (either of whose Words may be taken in this
case, I hope, a little sooner than Dr. Bentley's) to countenance their Opinion.
Aristophanes, in the Passage mentioned by Dr. Bentley, plainly intimates, that
there was a Book of Aesop's Fables in His time; and His Time was before
Demetrius's. (...), is, ne Aesopum quidem legisti: thus the Scholiast
interprets it; (...); thus the use of the word (...) in other Authors Plato, in
his Phoedrus, has employed it just in this manner, (...) p. 273. i. e. Tisiam
ipsum accurate trivisti, perlegisti. Serranus has mistaken the Sense of it, and
translated it Graviter pessum dedisti.
proves it ought to be translated; and, which is more than all, Dr. Bentley
himself has thus rendered it, You have not read so much as Aesop. How could
Aesop be read at a time* when he supposes, that there was no Collection of of
Aesop's Fables committed to writing? It happens indeed now and then, that Books
are written without being Read (Some of Dr. Bentley's Works will be a Proof of
this) but it can never happen I presume, that any Book should be read, without
being written. The same Scholiast quotes in (...), p. 134.
another Passage out of Aristophanes's (...), though upon a Cursory View of that
Play I do not now find it there. The Poet is Speaking of the Eagle; which Bird,
he says, (...)
(...)
The Fable he referrs to is that of the Eagle and the Scarabaeus, which is in
the present Collection; and I think he manifestly quotes a Collection of Fables
extant in His Time: I Am sure, had he intended to quote such a Collection, he
could not have used Words that would more plainly have expressed his Meaning.
To return to my point therefore, if there was a Written Aesop in Aristophanes's
time, then Demetrius Phalereus could not be the First who committed Aesop 's
Fables to Writing.

All the mention we have of this Performance of Demetrius is in Laertius, who
says it was called (...), and (...); by which it seems to Dr. Bentley, that
they were in Prose; and if it should seem to anybody else, that they were in
Verse, they have just as much Reason for their Fancy, as he has: unless by his
Divining Faculty, he can, from the Title's being in Prose, smell out that the
Work was so. Some, he says, may imagine, that they are the Same that are now
extant: Some! who? not Meziriac I hope, because he has not seen him. But
whoever these Some be, Dr. Bentley is against 'em. I wish (says he) they were
[the same that are now extant] for then they would be well writ with some
Genius and Spirit Disser. p. 138.
. How are we to take him? Would Demetrius's Fables have been better than they
were, if they had been still extant? or would the Fables that are extant, and
by some ascribed to Demetrius, be better than they are, if Demetrius had wrote
'em? Had Dr. Bentley wished that Demetrius's Fables were still extant, it had
been a Kind Wish, because Demetrius is thought a better Writer thah He that
composed these Fables: but to wish Demetrius's the same that are now extant, is
to wish his Fables no better written, nor with more Genius or Spirit, than
those we have.

Whom have we now after Demetrius? why, Somebody, that wrote the (...), and
might, for ought anybody knows, be before him. For Suidas, the only Man the
Dr. finds that mentions these (...), giving no Intimation of the Author's Age,
we are utterly at a loss where to fix him; unless Dr. Bentley can help us out
here, and by looking into his Mouth tell us of what Age his Greek is. Probably
he was of no One Age; the (...) or (...) in Verse, like our Present Collection
in Prose, were, it is natural to think, made up from several Authors that wrote
in several Times; amongst which Babrius himself (the next Author he mentions)
might have but a Share though a very large one (...), says Suidas.
: for we find him often quoted together with, and as it were under the Common
Title of (...) or (...) (...). Suidas in (...). Suidas in (...). Suid. in
(...). Suid. in (...).
; and by the bye, not to Scazons only, but Hexameters too (...),
(...)
(...).
Suid. in (...).
; which, if it were a Mistake of Suidas, might probably arise from his finding
him mixed with the Other Writers of the (...): but I am very unwilling to think
it a Mistake, because the Verses are fine ones, and worthy of Babrius. Whether
this Guess of mine be right or no, it is somewhat better founded than the Dr's,
who judges these (...) to have been written all in Elegiac Verse, because he
finds under this Title Two Pentameters quoted; and besides, in Three different
Places, Three Hexameters, which might have no Pentameters after them; and (to
strengthen his Inference yet farther) another Instance of Two Hexameters
together. This the Reader will find to be a true State of the Case, if he will
take the trouble of consulting the Paragraph, where this New Thought is in as
New a Manner surprizingly well handled.

I had like here to have overlooked One Considerable Branch of the Dr's
Discovery, where he informs us, that these Fragments of the (...) belong to the
Aesopic Fables, which, he says, have not yet been observed that he knows of
Disser. p. 139.
. I believe nobody ever read these Fragments, but observed it; however they
kept their Observation to themselves, because they knew nobody could read 'em
without observing it. For to what else could Fragments of Fables written after
the manner of Aesop belong, but to the Aesopic Fables? which Title is known to
comprehend not only the Fables supposed to have been written by Aesop himself;
but all Others, framed after his Model.

The Reader remembers, that after Demetrius came Somebody, who might as well,
for any thing we know of his Time, have come before him. Now after this
Somebody comes One Babrius Dissert. p. 140.
, who has the Advantage indeed of our Last Author in having a Name, and no
otherwise: for his Time is equally a Secret to us. Avienus, it is true, by the
Order he has placed him in, seems to think he was before Phoedrus; but how
little, or how long before, nobody can determine. So that this Babrius, that
lived we don't know When, comes after an Author we don't know Who, and equally
living we don't know When.

The Chronology of Babrius being thus settled, the Dr. proceeds to his
Character; and says, he was a Writer of Size and Quality: I agree with him in
his Meaning, though his Wording of it be a little Particular. Babrius was indeed,
as far as we can guess by the Small Remains we have of him, a very valuable
Author, and deserved to have lived as well as Phoedrus himself: He has not been
lost so long as Phoedrus was; may he be recovered as entire! His Draughts are
all Natural, his Expression Lively, and his Turn of Verse Numerous and Proper.
But the Dr. has by no means done right to his Character in the Instances he has
given us to judge him by; which are cited imperfectly Both, and the Last of 'em
extremely to his disadvantage. The First, about the Sick Lion, which the Dr.
has thus quoted, -- (...)
(...).
he may please thus to supply, (...) Suidas in (...), where (...) is, I
suppose, a Corruption of (...).
(...)
(...) etc.
To the next, (...), He may add these Two Beautiful Verses. (...)
(...) The strict Measure of the Verse requires that it should be (...). But
the Painting is more Lively, according to the Present Numbers.
(...).
(...) etc.
Suid. in (...) and this (to his Eternal Scandal be it spoken) is a Plain Proof
that he has not read over all Suidas. Nay, I have reason to suspect, that he is
got no further than (...), which I observe here to be the utmost Line of his
Citations. I would not have the Reader slight this Discovery of mine, for it is
as considerable as any of Dr. Bentley's, that are purely his own.

To oblige Our Critic, who is so fond of New Hints, I will suggest One to him,
that he may, if he pleases, improve at his Leisure. In the Scholia on
Thucydides ( p. 266.) there is a Passage quoted, (...); and the words of it
are, -- (...)
(...).
Now here is a New Author for Dr. Bentley, one that writ Fables alternately in
Scazons and Iambicks; or here is a Proof at least that Babrius (whose Verses
these seem to be) did not write All his Fables in Scazons unmixed: which may
also be further confirmed from this passage in Suidas in (...).
, quoted by him out of Babrius, (...); for it runs naturally into these Verses,
-- (...)
(...).
I suggest this Thought to the Dr. to enrich his Dissertation with, when he
puts it into Latin. After he has done so, Somebody perhaps may show him, that
it is founded on a Mistaken Reading of those two Passages; but till then, I
shall leave 'em as I found 'em.

After these Light Skirmishes, Dr. Bentley comes at last to his Main Point,
pretty early, I thank him; for he is not yet got quite Half way in his Remarks
(that should be) upon Aesop. He now draws all his Forces against the Present
Set; and his arguments, I find, (making allowance for a few Straglers, which I
shall fetch into their Ranks) march in this Order. First he attempts to prove
That Parcel of the Present Set which Nevelet put out, to be younger than Aesop
VI.
; in the next place, that it is even recenter than Babrius VII.
: and lastly, that the Other Parcel of 'em, which he ascribes to Planudes, is
yet Younger than Nevelet's VIII.
.

Upon the First Article he performs very notably; he is to detect the whole
CXXXVI to be Spurious: Now would I willingly Compound for the Odd XXXVI (if our
Critic will give me leave to call an Even Number so); but How Many do You think
he has disproved? No less than One! and here ends this Argument.

Not being able to proceed any farther here, he draws back, and falls once
again upon his First Preliminary, that Aesop wrote no Fables; which, having now
waded deep in the Controversy, he clearly perceives, because the CXCIIId is
told by Aristotle differently from what it is in Aesop, and in Lucian
differently from what it is in Aristotle. Now here is a Long Chain of desperate
Consequences; for if Dr. Bentley has proved any thing, he has proved Ten times
more than he is aware of. If Aesop did not write this Fable, because Aristotle
gives different Circumstances of it; then neither did Aristotle write it,
because Lucian's Account of it is as different from His, as His is from
Aesop's. Nay, according to Dr. Bentley, neither has Lucian told this Fable,
though we find it in his Works; because it is otherwise told in our present Set,
which the Dr. supposes written by a Man more Modern than He. All that can be
gathered from the Little Varieties in the same Fable is, that they who had
occasion to tell it, went no further than their Memory for it, where the Main
of the Fable, and as much as was for their Purpose, lay. And as for the Nice
Circumstances of it, they either mistook 'em by accident, or thought they could
vary 'em for the better.

This Digression has kindly supplied the Room of his First Attempt; in the
Next, he endeavors at something that is really to his Purpose; and if his
Proof were Full, and were his Own, I for my part should thank him for the
Discovery: but as it is neither, I shall take the liberty to show both That and
Him in their Proper Colors, and to do Justice to the Dead whom he has pillaged.

His Pretense, and his Words are, that the Author of the Parcel which was
published by Neveletus did nothing else but Epitomize Babrius, and put him into
Prose Disser. p. 143.
. Granting he didn't, whom are we to thank for this thought? Dr. Bentley says,
Himself; for He discovered it Ibid. p. 142.
. But there is an Honest Editor of the Dr's Acquaintance, a Man of a Fair
Character, and who has not yet been convicted of any Trick, that puts in for
the Discovery: let us hear what he says, and what the Dr. can answer to it.

Nevelet. A Discovery, at this time of Day! why, I found it out Fourscore Years
ago, and published it to all the World in my Edition of Aesop.


Dr. Bentley. What care I for Your Edition? I found it out my self.


Nev. Not care for my Edition? You constantly referr to it, and make use on it,
and quote my Preface P. 141.
: don't all your Dispute turn upon Nevelet's Parcel? how can You pretend
Ignorance?


Bent. I pretend to publish such Things only as have escaped the Observation of
Others; I have done so, and I Will stand to it.


Nev. Stand to what You will, it is My Observation, and I Will unmask You. Have
not I said, after quoting a Scazon out of the Prose-Fables, Redolent haec ut
plurima alia harum Fabularum Versus Iambicos: atque utinam exstarent hi Versus
unde haec desumpta sunt; Babriam ipsum, quantum video, Integrum haberemus,
cujus jam Vmbram tantum and Epitomen habemus Not. in Fab. 175
. What have You said more than this comes to?


Bent. Yes, I don't call 'em, as You do, barely Iambicks, I call 'em
Choliambicks, and Scazons: besides, You speak doubtfully, redolent haec, ut
plurima alia, Versus Iambicos; but I speak positively, My Expressions are,
There are most Visible Footsteps, This is a manifest turning out of
Choliambicks; Who does not discover here a Scazon?


Nev. You have indeed a Peculiar Way of Speaking; but what else have You added
to my Discovery, besides Confidence? You endeavor what You can to disguise
what You take from me; but after all, there appears upon You here and there not
only a Sameness of Sense, but a Sameness of Words too, which could not fall out
by Accident Dissert. p. 36.
: and this is Your Own Way of tracing a Plagiary. The most Remarkable Hint of
mine, Cujus jam EPITOMEN habemus, don't you translate it literally, and say,
that the Author of that Parcel did nothing but EPITOMIZE Babrius?


Bent. I don't go upon Hints; I have demonstrated, it is my Thought, by showing
the very manner in which I found it out. I discovered it by this means; I
observed in 'em several Passages, that were not of a Piece with the rest, but
had a Turn and Composition plainly Poetical, as in the CCLXIIId Fable, which
begins thus, (...) This I saw was a Choliambic Verse Disser. p. 143.
.


Nev. I know where you saw it; 'twas in my Notes upon this Fable, where I have
these Words, (...) etc. Versus Iambicus Scazon --


Bent. But I improve upon this, and say -- I presently suspected that the
Writer had taken this out of Babrius.


Nev. That Is the very Translation of my Words, that follow, -- Quales Babrias
scripsit, nec satis scio number Babriae ipsius. Now, suppose You had observed
several Footsteps of Scazons in the Fables, is it credible that You should take
Your First Hint from that very Fable I did, which comes so Late in the Book
Fab. CCLXIII.
; when the same Hint might as well have been taken from several Fables before
it? Come, come, Dr. this bears hard upon You; the Footsteps of Babrius are not
near so plain in the Fables, as the Footsteps of my Notes are in Your Remarks.


Bent. I tread in No man's Footsteps; it is well known, I have declared loudly
against Filching; do you think I Would turn Filcher my Self? Foreign Professors
know me better.


Nev. Vizzanius, and I know You better than They do; and the World in a little
time shall know You as well as We do. You thought You might safely injure the
Dead; but the Living shall do us Right upon You, strip You of all Your borrowed
Plumes, and return 'em to their several Owners: You may read Your Fate out of
these Verses of Virgil.


His Bentlejus ovat Spoliis, gaudetque potitus.
Nescia Men's hominum Fati, Sortisque futurae;
Et servare modum rebus su^lata secundis!
Illi tempus erit, magno cum optaverit emptum
Intactum Neveletum, and cum Spolia ista, diemque
Oderit --
The Case between Nevelet and Dr. Bentley is fairly represented in this
Dialogue; and if anybody still thinks that the Dr. struck out this Hint purely
by his Own Sagacity, I Am sure I shall take no further Pains to convince him;
but go on to examine, how far the Discovery reaches.

Dr. Bentley has instanced in Six Several Fables, in which he finds the Traces
of Babrius's Scazons. In the Two First he has pretty good Color for what he
says; because Suidas has preserved Three Scazons of Babrius, the Words of which
are most of 'em to be found in these Two Fables, and very near in the same
Order. In the Four next he does not go upon so good Grounds; but indulges his
Fancy, without having the Authority of Suidas to back him in it. He finds out
some Words, that will run into Scazons, or Pieces of Scazons; and, without any
more ado, concludes from thence, that These were designed for Scazons, and
those Scazons were Babrius's. That the Two first of the Four have something of
a Poetical Turn I agree with him; particularly the Conclusion of the Second,
methinks, is Noble, and not unbecoming Babrius. -- (...)
(...)
The Rest are so Flat, and so Unmusical, that I can scarce ever think 'em
designed for Verses; or if they were, yet I have too great a Regard for
Babrius, to think 'em His. Others beside Babrius might happen to turn a Fable
the same way; Dr. Bentley ought to know, that Callimachus did so. As for One of
'em, the CLXVth, Dr. Bentley very unluckily pitches upon it, to prove it
transprosed from Babrius. It begins in the Prose, (...), which the Dr. supposes
to have been in Babrius, thus, (...),
(...)
A Good Judge of these things easily perceives, that the First of these Verses
has nothing Harmonious in the Numbers, or Poetical in the Expression of it; and
would conclude therefore that this Fable was not taken from Babrius's Scazons,
though he had no other Evidence of it. But it happens, that Two Verses, truly
Babrius's, and relating to this Fable, are preserved in Suidas, which utterly
overthrow Dr. Bentley's Criticism; for the Wording of 'em does not in the least
fall in with That of the Prose. The Verses are, Suid. in (...).
(...)
(...) This Last is a Corrupt Reading.
*
If the Prose Fable had traced Babrius so nearly in the beginning, it would
have carried some Resemblance to him throughout: and therefore in One of his
Six Dr. Bentley is Evidently mistaken; and must guess again, before he can make
up his Number.

In the mean time I desire the Reader to take notice, that there are in Suidas
Fragments of Babrius belonging to above Twenty Several Fables; and out of all
these Dr. Bentley has been able to produce but Two that have the least
Agreement with our Prose Set: the Rest are widely d^fferent in their
Expression, as appears by comparing 'em with the particular Fables to which
they belong; which in most Cases may be done with Certainty. Nay, we have One
Entire Fable of Babrius, about the Swallow and Nightingale, and another Large
Fragment of Nine Lines, about the Priests of Cybele; and the Fables that answer
to these in the Prose are now extant; and are so far from resembling Babrius's
Verses, that they have scarce a Word the same with 'em. With what Face
therefore could Dr. Bentley pronounce it, Evidently apparent, that the Author
of these Prose Fables did nothing else but Epitomize Babrius P. 143.
? 'Twould be full as good a Consequence, should one say; because we find, that
Two or Three Fragments of Ennius, are with some little Difference plainly
inserted into Virgil's Aeneid; therefore it is Evident, that Virgil did nothing
else but transcribe Ennius.

After Dr. Bentley's way of Arguing, I could easily prove, that all Nevelet's
Parcel is transprosed, or (as he would call it) traduced P. 147.
, not from Old Babrius's Scazons, but the Modern Gabrias's Iambicks. That they
are more Recent than Gabrias I discovered by this means, I observed in 'em some
Passages that had a Poetical Turn, as in the 173d Fable, (...).
This I saw was an Iambic Verse; and (having first seen it observed in
Nevelet's Note upon this Fable) I presently suspected that it was taken from
Gabrias, and was soon confirmed in my Judgment: for upon consulting his Version
of the Fable, I found this Verse there. Whence it Evidently appears, that the
Author of this Parcel did nothing else but enlarge upon this Sorry Poet, and
put him into Prose. I could go on producing Other Instances of the kind, which
would make out the Point about Gabrias much more clearly and plainly than Dr.
Bentley has made out His about Babrius; but I have a greater regard for my Own,
and for my Reader's Time, than to throw it away upon such Trifles.

It Is so far from being a Mark of Acuteness to point out a few Scazons or
Iambicks in the Compass of a Book, that, on the contrary, it is hard to find a
page of Greek Prose any where without 'em. Aristotle has long ago observed for
the Greek, and Tully for the Latin, that those Languages run naturally into
this Sort of Meter: and that it is difficult even in Common Discourse to avoid
it (...). Arist. 3, Rhet. c. 8.

And again -- (...).

Senarios and Hipponacteos (i. e. Iambicks, and Scazons) effugere vix possumus;
magnam enim partem ex Iambis nostra constat Oration.

Cic. Orator.
. Nay, to show how little can be made of such Conjectures as These, I dare
undertake to find in these Fables any Sort of Verse that Dr. Bentley shall
pitch upon; and many more Verses of Some Sorts, than the Dr. has produced
Scazons. I will give him an Instance or two of this kind, to show, how very
fanciful it is possible for a man to be in these matters, with how very small
Grounds.

The Fable of the Fly, in the Greek Prose runs thus, (...). Now it is the
Easiest thing in the World to resolve these Words into Hemijambs, or
Anacreonticks, with some Slight Allowances in the Measure. (...)
.......... (...)
(...)
.............
(...)
(...)
(...)
And this Conjecture, I might say, is so much the more probable, because not
only the Numbers, but even the Humor and Matter of the Fable is Anacreontical.

Again, in the Fable of the Nightingale and the Hawk, we have these Trochaicks,
(...),
(...) etc.


In the Conclusion of the Fable of the Frogs, we have these Words, -- (...)
(...);
Who does not see that this Fable was written in Long and Short Verses?

That of the Lover and his Two Mistresses is told twice in the Present
Collection; in the Parcel printed before Nevelet thus, (...). Now the greatest
part of this will run naturally into Long and Short Verse, (...).............
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
......... (...).
But notwithstanding these near Resemblances of several Sorts of Verse, that
are to be met with in our Prose Fables, I am far from thinking that the Fables
in which they they are found were written first in Anacreontic, Trochaic, or
Elegiac Measure, and from thence made Prose; and should any one pretend to
prove it from hence, they would engage I think in a Ridiculous Attempt. The
Composers of these Fables might accidentally so range their Words as to fall
into these Measures; the Best and the Worst Writers often do so, without being
aware of it: In Sir William Temple's and Dr. Bentley's English, how many Blank
Verses are there, which they themselves never thought of, or intended? and
therefore nothing, I say, can be built upon such Vain and Empty Conjectures.

However, so well satisfied is the Dr. with his Performances of this kind, that
he triumphantly concludes, Thus have I proved One Half of the Fables that carry
the Name of Aesop to be a Thousand Years more Recent than He Dissert. p. 146.
. His Proof, without any manner of Misrepresentation, or Ridicule, stands thus.

If out of an 136 Fables, Two, by leaving out Some, and putting in Other Words,
and changing the Order of 'em, look like Two Fragments of Babrius preserved in
Suidas, then it is evident that these were transprosed from Babrius: and if in
Four more there are some Resemblances of Scazons, of which no Footsteps appear
any where else, then these also were transprosed from Scazons; and those
Scazons must be Babrius's: and if the Passages in these Six Fables are borrowed
from Babrius, then the whole Parcel of an 136 (among which these Six chance to
be found) are certainly Later than Babrius: and if they are Later than Babrius,
(whose Age we certainly know no more of than that he lived before Avienus) then
they are certainly above a Thousand Years more Recent than Aesop.

Having by this Subtle Chain of Consequences drawn down the Date of Half the
Fables a Thousand Years below Aesop, he goes on with the same Clearness and
Strength of Reason to prove the Other Half more Modern than They. That they are
not from Aesop' s Own Hand; we may know, he says, from the LXXth of the Serpent
and the Crabfish, which is taken from a Scolion, or Catch, much older than
Aesop Disser. p. 146.
That this Scolion is Older than Aesop, he has no manner of Authority to say;
Athenaeus, who cites it, intimates nothing of the Age of it; and if it were
Older than Aesop, might not Aesop take Occasion from it to raise a Fable of his
Own? So that the Dr's Proof has these two small Defects, that the bottom on
which he goes is a Precarious Assertion, and the Inference he draws from thence
wild and unreasonable.

After this, he objects against a New Beast, and a New Bird, to be met with in
our present Set, which were utterly unknown to all the Ancient Naturalists. As
to his Beast, (...), it is I own a New Sort of Monster; and so New, as not to be
met with in the Elder MSS of Aesop, nor even in several of the Modern ones.
Vossius's MS, and Two in the Bodly-Library, instead of (...) read (...): this
(...), it is likely, might be (...) at first, (which may be observed throughout
the Fables to be the Prey the Lion generally feeds upon From hence the Epithet
of (...). Suidas in (...).
) and from the Confusion of those Two Words, (...) and (...), our New Sort of
Beast might easily arise.

Perhaps too the Original of the word (...) may be traced from the same
heedlesness of a Transcriber. It might formerly have been (...), the same with
(...), (as (...) is with (...) (...). Hesych. in (...): for which Nicander uses
(...) if (...) in Hesychius may be interpreted Aves Pensiles, Birds hung up in
Cages, the Wording and Matter of the Fable will fall in very naturally with
this Guess about (...); for it begins thus, (...) --
) and the B, which stood there for the Number of the Fable, being joined to the
first word (...), might create this New Species of a Bird.

But whether or no This be the way in which these Words crept into the Text is
not worth insisting upon; it seems plain to me that they sprung from some
Corruption of it, since they are not to be met with, that I can find, in any
other Author, Ancient or Modern, or in any Other Fable of Aesop, but these Two
only. And if a Modern Corruption of any place in a Book prove the Book it self
Modern, there is no Book but may be proved so.

Upon the same false Ground his next Objection about the Hebraism is built:
instead of (...), Vossius's MS. reads, (...). Dr. Bentley, who pretends to such
a Sagacity in the way of Critic, and talks as if he had consulted all the MSS
of Aesop upon this occasion, should methinks have observed these Various
Readings, and have had the Skill to make use of 'em.

There are yet Two Fables more in this Set, which the Dr. will prove not to be
Aesop's, One, because he finds it word for word almost in Apthonius (he means
Aphthonius): and it may be Aphthonius found it word for word before in Aesop;
and then we are as we were. The Other, he says, is a Paraphrase on the
CCLXXXIVth in Neveletus's Parcel: and why may not that in Nevelet be as well an
Abridgment of This?

Having laid down these Undeniable Premises, he solidly Concludes thus, This
Collection THEREFORE is more Recent than that Other Dissert. p. 147.
. Never was the poor Particle therefore so miserably abused; he has mentioned
but Six Fables out of an Hundred and fifty, and has given us no tolerable proof
that any One of those Six are Modern; and yet in the Strength of what he has
done ventures to pronounce the Whole Set to be so. Either Dr. Bentley must be
a very Thoughtless Writer, or he must hope to meet with very Thoughtless
Readers: and such I am sure they must be, if these ways of arguing pass upon
'em.

What has Our Critic then been doing all this while? he pretends to prove, that
the whole Three hundred Fables are at least a Thousand Years Younger than
Aesop; he has attempted this Proof particularly but upon Twelve of them; and
that in a very Weak Inconclusive manner. However, should I give him up these
Twelve, and add Two hundred more to the account, and allow all these to have
been Later than Aesop; yet still there are Enough left, to support Their
Pretenses, who make Aesop an Author, and take Some of these Fables to be
Originals of His Composing. Nobody imagined that All, or Half the Fables, that
have gone under the Name of Aesop, are His; or that Any of 'em almost are in
the very same Words and Syllables, that they were in, when they came out of His
hands. They have doubtless undergone some more, some less Alterations: but if
under all these Changes still the Same Little Story in its Chief Circumstances,
and the same Simplicity in telling it; the same Humorous Turn of Thought, and
in good measure the same Words too have been preserved; there is Enough of
Aesop left, whereby we may make a true Judgment of his Spirit, and Genius, and
manner of Performance. When Dr. Bentley shall clearly have made out, either
that None of these Fables came from Aesop himself; or, if they did, yet that in
the very Form and Cast of 'em, as well as the Expression, they have been since
so totally altered, that they deserve not to be called the Same; it will then
be time enough to own* that we are unable to judge of Aesop's merit by any
thing in the Present Collection: but till that is done, we may safely enjoy our
Opinions, and They that have admired Aesop, may venture to go on, and admire
him still.

All that Dr. Bentley has hitherto offered upon the subject of Aesop is so
slight and inconsiderable, that one would naturally imagine it to be his Own,
and believe him when he says, that he intended to give us nothing, but what had
escaped the Observation of others Dissert. p. 135.
: and yet it is certain that Nothing almost which he has said could escape the
Observation of any man that looked into Nevelet; in whose Preface, and Short
Notes, the very same Remarks are made, without any thing of the Ostentation and
Ill-reasoning that here accompanies 'em. The Reader will know whether I have
injured Dr. Bentley in this Imputation, after he has given himself the trouble
of viewing the following Accounts, wherein I have compared Nevelet's Old
Observations with Dr. Bentley's New Ones.

Sect. I. Dr. Bentley observes, that One in Aristophanes tells another, that he
is unlearned and unacquainted with Aesop, (...)

Sect. II. Socrates essayed to put the Aesopic Fables into Verse.

Sect. V. Afterward came one Babrius, that gave a New Turn to the Fables into
Choliambic Verse. Suid. in (...).

Ibid. There Is One Gabrias yet extant, that has comprised each Fable in four
Sorry Iambicks; but our Babrias was an Author of another Size.

Ibid. There Is a Noble Fable of his yet preserved at the End of Gabrias, of the
Swallow and the Nightingale.

Ibid. Suidas brings many Quotations out of him as this, etc.

Sect. VI. Here Dr. Bentley has the Ingenuity to own his acquaintance with
Neveletus, where he takes little or nothing out of him.

Sect. VII. That they are recenter than even Babrius I discovered by this
means; I observed in 'em several Passages, that were not of a piece with the
rest, but had a Turn and Composition plainly Poetical; as in the CCLXIIId
Fable, which begins thus, (...): This I saw was a Choliambic Verse, and I
presently suspected that the Writer had taken it from Babrius: whence it
evidently appears that the Author of that Parcel did nothing else but EPITOMIZE
Babrius, and put him into Prose.

Ibid. There Is a Noble Fragment of Babrias belonging to the CCXLVth Fable about
the Priests of Cybele, given us by Natalis Comes, (...) etc.

Vnde est Aristophanicum Convitium, (...)

Nev. Praef. p. 2. Socrates Aesopi Fabulas dignas judicavit quas Versibus
includeret.

Id. ibid. De Gabria itidem est ut moneam, scripsit Ille Iambico metro ejus
generis quod est (...), ut Suidas notat.

Praef. p. 4. Injuria Babriae fit cum ^i Tetrastichia quae vulgo exstant
adscribuntur, quae Babriam pro suis agnoscere puderet.

Id. ibid. At in (...) illis ne unicus quidam Scazon praeterquam in ultima
Fabula (...); quae sola restat naufragii tabula.

Id. ibid. Ex pluribus Babriae Fragmentis quae extant apud Suidam, nonnulla
congeram, etc. and then he gives us 14. Verses of Babrius, collected from
Suidas.

Nev. Not. ad Fab. CCLXXIII. (...) Versus Iambicus Scazon, quales Babrius
scripsit, nec satis scio number Babriae ipsius. And again, Fab. CLXXV. (...), etc.
Redolent haec ut plurima alia harum fabularum loca Versus Iambicos: atque
utinam extarent hi Versus, unde haec desumpta sunt; Babriam ipsum quantum
vid^o, integrum haberemus, cujus jam Vmbram tantum and EPITOMEN habemus.

Egregie vero rem totam describit Babrias: quod Fragmentum debemus Natali
Comiti; nullibi quippe quod sciam extat praeterquam in ipsius Mythologia, (...)
amp;c.

Not. in Fab. CCXLV. I must stop a little here to commend the Dr. for being so
true to his Author, as even to copy his Mistakes. Nevelet did not know of any
Writer before Natalis Comes, where this Fragment was to be met with; and
therefore our Dissertator, that goes no further than Nevelet, could know no
more than He did. However he Ought to have known somewhat more; because he
pretends Dissert. p. 140.
to have read what Tzetzes says of Babrius* Had he done as he pretends, he
would have found Babrius mentioned in Tzetzes together with this very Fragment;
and that in such a manner, that 'twas impossible to see the one, and yet
overlook the other. For thus Tzetzes enters upon the mention of Babrius Par. 47^
, (...),
(...) etc.


Sect. VIII. There is no MS. above 300 Years old, which has the Fables
according to that Copy -- Coming abroad first with Aesop's Life, writ by
Planudes, they are justly believed to be owing to the same Writer.

Ibid. The LXXVth about the Ethiopian, is taken almost word for word out of
the VIth of Apthonius.

Ex MSS. illis quos habui, ne unic^ quidem vulgatas jam habuit Aesopi Fabulas,
quas a Planude (ut Aesopi Vita est) Scriptas existimo.

Nev. Praef. Inter Aesopicas Fabulas legitur quoque haec paucis immutatis sub
Titulo (...).

Nev. Not. in Fab. VI. Aphthon. Thus far I have had leisure to trace the Dr. in
Nevelet; and I need trace him no farther; for These Hints. which appear to be
taken from thence are the only ones that he pretends to build any thing upon.
Whatever he has added of his Own (if he has added any thing) has been already
shown to be either a Mistake, or nothing to his Purpose. And now let me put a
Grave Question to him; with what Modesty, or Conscience, he could tell his
Reader, at the Entrance of this Dissertation, that he intended to offer such
things only, as had escaped the Observation of Others? when it is manifest,
that, as far as we have hitherto gone in his Remarks (that is in Three Quarters
of 'em) he has done nothing but plundered Nevelot. It Is true, as he wittily
observes Dissert. p. 33.
, Good Wits jump sometimes: however I should think it a pretty Nice matter for
the Best Wits in the World to jump so often together, so very evenly!

What he has put together in the next Paragraph, concerning the Life and
Manners of Aesop, with a great Show of Reading was already collected to his
hand, out of Eustathius, Plutarch, Agathias, Philostratus, Pliny, Herodotus,
Suidas, and Strabo; and the passages from thence printed at large in the End of
Camerarius's Fables. Dr. Bentley presents these to us with the same Pomp and
Pleasure, as if he had been the first Producer of 'em; and makes no addition to
their Number, but by One Poor Quotation out of the Scholiast on Aristophanes,
and another known passage of Phoedrus.

When he was mentioning Disser. p. 135.
Meziriac, Vavasor, and Bail, as Men that had gone before him on this Subject,
it would have been honorably done of him, not to have forgotten Those, whom he
was so much more beholden to, Nevelet, and Camerarius. But I find he is ashamed
of his Nearest Acquaintances; and, after such Instances of his Ingenuity, I
believe his Nearest Acquaintances will be ashamed of Him.

Our Critic having spent his Small Artillery here and there upon a Fable,
without much Success, grows Peevish, and is resolved to be revenged on the Poor
Monk that collected 'em, Planudes; who, as much a Monk as he was, never, I
believe, gave any man such Gourse Language from his Cell, as he now receives
from Court. He is called here an Idiot of a Monk, that has given us a Book [the
Life of Aesop] which perhaps cannot be matched in any Language for Ignorance
and Nonsense Ibid. p. 147
. As for Planudes himself, I must confess I have not the Deepest Veneration for
his Character; but neither can I think so despicably of him, as the Lofty Dr.
Bentley does, because I find him well spoken of by men of Good Knowledge and
Judgment, and even by his Adversaries Themselves The Learned Cardinal Bessario,
in a Treatise he wrote against Planudes long after his Death, has this
Apostrophe to him, (...) etc. Opusc. Aurea, p. 622. Arcudius, the Collector of
these Pieces, and who differs as much in his Sentiments from Planudes, as
Bessario does, has in his Preface, this Honorable Character of him: Planudem,
Monachum Groecum, celeberrimum Philosophum, and Theologum, and in utraque
Lingua versatissimum. And the Epithet (...) which Bessario bestows upon him, is
given him also in the Titles of his Manuscript Pieces, (...). etc. -- which
shows, that though Planudes was a Monk, yet the Scholars of those Times were far
from thinking him an Idiot.
. Nay, Dr. Bentley, I think, gives an account of him, not at all to his
disadvantage, where he says, that That Set of Fables he put out was of his own
drawing up; amongst which, there are several so well turned, so exactly copled
from Nature, and built on such a true knowledge of Human Life and Affairs, that
it is plain he was neither an Idiot, nor a Monk, that composed 'em. This is an
Honor therefore misplaced on Planudes, and which he deserves as little as he
does that Scurrilous Language; which the Dr. (ever happy in Inconsistencies)
has in that very Page bestowed upon him. Nevelet, and Vavasor were a little too
hasty in their Conclusions on this matter, and spoke too largely, when from
some Fables that relished of Planudes's Style and Way, they inferred that All
were of His Composing. Dr. Bentley has taken up the same Inference from an
argument of as little weight: the Reason (and the only Reason he gives) for his
believing 'em drawn up by Planudes, is, that there is no MS. any where above
300 Years old, that has the Fables according to that Copy. No MS! any where!
Very Extensive Words; it is pretty difficult to answer for All the Libraries of
Europe: for, as a Late Critic observes, Saepe non licet Viris doctis MSS.
adire, seu ob Distantiam Locorum, seu ob Praefectorum Bibliothecis invidiam,
seu ob alia Impedimenta quae memorare nibil attigit Ars Crit. p. 172.
. Learned Men are often debarred the Use of MSS, either by their Distance from
'em, or by the Envious Temper of those that have the Custody of 'em; or by some
Other Sort of Hindrances -- as for Example, when they expect to have those kind
of Favors gratuirously done 'em. But supposing he had an Exact Account of All
the Europaean MSS, yet how does he know, but that there may be one at Fez? the
most inaccessible Library in the World, next to that at St. James's.

This was an Assertion fit to be laid down by Dr. Bentley, because impossible
to be proved; and, I believe, not difficult to be disproved: for, as much out
of the way of those things as I live, I have casually heard of a MS, Older than
Planudes, that has the Fables according to His Copy; Vossius's MS. I mean,
which though I have not seen my self, yet better Judges than I am, who have seen
it, assure me, that it is about 500 Years Old, and that Vossius himself always
esteemed it so. It Is now at Leyden, I think; and might have been nearer, but
for Some-body's management. I need look out for no more Instances; against a
Negative, One is as good as a Thousand. If all the MSS, that have the Fables
according to Planudes's Copy were evidently Younger than He, yet we could not
from thence certainly collect, that He was the Author of 'em; whereas if One of
'em happens to be Older than He, we may be pretty sure he was not.

As for Planudes's Life of Aesop, I cannot indeed think it a Book not to be
matched in any Language for Ignorance and Nonsense Dissert. p. 147.
; because in some Languages I think it may: however I have no Great Opinion of
it. There are in it Several Idle Trifling Stories, told in such a Fabulous Way,
that one would think Planudes meant to suit the Life to the Book which follows;
and writ out of his Own Invention for want of Authorities. And yet neither dare
I reject every Circumstance of his Account as fictitious, that I do not find
confirmed by Elder Authors: he might make use of Books that never came down to
us; a great deal of Good History perished in the sacking of Constantinople: or
he might from the Same Books which we have now in our hands, take some Hints,
which we have not yet observed in 'em; and which it would be very Rash and
Immodest in Us to pronounce not to be there, till we have read over all the
Greek Authors carefully, and sisted 'em thoroughly. And this is particularly fit
to be said to Dr. Bentley, who, for want of such a Prudent Distrust of his own
Knowledge, has been guilty of a Gross Mistake. The Circumstance in Planudes's
Account, which he pitches upon to expose, is that of Aesop's Vgliness. He had
met with a Large Collection of Testimonies concerning Aesop in Camerarius's
Fables; in none of which there was any Hint of his Deformity: and he concluded
therefore, that there must and could be none any where else; and that This was
certainly a Fiction of Planudes. And now how does he insult over the poor
Ignorant Monk Dissert. p. 149.
on this occasion? how unmercifully does he use him? he asks him, what
Revelation he had about Aesop 's Deformity? for he must needs learn it, he
says, by Dream and Vision, and not by Ordinary Methods of Knowledge. He lived
about Two thousand Years after Aesop; and in ALL that Tract of TIME there is not
ONE SINGLE Author, that has given the LEAST HINT that Aesop was Ugly Ibid.
. Casaubon, or Gerbard Vossius, who had either of 'em read Ten times as much as
Dr. Bentley, would not have talked at this rate; because Neither of 'em, as
Learned as They were, had read All that was written, or remembered all they had
read. But Dr. Bentley, in the strength of Camerarius's Collections, is
positive, that not ONE SINGLE Author before Planudes's time, has given the
LEAST HINT of Aesop's Ugliness. If he would not be Angry, I would venture, out
of my small Stock of Reading to supply him with One, and Him an Author of great
Note, Eustathius; who in the beginning of his Comment on the Odysses ( p. 17.)
derives the word (...) from (...), and (...), says he, (...). I contend not for
the Goodness of the Etymology, let it shift for it self: but it is evidently
built on a Supposition that Aesop was Ugly; and implys, that That Opinion was
Common in Eustathius's time, that is, about Two hundred Years before Planudes
was born. Doubtless, that Learned Parecbolist (to speak in Dr. Bentley's
Phrase) could have produced Authorities enough for this Opinion, though they are
since lost: however He himself is a sufficient Authority to Us in the point,
since he is not, as far as I can find, expressly contradicted in it by any One
Ancient Writer; at least, he must be allowed to screen Planudes from the
Imputation of having invented this Particular to the Dishonor of Aesop: which
he was so far from doing, that we have reason to think he might have this very
passage of Eustathius in his Eye, where he tells us, that (...) and (...) are
the same (...). Vit. Aes. in initio. Planudes here intimates the same
Derivation of (...) with Eustathius; that is, as to the Words themselves, from
whence it comes: though he takes (...) in the Sense of Uro, and not of Splendeo;
which he thinks the Easier Etymology, as needing no Antiphrasis to justify it.
, and that Aesop took his Name from his Ugliness. The Groundwork of this Story
then Planudes had either from Eustathius, or from some Elder Accounts, which
both Eustathius and He equally transcribed; and upon this Groundwork it is
probable he enlarged, in his Fanciful Way, and being satisfied that Aesop was
Ugly in the main, was resolved to make him as Ugly as he could possibly, and to
dress up a Monster in all imaginable Kinds of Deformity.

Whether there be any Author, besides Eustathius, extant, who has made express
mention of Aesop's Ugliness, I am not now at leisure to enquire: sure I am
there are in other Writers Remote Hints and Intimations of this Matter, such as
may fairly be supposed to imply it. When, in Plutarch's Feast, one of the
Guests thus rallies Aesop, (...), he seems to reflect upon his Ill-shape and
Unweildiness. Lucian, in his Vera Historia says, they used Aesop in the
Fortunate Islands for a (...), a Buffoon, or Iester, one that made 'em Sport
(...). p. 397.
; meaning I suppose that he did it as well by his Person and Outside, as by his
Ingenious and Divertive Fables; and indeed rather by the First than the Latter;
for his Fables, of themselves, though they entertain and please us extremely, yet
do they not give us that Sort of Pleasure which causes Laughter. Dion
Chrysostom therefore, in the Passage produced by Dr. Bentley, seems to
distinguish between the (...) of Aesop, and his (...), says he, (...),
implying, I think, that the One was not exactly the same with the Other. It Is
true Everybody knows, that the Aesopic Fables were after Aesop's time
frequently called (...) by the Greek Writers, and from thence Ridicula by
Avienus: but it is not unlikely that the Original of this Use of the Word was
from something Ridiculous in the Gesture, Look, and Mimical Wit of Aesop that
accompanied 'em, when he first told 'em; rather than from the Structure of the
Fable it self, which does not seem contrived to operate that way. I am willing
to think therefore that the Name usually given to these Fables, (...), and the
Office of (...) ascribed to Aesop, carry in 'em some small Hint of Aesop's
Ugliness; for nothing is so Divertive, or raises Laughter so much as Deformity,
especially when Wit goes along with it. We may observe therefore, that when
Homer has a mind to excite this Light Passion in his Serious Poem, he does it
by the means of an Ugly Man (...)
(...)
Il. b. 215. Upon which Eustathius, (...).


, and an Ugly God (...),
(...).
Il. a. 599.
; Thersites and Vulcan are, as I remember, the only Two (...) in the whole
Iliad; the One on Earth, and the Other in Heaven.

It Is dangerous conversing long with Dr. Bentley; for I find I have slipped
here, e're I was aware, into his manner of arguing: however, in this I will
still differ from him, that I offer these things as slight Guesses only,
without laying any manner of Stress upon 'em. I need 'em not, in order to show
the Dr. his Error, and this is not a place to do justice to the Argument:
Eustathius's Single Testimony, without other Help, is sufficient to bring
Confusion in our assuming Critic, who challenged Me and all the World to
produce One Single Author before Planudes, that had given the Least Hint* that
Aesop was Ugly.

Vavasor, who started this thought to him (for This too is one of the Things
that have escaped the Observation of Others) mentions it with Distrust, and as
a Suspicion only; Thersitem, says he, Homericum reserebat Aesopus oris habitu,
and reliqua facie, nisi and hic quoque imponit Planudes ( p. 25). Had Our
Critic, when he took the Hint it self from Vavasor, taken also his Wary way of
proposing it, he might have saved himself the Shame of being confuted: but it
was a proper Occasion for Dr. Bentley to be Peremptory, when even a Jesuit was
Modest.

The Method he has taken of improving Vavasor's Suspicion into a Demonstration,
is, by running over Camerarius's Testimonies, and showing, that in None of 'em
there is any account of Aesop's Deformity, and that most of 'em are (as he
thinks) inconsistent with it. The Learning here is not his Own, but the Logic
most certainly is; for I dare say, never any man so reasoned before him. I will
give the Reader some account of it, after I have desired him to remember, that
the Point in Debate between Dr. Bentley and the World, is, not whether Aesop
was Ugly to that Degree Planudes has merrily represented him to be (Nobody was
ever Silly enough to imagine it, nor did Planudes himself dream of being thus
far credited): but the Dispute is, in general, whether Aesop were Ugly, or not?
Our Critic denies that he was, in Virtue of his Old Argument, the Silence and
Praetermission of Authors; and the Sum of whatever he has said on this occasion
comes to thus much. It does not appear from Ancient Authors, that he was a Lump
of Deformity, and a Scarecrow; therefore it is certain, he was not any ways
deformed; and therefore it is probable he was very handsome P. 157.
. His Particulars are as follow.

In Plutarch 's Convivium, Nobody, he says, drolls on Aesop 's Ugly Face,
which could hardly have escaped, if he had such an Ill one P. 149.
. I own Nobody there drolls on the Mien of his Face (to use a Bentleyism); but
the Mien of his Body, and his Natural Unweildiness, I have shown to be touched
on: and their mentioning any One Instance of his Ugliness, is a sure a Sign of
his being Ugly, as if they had reckoned up All. Had Aesop been so very Handsome
as Dr. Bentley tells us he was P. 157.
, the (...) of Chilo had been a Piece of Raillery very ill applied.

But Philostratus has given us in two Books a Description of a Gallery of
Pictures, One of which is Aesop, with a Chorus of Animals about him. There he
is represented smiling, and looking toward the Ground in a Posture of Thought,
but not a Word of his Deformity; which, were it true, must needs have been
touched on in an account of a Picture P. 149, 150.
The Dr. imposes upon us; the Picture he mentions is not designed to represent
Aesop, but his Fables; and by Their Name it is called (...).
. In it, indeed Aesop has a Place; and he is so far described there as
Philostratas had need of him, to express the Subject of his Piece; to have gone
farther would have been an Impertinence, utterly inconsistent with
Philostratus's Character, who is a Short Writer, and exactly proper in his
Circumstances. His Words are, Aesop seems there, as if he were actually framing
a Fable; His Smiling Face, and his Eyes fixed upon the Earth, declare as much:
the Painter knew very well that Fables are the Work only of Easy Minds (...).
. Would the Dr. have had a Particular of Aesop's Deformities inserted here? to
what purpose? when in the very mention of his Name they were sufficiently
understood; and would have been of no manner of use toward imprinting an Image
of that Thoughtful Posture of Aesop the Artist chiefly designed to express.

Philostratus's Intention was, to describe a Gallery of Pleasure, hung round
with fine and delightful Paintings: in his Account of One of these, he had
occasion to mention Aesop, and with good Judgment omitted those Particulars in
his Description of him which were neither Taking to the Eye, nor at all
Instructive, with relation to his Design in introducing him. Dr. Bentley, I
find, would have been improper enough to have described him Capape on this
occasion; but Philostratus, though a Sophist, knew better. There is a Like piece
of Address observable in his First Picture, where Vulcan's Engagement with
Scamander, and his Victory over him is represented out of Homer; and which, I
suppose, he placed in the Front of his Book, for the Honor of Lemnos, his
Native Island: And for the Honor of That too, and to make his Draught
perfectly pleasing, he gives us a Vulcan as handsome, for ought appears to the
contrary, as any Figure in his Gallery. Indeed he Ingeniously excuses the God's
not appearing to be Lame, by saying, that the Rapid Motion, with which he seems
to come from Heaven to the Combat with Scamander, must be supposed to cover
that Defect: But he intimates nothing of his Other Deformities; though Vulcan
was, according to the Poet's (...),
(...) etc.
Il. p. 410.
account of him, as Ugly every way as Aesop was according to Planudes.

This, I hope, sufficiently accounts for Philostratus's Omission; and as for
the Statue erected to Aesop, at Athens, and made by the famed hand of Lysippus,
it will be no argument of his Handsomness, till the Dr. can prove, that this
was an Honor done to Handsome Men only; which it will be no Easy Matter to
do, because there is an Unquestionable Instance of a Statue, made by this very
Lysippus, and erected by order of the Athenians, to the Memory of a Man, full
as Ugly as we need allow Aesop to have been: I will give it the Dr.
immediately, e're I part with this Argument.

The Greeks, he says, have several Proverbs about Deformed Persons, as (...),
etc. but none upon Aesop P. 150, 151.
? All that follows from hence, is, that Aesop was not Ugly to a Proverb; which
I willingly grant him, and am ready to leave Planudes's account as far as this
comes to: but he might be Ugly enough for all that; several have been so, that
were never made Sayings of: I know Some, at this day, who Write as Uglily as
ever Aesop Looked; but their Style is not yet got into a Proverb, though perhaps
hereafter it may; and therefore This instance I will not insist on.

Again, Aesop, he tells us, was Croesus's Ambassador to Delphi Ibid.
: he means, that he was sent of an Errand by him (...), says Plutarch, in
Conviv. if that piece may be allowed to be quoted seriously for good History.
thither; for such Mighty Monarchs as Croesus did not use to make Other Men's
Slaves, Their Ambassadors. But let his Title be as Glorious as the Dr. pleases,
his Person might nevertheless be Contemptible; unless the Dr. can prove, that
the Delphians were as Nice of Temper as the Turks, and would pay no Regard to
the Public Minister of a Prince, unless he were Tall and Comely. Whatever
Aesop's Person, or his Character were, They showed, I am sure, no great
Veneration for Either, when they tumbled him down their Precipice.

After all, the Dr's Reasoning upon this Circumstance must be allowed to be
Just; if Aesop were Short and Ugly, it is plain, as he pleasantly observes,
that he could never make a Proper Ambassador.

There is another Objection drawn from Aesop's being a Polite Courtier, and a
Man of Address: what if he were? Many, I suppose, have been so, who were no
Beauties! Yes, but he was so, to that degree, as to rebuke Solon for his Gruff
and Clownish Behavior with Croesus, and tell him, that he must converse with
Princes, (...), either Agreeably, or not at all P. 151.
. The Thing he said was Handsome, I grant; but must He needs be Handsome that
said it? I thought Ugly People had sometimes been as Witty and as Wise as their
Neighbors. But since he has mentioned this Aphorism of Aesop's, and professes
to approve it, I must tell him, 'twere well if he would follow it too, when the
Itch of contradicting Great Men is upon him; and resolve to oppose his Betters
(...); either not at all, or with Decency.

Dr. Bentley has yet One Reflection behind in behalf of Aesop; he has reserved
it for the very Last Place in his Book; and we know him to be such a Master in
Good Writing, that we may from thence be sure it is a fine one. Rhodopis, Aesop
's fellow-Slave, was, it seems, the greatest Beauty of her Age: if therefore
(says he) we may guess him by his Companion and Contubernalis, we must needs
believe him a Comely Person P. 152.
. This puts me in mind of his Argument about Alaesa Vide p. 124 of this Book.
, which he proves to be upon such a Coast of Sicily, because it happens to be
mentioned with some Towns that are certainly upon that Coast; and which I have
proved for that very Reason not to be there, because it is mentioned elsewhere,
with some Other Towns, that are certainly not upon that Coast. If Rhodopis were
extremely handsome, Aesop, her fellow-Slave must be so too! which is as if I
should say, it was impossible that Little Ieffery should be such a Dwarf as he
is represented to be, because the Tall Porter and He were Fellow Servants. Must
Aesop's Master needs buy his Slave as we do Coachhorses in Pairs? and be as
careful exactly to match 'em? Perhaps Xanthus, or Iadmon, or whoever he was,
(for Authors disser) might be a little wantonly inclined; and having purchased
Rhodopis for his Own Use, might fear, lest his Wife should return the Injury he
did her; and so took Aesop into his House, who he knew would be no Temptation
to her: or perhaps he pitched upon an Ugly He slave, that he might be sure to
keep the Fair Sheslave to himself; and made use of Aesop as a kind of
Kuzlir-Aga, to inspect his Seraglio. After all, what if I should turn the
Tables, and say, That Herodotus and Pliny's mentioning this Little Particular,
is a confirmation of the received Opinion about Aesop's Deformity? If He were
as remarkably Ugly as She was Handsome, the Observation indeed was pretty, and
not unworthy of those Authors; but Otherwise, it is Flat enough to have been
made by Dr. Bentley.

One would think the Dr. in Jest, when he puts such things as These upon Us for
Arguments; whereas He prop^ses 'em seriously and in good earnest, and fancies
he has done wonders in the strength of em. To convince him, if it be possible,
of the Weakness and Absurdity of his Proofs, I will (as I did once before In
the Answer to the Di^s^^^^^i^n on P^ala is.
) try 'em upon Another Subject; and see how far they will be allowed to hold.

Whatever Aesop was, Socrates, we are sure, was excessively Ugly: Thus he is in
short described by Xenophon in (...). 4*5.
, and St. Jerome Adv. (...) l. 1, p. 51.
: Flat-nos'd, Goggle-ey'd, Wide-mouthed, Thick-lip'd, Pot-belly'd, Bandy-leg'd
All these particulars, but the Last, are taken from Xenophon.
.

Notwithstanding this, in that way of Ratiocination Dr. Bentley has made use
of, I will prove him to have been a very Lovely and Beautiful Person. I will do
it by Every One of the Arguments he has urged, except the First, taken from
Philostratus's Gallery; in which Socrates, the Famous Persecuter of Sophists,
we may be sure, could have no place: but I shall make amends for the want of
This Proof, by a New one of my Own, every whit as much to My Purpose as This is
to Dr. Bently's.

Thus then Our Man of Criticism has taught Us to Speak, and Argue -- The
Athenians set up a Noble Statue Diog. Laert. in Socrate. Tertul. in Apol.
to the Honor and Memory of Socrates: had he been so Ugly as some would make
him, it had been kinder to his Memory to let that alone. But the Famous
Lys^ppus was the Statuary (...) Laer. ibid.
that made it. And must so great an Hand be employed to dress up a Lump of
Deformity?

The Greeks have several Proverbs about Persons deformed, (...) etc: Our
Socrates, if so Ugly, had been in the first Rank of 'em: especially when his
Statue had stood there to put every body in mind of it.

He was so far a Favorite of Archelaus, King of Macedonia, that he courted him
to come, and live with him Arist. Rhet. l. 2.
: but would such a Monster have been a fit Companion for a Prince? He is known
to have been one of the best Speakers, and a Man of the greatest Address and
Insinuation of any in his time; he had all the Chief Persons of Athens
continually about him, and was ever instructing 'em in the Duties of Humanity
and Courtesy, and all manner of Sociable Virtues: Could such a Character, such
a Station, or such Discourses befit Socrates if he was truly that Scarecrow he
is represented to have been?

He sung, he played upon the Music Cic. in Catone.
, he danced Xen. in Symp.
, he wrote Verses Plat. in Conviv.
: he was every way an Accomplished Person; and his Conversation therefore was
coveted by those that were so themselves. He made One often at the Meetings of
the Beaux Esprits, and sat up Drinking and Laughing with 'em till Morning Ibid.
: Is it credible, that a Man of such Deformity could be so Acceptable, so
Polite, and so Pleasant?

But of all things, that which ought most to prevail with us to pronounce him
not-Ugly, is, that he was the greatest Lover of Beautiful Persons, and the most
Beloved by 'em of any of his Age: Alcibiades, Critias, Agatho, Phoedrus, and
the rest of his Acquaintances, were all remarkably Handsome: so that if we may
guess him by his Companions and Contubernales, we must needs believe him to be
a Comely person.

His Thoughts, his Discourses were all of Love; every thing he said and did
tended to inspire people with it; his Philosophy was nothing but the Doctrine
of Love: and can we think he would have dwelt upon this Passion so much, and
inculcated it so often, if He himself had been so very Unlovely and
Disagreeable?

Plato, and Xenophon, have wrote Set-apologies for him, wherein they defend
him, among other things, from the Imputation of corrupting the Youth of Athens
by Unlawful Love: had he been so deformed, as he is said to be, how could they
better have cleared him of it, than by Urging the Improbability of his
attempting such Impurities, in which he was so unlikely to prevail? But having
said nothing of this kind in his behalf, it must be presumed that they had
nothing of this kind to say.

Aristophanes, who has exposed and ridiculed him upon twenty Other Accounts,
has not a word, as I remember, of his Deformity; though this was the most Natural
Subject for him to exercise his Comical Wit upon, and so Obvious, that, one
would think, he could not have missed it.

I appeal now to any Indifferent Judge, whether I have not proved Socrates
handsome by as good Arguments at least as our Critic has advanced to prove
Aesop so? Indeed, they are most of 'em the very same; only urged further, and
with more strength (if I do not deceive my self) in the Case of Socrates, than
our Dissertator has been able to carry 'em in relation to Aesop. And yet after
all I have said, I freely own, that the Testimony of any Ancient Writer
concerning Socrates's Ugliness, though it stood Alone, and we had no Other to
back it, would weigh more with Me than all these Negative Authorities. So weak
an Argument is the Silence and Praetermission of never so many Authors in a
Point where any Single Writer of Note has plainly declared himself, and his
Account has been generally received and credited by Succeeding Ages.

But I offend in dwelling so long on these Trifles, which deserve rather to be
Laughed at, than Confuted: I will trouble the Reader no further on this
Argument than till I have suggested One Observation to him about Dr. Bentley's
odd Conduct in relation to Aesop. He is extremely concerned to have Aesop
thought Handsome, at the time that he is endeavoring all he can to prove him
no Author. He hopes by his Civilities to his Person to atone for the Injuries
he does him in his Writings: which is just such a Compliment to Aesop's Memory,
as it would be to Sir William Davenant's, should a man, in defiance of Common
Fame, pretend to make out, that he had always a Good Nose on his Face; but
however, he did not write Gondibert.

Our Critic's Two Attempts are so very inconsistent, that it is hard to imagine
why a Man should venture upon both of 'em at once: but Dr. Bentley had a good
Reason for it, they were Both Paradoxes; and he cares not What, or Whom he
writes for, or against, so he can but advance something which nobody ever
ventured to maintain before him; and which he is sure always to manage at such
a rate, as that Nobody will ever take it up after him.

I have done with what I intended to offer on Either of these Dissertations;
and, upon a Review of what I have said, am ashamed to see, to what a Bulk this
trifling Dispute has swollen. However, as Large as I have been upon it, I assure
the Reader, that, unless I had spared Dr. Bentley very often, I must have been
much Larger; for his Absurdities are not yet near exhausted. But I am not
likely to be the Last whose Pen will be employed on this Subject; and it is fit
therefore that Some Matter should be left for Those that come after me.

In that Dissertation where I am chiefly concerned, Dr. Bentley takes his Leave
of the Argument, with Some particular Civilities to Me. He heartily wishes he
could do any Service to that Young Gentleman of great Hopes whose NAME IS SET
TO THE EDITION: but he can do him no greater at present, than to remove some
Blemishes from the Book that is ASCRIBED to him; which he desires may be taken
aright, to be no disparagement to Himself; but a Reproof only to his Teachers
Disser. p. 68.
. I would not willingly be behindhand with the Dr. in any Instance of
Courtesy, and therefore, in return, will, e're we part, bestow some Charitable
Advice upon him: the rather, because I have reason to believe, that he has very
little Advice from any Other Quarter. If he had, he would certainly never have
written on the Subject, in the Manner he has done: for I have not so ill
Thoughts of any One Man I know in the World, as to imagine, that he would have
advised Dr. Bentley to do as he has done, had His Opinion been asked in it.
Young as I am therefore, I will take the freedom to do that kind Office to him,
which his Friends, I find, either do not care, or are not allowed to perform.

And the first piece of Advice that I will venture to give the Dr. is, that he
would know his own Talent; and resolve for the future not to venture upon any
way of writing that Nature never designed him for. Wit, and Ridicule, are
either the most Diverting, or the most Insipid things in the World. I have the
Opinion of good Judges, that he has no true Taste of either of these, and
performs very untowardly in 'em. He would do wisely therefore to forbear 'em;
and so he would, methinks, though he should have some little Knack at 'em: for
Grimace, and Banter, and Quibbles, even when luckily hit off, are not very
suitable to the Character of a man in Holy Orders. And to give him my opinion
what he is fit for, I think, (if he resolves always to be doing something out
of his Profession) that the Collecting Greek Fragments, or Proverbs, would be a
proper Employment for him. He has succeeded well in One of these, and would
doubtless be as happy in the Other: for his Genius seems to lie very strongly
that way; as one would guess by the Multitude of Proverbs in all Tongues,
(English, Latin, and Greek, but chiefly in the Last) of which he has emptied
himself into these Dissertations. And I am the rather apt to think, that such
Works as these might thrive in his hands, because the well executing 'em
depends chiefly on Two Qualities, which he must be allowed to possess;
Application, and a Willingness to be employed in such Sorts of Studies, as only
load the Memory, without improving the Understanding.

It is Another piece of Advice I should choose to give the Dr, that he would,
against he writes next, make use of that Relation he has to a Court, so far, as
to get a little Good Language, and Good Manners; without which, had he waded
through all the Greek Scholia, and turned over every Lexicon extant, he would
never write any thing that will either please or last. When he is making
Reflections on Style, it is very proper, I think, that he should be well
skilled, not only in the Tongue he writes of, but in That too which he writes
in: else, he will only make Sport for his Reader, if while he is correcting a
Fault in One Language, he himself makes Ten New ones in another.

And till he understands his Own Tongue a little better than he does, he would
do well to forbear Minting any New Words in it; which is the Work of Great
Masters, and a Privilege allowed only to Writers of the First Rate, who know
the Compass of a Language, and see through all its several Beauties and
Blemishes. Sir William Temple may say, Sufficiency, and the World will speak
after him: Indeed we are convinced from some things that have come out a late,
that there is such a mixture of Vanity, Indecency, and Ignorance, in some Men's
Writings, as No One Word in our Tongue would perfectly answer; and there was
need of a New one therefore to express it. But if Dr. Bentley should take the
same Liberty, he would be sure to be opposed in it; His Commentitious, and
Putid, and Vernacular, and Negoce, will be hissed off the Stage, as soon as
they come on: for the Fine Speakers will never endure that a man should take
upon him to coin New Words, who does not know how to use the Old ones.

Another thing I mightily recommend to him, is, that when he next pretends to
fix the Age of Greek Words, and Phrases, he would vouchsafe, among his other
Greek Books, to read the Bible: least he should happen to pronounce Some Modes
of Speech to be of Late Date, which are familiarly to be met with in those
Sacred Pages. For after all, should his knowledge in Greek Learning prove never
so great, yet it would not redound to his honor as a Divine, to appear well
read in all Sorts of Books, but those it best becomes him to be acquainted
with, the Old and New Testament.

I am of Opinion too, that it would not be amiss, if for this Twelvemonth next
to come, he read over Dr. Hody's Vow once every morning: it is a Good One; and
those who pretend to understand Secret History tell us, it was made upon a very
Proper Occasion. I will insert it here, both for Dr. Bentley's Benefit, and Dr.
Hody's Honor; who, it must be owned, has acted up to it always, as a right
good-natured Man, and an Excellent Scholar.

Faxit Numen,
Vt vel aeterno Ego silentio inter non scribentes delitescam,
Velsemper, ut Virum Ingenuum, liberalis ac generosae
Educationis veraeque Philosophiae studiosum decet,
Scribam:
Veritatis Vnicae Indagator,
Absque omni Styli acerbitate,
Mitis, Vrbanus, Candidus,
Ad id quod indecens est adeo non pronus, ut nec movendus:
Nugarum denique Contemptor.
In fine Praemon. ad Malalam.
Next to this Short Vow of Dr. Hody's, I know no small Piece that will deserve
his Reflections better, than Lucian's Lexiphanes Lexiphanes is the Name of a
Famous Pedant, fond of Hard Words, and Affected Expressions. Lucian, in a
Dialogue of his, gives a Vomit to him, and brings 'em all up, one after
another. His Disease is excellently well described by Lucian in these words;
(...). Luc. in Lexiph.
. If he would read it often, take the good Advice that Lucian gives there, of
Sacrificing to the Graces, and to Perspicuity (...). Id. ibid.
; and suffer some Skilful Friend to administer to him the Emetic Draught there
prescribed, it would do him a World of Service: by the help of this Physic,
and these Directions, well pursued, he might in time become a Sound Man again,
and speak and write like the rest of his Neighbors.

But if he be too far gone in his Distemper to have a Thorough Cure made upon
him, yet at least it is very possible, and very requisite, that he should
advance so far toward it, as to purge his Style of all Insulting Unbecoming
Terms, and Injurious Reflections: for if he carries on this Critical War in
that Unsouldierly Way he has hitherto done, and throws out his Rudenesses
without Decency or Distinction, he may happen to draw some Inconveniences upon
himself that he is not aware of.

Especially he should take care, when the Angry Fit is upon him, not to vent it
upon Great Bodies of Learned Men. A Single Writer may be trampled upon now and
then, and receive Correction from his Hand, without endeavoring to return it:
but among Numbers, there will alwa^s be found Some, who have Ability, and
Inclination, and Leisure enough to do Themselves and their Friends right upon
the Injurer; though he were a Champion of ten times as much Strength and Prowess,
as Dr. Bentley thinks himself to be. Besides, Single Adversaries dye, and drop
off; but Societies are Immortal: their Resentments are sometimes delivered down
from hand to hand; and when once they have begun with a man, there is no
knowing when they will leave him.

'Twere well too, if he would think it a point of Prudence to observe some
Measures of Decency toward the Dead as well as the Living; and not give
himself that insufferable Liberty of attacking their Reputation and their
Works, in hopes that nobody will be generous enough to stand up in their
behalf, and speak for those, who cannot speak for themselves. He has defied
Phalaris, and used him very coursely, under the assurance, as he tells us, that
he is out of his Reach Dissert. p. 40.
: Many of Phalaris's Enemies thought the same thing; and repented of their Vain
Confidence afterward in his Bull. Dr. Bentley is perhaps by this time, or will
suddenly be satisfied, that He also has presumed a little too much upon his
Distance: but 'twill be too late to Repent, when he begins to Bellow.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 53, l. 18, for One of 'em was, r. Two of 'em were. P. 54, l. ult. First
Inventor, r. First Inventor. P. 64, (...), r. (...). P. 66, in marg. (...), r.
(...). P. 76 (...), r. (...) P. 79, l. 12, this, r. his. P. 81, in marg. Gron.
de Rec. r. Pec. P. 110, l. 32, a word of, r. a word of being kind to. P. 114,
l. 2, Care, r. Cave. P. 136, l. 18, d. as he says. P. 139, l. 13, lit, r. hit.
Ibid. l. ult. Phalaris, r. the Letter-writer. P. 140, l. 1, He, r. Phalaris. P.
179, l. 1, (...), r. (...). P. 186, l. 21, fathom, r. fashion. P. 198, (...),
a. (...) P. 212, Naogorgo for Naogeorgo. P. 222, l. 3, Enclyticks, r.
Encliticks. P. 272, l. ult. is, r. it.

A Short Account of Dr BENTLEY, By way of INDEX.
DR Bentley's true Story of the MS proved false by the testimonies of -- Mr
Bennet. Page 6 -- Mr Gibson. p. 7 -- Dr King. p. 8 -- Dr Bentley. p. 19
Dr Bentley's civil usage of Mr Boil. p. 10, p. 7 and 8. (in Dr King's and Mr
Bennet's Letters) p. 199, 284. His civil Language to and Mr Boil. p. 11, 94,
238, 284. -- Sir W. Temple. p. 94, 199, 200.
His Singular Humanity to -- Mr Boil. p. 7, 9, 11 -- Sir Edward Sherburne. p.
15, 16 -- Foreigners. p. 14, 15
His Ingenuity in -- relating matters of fact. from p. 2, to p. 24 -- citing
Authors. p. 17, 18, 25, 26, 29, 117, 127, 132, 133, 150, 169, 212, 219. --
transcribing and plundering Notes and Prefaces of -- Mr Boil. p. 35, 113, 114,
131, 143 -- Vizzanius. From p. 54 to 60.133, 193, 194 -- Nevelet. p. 247, 248,
261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 269 -- Camerari^us. 273 -- Editor of Hesychius. p. 156
-- Salmasius. ibid. -- Dr. Bentley. p. 192

His Appeal to Foreigners -- a suspicious Plea. p. 13 -- a false one. p. 14, 15
His Charges against the Sophists returned upon himself, -- for forging
History, p. 16, 117, 127 -- for Solaecisms. p. 34. 91, 178 -- for egregious
dullness. p. 74, 106, 119, 135, 136, 137, 241 -- for Pedantry. from p. 93 to 99,
144, 216 -- for declaiming. p. 49, 50, 115, 116
His elegant Similes. p. 11, 94, 97 His clean and gentile Metaphors. p. 11, 97,
188 His nice taste -- in Wit: p. 28 -- in Style and Language, -- in Greek. p.
60, to 73, 203, 208 -- in Latin. p. 34, 191, 206, 211 -- in English. p. 34,
185, to 192
His old Sayings and Proverbs. p. 11, 94, 116 His Collection of Asinine
Proverbs, with an addition. p. 220 His extraordinary talent at Drollery. p. 36,
73, 117, 133, 214, 215 His choice of weighty points to debate. p. 156, 192 His
exactness in Chronology. p. 118, 119, 140, 142, 165, 241, 243 His familiar
acquaintance with Books that he never saw. p. 76, 98, 115, 232 His respect to
the Bible. p. 22, 62, 63, 67, 68, 121 His New Discoveries -- of the Buda MS p.
29, 30 -- Empedocles's Epic Poem. p. 45.195
His Old Discoveries -- of Ocellus Lucanus being writ in Doric. p. 54 -- of the
Aesopic Fables transprosed from Babrias's Scazons. p. 248
His dogmatical air. p. 97 His modesty and decency in contradicting great men,
-- Plato. p. 238 -- Stobaeus. p. 27 -- Suidas. ibid. -- Fazellus. p. 32 --
Capellus. ibid. -- Mr Seldom. ibid. -- Grotius. p 158, 159 -- Scaliger. p 158,
159 -- all the Moderns p 158, 159 -- Casaubon. p. 156, 158 -- Erasmus. p. 236
-- Scaliger. p. 236 -- Sir W. Temp. p. 27.92.199 -- Mr Barnes. p. 39.40 --
Everybody. p. 27.226.237
His happiness in confident assertions for want -- of Reading. p.
30.31.36.40.62.63.64.65.66.67.68.85.100.101.107.126.205.206.269 -- of Judgment.
p. 69.74.109.110.161.182.237 -- of Sincerity. p. 76.84.111.127.132.212.214.215
His surprising Consequences, p.
52.55.59.114.115.124.125.135.136.140.144.151.158.209.210.211.232.235.236.240.241.246.253.256.257.259.273.274.277.278.279. His profound Skill in Criticism. From beginning to The End.

