THE ANSWER OF A PERSON of QUALITY, To a Scandalous LETTER Lately Printed and
Subscribed by P. W. Entitled, [A Letter desiring a just and merciful Regard of
the Roman Catholics of Ireland, given about the end of October, 1660. to the
then Marquess, now Duke of Ormond, and the second time L. Lieutenant of that
Kingdom.]

DVBLIN. Printed by I. C. Anno Dom. 1662.

The Answer, etc.
HAving lately seen a Printed Paper, the Title whereof is, [ A Letter desiring
a just and merciful regard of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, given about the
end of October, 1660. to the then Marquess, now Duke of Ormond, and the second
time L. Lieutenant of that Kingdom:] Subscribed by P. W. And finding it in
effect, whatever the words of it are, extremely undutiful to his sacred
Majesty, very disrespectful to the Duke of Ormond L. Lieutenant of Ireland, and
most scandalous not only to the Protestants of Ireland, but also to those of
the same Religion in his sacred Majesty's other Kingdoms: I have esteemed my
self obliged, as a faithful subject to the King, as an humble servant to the L.
Lieutenant, and as a son of the Protestant Church, whose Members are as highly
as falsely asperst by it, to expose in print an Answer to that Letter, which
before I enter upon, I will only say, P. W. professing not a little to be his
Graces servant, if he meant not this Letter as a respect to his Grace, why was
it written? if he did, why was it printed? But P. W. despairing to receive from
his Grace the effects of his unjust desires for his Contrymen, chose this
way to acquaint them, 'twas not for want of his solicitation. He would let
them see, since he could not make them beholding to My L. Lieutenant, that they
were so to him.

Since I shall often have occasion to name IRISH PAPISTS, I have thought fit
here, once for all, to declare, That I mean not thereby in all, or any part of
my Answer, any of those Worthy Persons of that Nation and Religion who have
still faithfully served the King, whose merit I highly respect, and the more,
because it has been preserved from infection even in a very Pesthouse; nor any
of those, who having been truly sorrowful for it, and in the constancy of their
subsequent services to his Majesty, have washed themselves clean: For I take a
perfect delight in any change from bad to good; and I heartily wish, that every
one of them had not so much endangered their being polluted again, as
interceding and pleading for their guilty Contrymen does amount unto. Having
thus made this necessary digression, I shall now proceed.

The parts separate of this Letter are three. First, a Preface. Secondly, a
Petition. Thirdly, a Conclusion or concluding Wish. P. W. prefaceth; First, the
Fears and Iealousies of those whom he calls the Catholics of Ireland.
Secondly, His own affection to, and confidence in his Grace the Duke of Ormond.

Fears and Iealousies are no less than must in reason be expected in the
Generality of the Irish Papists; For though the goodness and indulgence of the
best of Kings may make their condition safe: yet the conscience of their own
guilt will never suffer them to be secure. Pretended Fears and Iealousies were
the Forerunners, if not Causers of Troubles past; I hope P. W. intends them not
as such, for Troubles to come.

Fear is founded on, at least attended with Hatred; and if one of the Best of
his Majesty's Servants, one of the chiefest of his Ministers, be thus 1.
Universally, 2. Intensly feared, and therefore 3. hated, 4. as P. W. says, by
his own Contrymen: (but let all that P. W. prints, stand or fall, as this
last particular is true or false; for his Grace is neither his Countryman by
birth, Religion, or any other relation to which that Name is appliable;) yea 5.
by his own Fiduciares (as is expressed in the Printed Letter.) If, I say, all
this be not true, why does P. W. say it? if it be true, what can others expect?
For if the flame be so in the green Tree* what will it be in the dry?

The Irish Papists in their former and later Apologies for the horridest of
Rebellions, have not to this very day (within any of his Majesty's Dominions)
even pretended publicly any other cause for their Rapines, Murders, Massacres
and Treasons, but what resolves it self into Fears and Ielousies. And if their
Passions be the same, it is to be feared their Wills are not altered. And if
their Wills be the same, nothing under God, can prevent the effects, but want
of strength.

Especially considering that 1. in 1641. no such antecedent animosities or
hatreds had prepared matters for Fears and Ielousies, as by the worst of
Rebellions is now become even nationally violent, (but by the way, it seems to
me somewhat hard, that those which give the rise for the Cause, should first
cry out in the Effects.) 2. In 1641. these Fears and Ielousies (if really in
any) were but in a Few; but now P. W. confesses, That they have seized upon
almost all the Nobility, Gentry and others, yea the Generality of the
Catholics of Ireland, even the constant Believers of, passionate Sticklers
for, and fastest Friends to his Grace the Duke of Ormond; and this so intensly,
that it produces the loss both of Faith and Hope.

Here it may well be observed what temper they are of, whom P. W. pleads for;
Ielousies, Fears and want of faith are so inseparable from them, that those in
1641 were only said to be derived from his Majesty's Enemies, but now (all
such by the mercy of God being blown away) they are derived from his Majesty's
chief Minister of State of this Kingdom; and who is made such, as P. W. says,
and as I most heartily acknowledge, by his own great deserts. What is it can
suppress the Fears and Ielousies of P. W's. Contrymen, when his Majesty's
free Election of a chief Governor, and such a one as the Duke of Ormond is,
cannot do it? This acknowledgment of P. W's. fully proves, that the Irish
Papists Fears and Ielousies of the chief Governors of this Kingdom in 1641,
were only taken up by those, and not cause given for them by these. The plain
English is this, though his Majesty should from time to time nominate for Lord
Lieutenant of this Kingdom, the wisest and the faithfullest of his Subjects;
yet because the King commissionates them, or because they are such, or both,
many (I wish I could not say most) of the Irish Papists will be jealous and
fearful of them.

Concerning P. W's. affection to, and confidence in his Grace the Duke of
Ormond, expressed by several instances of free and frequent access to him, of his
and others reliance on his word, of his daily care and trouble to support his
esteem, and of blaming distrusters as guilty of ignorance of State affairs, and
the Intrigues obstructing, as yet; or of inconsideration of those wiser ways,
though slower, than folly or rashness could chalk out, or of prejudice and evil
Passion. I will only say, That though P. W. would make us believe, as if some
word in secret had post by his Grace to the Irish Papists, which they dare thus
mention to himself, and publish to the world; at least that he who is a professed
Enemy to the English Interest, and Protestant Religion, is his Graces intimate
and familiar Confident; and by such as visible, as false arts, endeavor to
infect the Protestants with the disease of him, and his Countrymen; Ielousies
and fears of the L. Lieutenant. Yet I dare as truly, as confidently aver,
though P. W's. Oratory were as great as his malice, his insinuations could not
shake, much less overthrow that irremoveable confidence his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects of Ireland, ^ave built with great reason and experience
upon his Grace, even on the double Accounts, of his Principles and Practices.
To attempt to betray with a Kiss, is neither a new art nor a new sin. But he
that would destroy by undermining, would do it by open force, if his power
proportioned his will.

Concerning P. W's. affection to his Grace, he says no more for that in
particular, than he says in general for his Countrey-mens having a right to the
Peace made in 1648. Therefore I believe his Grace will take his measure of the
former, by his knowledge of the later.

After this Preface, P. W. petitions, That his Grace would no longer delay,
than shall be necessary, yea that he would in this present conjuncture,
effectually demonstrate that justice and favor he intended to the Catholics of
Ireland, in the Articles of Peace made in 1648.

Though P. W. in the first clause, petitions only that his Grace would no
longer delay than shall be necessary; yet as if struck with the Fears and
Jealousies of his Contrymen, and not daring to submit the determination of
that period of necessity to his Graces judgment, he petitions limitedly, if not
positively, in the later clause, for the present conjuncture.

If the subject matter of that Justice and Favor petitioned for, may be
measured (as is expressed) by his Graces intendment, I am confident the
Protestants of Ireland, should his Majesty think fit) will freely submit their
All, to that Decision; without either Articling with him first; or breaking
Articles after the guilt of making them.

P. W. inforceth his Petition by Arguments pretending to Justice Distributive
In the common case considered Absolutely. comparatively
Justice Commutative In some special cases of the Transplantation. Corporation.



In respect of the common Case considered absolutely, P. W. argues, That the
Irish Papists in 1648. FREELY put themselves and their power into his Graces
hands.

But Freely in this instance, if it signifies ought meritoriously, it signifies
the same as gratis; when as it was made, 1. upon Articles; 2. even upon such
Articles, as forced from his Majesty all the Regalia, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal; 3. when as at such a season, and in such a Tempest every good Subject
should freely have cast his Goods overboard, to prevent the common Wrack, even
then the Irish Papists would not contribute to prevent one Leak, but at a Rate
unproportionate, and as the Tempest or Leaks increased, so increased their
Rates. But to show how freely the Irish put themselves and their power into his
Majesty's hands, I need but rehearse his sacred Majesty's own words, in the
preamble of his Majesty's Gracious Declaration of the 30. of November 1660.
page 3. viz. We well remember the Cessation of the Peace, which Our Royal
Father of blessed Memory had been FORCED, during the late Troubles, to make
with his Irish Subjects of that Our Kingdom, and by which he was COMPELLED to
give them a full pardon for what they had before done amiss, upon their return
to their duty, and their promise of giving his Majesty a vigorous assistance.
In the same page of the same Declaration, soon after follow these words, viz.
We could not forget the Peace which Our selves was afterward NECESSITATED to
make with our said Subjects, in the time when they who wickedly usurped the
Authority, had erected that odious Court for the taking away the life of Our
dear Father, etc.

That which his Majesty calls Forced, Compelled and Necessitated, P. W. calls
Freely putting themselves into his Graces hands; so that that untrue suggestion
of his needs no other refutation as to the time past, and as to the time to
come, I wish I had not cause to doubt, if ever they put themselves into his
Graces hands, that which they will call Freely, will be an effect of
compulsion, force and necessity. Whatever the Submission was in 1648. and how
free soever pretended; yet the express letter of those Articles, (Article 18.)
precludes all offenses which shall be committed or done after their Date; and
after that, the Irish Papists instead of freely putting themselves and their
powers in the L. Lievtenants hands, signally declared their Contempt of him,
Disobedience to him, and Opposition against him. For proofs whereof, among
many, I shall set down one undeniable instance of each.

1. For their Contempt: In April 1650. by a Message they desired the L.
Lieutenant to Leave the Kingdom, and commit the Government to one of their own
election, in whom they could confide. That which Now P. W. varnisheth with a
modester phrase of Fears and Iealousies, was Then contempt and diffidence. At
the same time that they owned the L. Lievtenants Authority, they desire him to
resign it, without his Majesty's consent, nay so much as his knowledge; yet this
is but consonant to the whole Series of their practices, never to acknowledge
the Kings Right, but to affront it, or to get their ends by it.

2. For their Disobedience when the L. Lieutenant refused upon weighty reasons
of Piety, Duty and State, to conform to this Message, and leave the Kingdom; in
August following they by their public Declaration professed their Disobedience
in these very words: We do hereby manifest to the People, that they are no
longer obliged to obey the Orders or Commands of the Marquess of Ormond. Words
which so clearly evidence their Rebellion, and the vastness of it, that they
need no Comment, nor ought but the Text it self to prove both those Truths. Nor
is there need of any other proof to evince their entire breach of those
Articles, which they now so fiercely plead for the benefit of. They are so far
from giving proofs of their duty to the King, and of their gratitude for his
mercy extended in those Articles; that least any should suspect them guilty of
those, they declare their power paramount to his Majesty's authority.

3. They proceed from bad to worse, from worse to worst; from Contempt to
Disobedience, from disobedience to downright Opposition. And accordingly the
very next month they cause their Clergy to excommunicate not only the L.
Lieutenant, but all that should feed, or adhere to him. That which Christ
commands us to do to our Enemies; (if thy Enemy hunger, feed him;) and that
which even common Charity makes us do to the very beggars at our gates, they
not only refuse to do to him they so recently acknowledged to have his
Majesty's Authority, nay who had the honor to represent his person: but also
they prohibit all others to do it, and upon no less penalty than
Excommunication; and that nothing may be wanting to sublimate their wickedness
to the highest, Religion is made the instrument of their iniquity.

The Notoriety whereof, and of many other acts diametrically opposite to that
free submission immediately pretended, is so undeniable, that P. W's. own
Conscience squeezes out this confession, I am not ignorant that some have
after transgressed in a high nature.

But first, the aforementioned Declaration runs in the name of the Catholics
of Ireland; now some, was then all.

Secondly, All the premised instances of Contempt, Disobedience and Opposition
were not the acts of private, but of public persons, even of those public
persons into whose hands the Irish Papists may truly be said to have gratis put
themselves and their power.

Thirdly, The general silence and submission of the Body of the Irish Papists
to the premised instances, conclusively argues, a general consent thereunto, at
least subsequent, if not antecedent; for either they were generally consenting,
or dissenting; if dissenting, why did not that Generality punish the
Transgressors, or even oppose and deny the Transgression? if generally
consenting, that extenuating particle some, declares more affection in P. W. to
those Consenters, than either to his Majesty or his Viceroy.

The next Argument respecting the General Case, is propounded by way of
Comparison, and that as frequent as untrue, charging, (1) Protestants, (2) Many
Protestants, (3) Many thousand Protestants, (4) In the three Kingdoms; 1. To
have been more hainously criminal; 2. To have contributed, or intended as
little for the bringing home of his Majesty, as the most wickedly principled of
the Roman Catholics of Ireland.

If ever any, this Comparison is odious, between Many thousands Protestants in
the three Kingdoms, and not barely the Irish Papists, but the most wickedly
principled of them: So that if P. W. may hold the scale, the Crimes of those
Protestants shall weigh more, and their Services for his Majesty, at least
their intendments, less.

But let P. W. prove any one of those many Thousands thus wickedly principled
to be a Protestant, and and he will with the same labor disprove his charge.
Let him prove his charge in any one particular, and he will with the same
labor disprove his instance to be a Protestant.

I believe most in the three Kingdoms have been first or last hainously
criminal, so that every Mouth must be stopped. But certainly their guilt
gradually differs, and the most wickedly principled of the Roman Catholics of
Ireland deserve not the lowest degrees in it. Yet possibly some others in the
three Kingdoms may run parallel with them; But I assume, such are more closely
allied both in Principle and Practice, to the Irish Papist, than English
Protestant.

Suppose all be involved in one Common guilt, is the eye of P. W. evil, because
his Majesty's is good? or, is there any necessity to extend the same Grace to
all; or to render a Reason, where only Grace makes the difference? I presume
P. W. expects a greater degree of favor than many others of his Contrymen,
and therefore his Fears and Iealousies are less; his affection and confidence
more; and may not his Majesty's Grace make a general as well as personal
difference?

Lastly, As God who is glorious in all perfections, does magnify his Mercy
above all his works: so his Majesty who abounds in all Royal virtues, does
above all abound in Grace and Goodness, and from that Grace and Goodness,
without the least pretension of merit (the Popish tenent) or Articling, (the
Irish practice) the English Protestants confess to derive their All. Yet they
humbly conceive, there are rational inducements for his Majesty in the degrees
of his Grace, to discriminate between the Irish Papists and the English
Protestants.

1. In all Societies the public acts of FREE Representatives, virtually and
interpretatively include all, who declaratively oppose not. But the English
Representative, though under a Force, would never consent to cast off his
Majesty's Authority, and as soon as freed from Force, brought home his Majesty;
the Irish when at most freedom, and after a submission pretended, distrusted,
disobeyed, opposed his Majesty's Authority; yea banished and excommunicated
(him in effigy in) his Viceroy; and his, namely, all that should feed him or
adhere to him; nor did they ever as a public Representative, either witness
their repentance, or contribute to his Majesty's Restoration.

2. The English Protestants, as became Subjects, submitted to his Majesty
freely and absolutely; but the Irish Papists as became Enemies, not only
Articled with his Majesty, but compelled him in the day of their height and his
necessity, to such Articles, as they knew nothing but necessity could compel
him to. The English Protestants may therefore claim his Majesty's Grace, which
is as great as their Guilt; the Irish Papists can only claim what is due by
Articles, the foundation whereof being dissolved on their parts, they can
justly claim nothing by them, though his Majesty's Mercy has given them much.

3. The forfeited Estates of the English Protestants were fully at his
Majesty's dispose, and might be freely remitted; but the forfeited estates of
the Irish Papists were sold by his late Majesty of blessed memory, and that
sale, for the satisfaction of the Adventurers, countenanced and declared in
Parliament, and therefore the forfeited Estate of the Irish Papists could not
be remitted without satisfaction to the innocent Purchasers.

4. His Majesty may rationally expect more future obedience and loyalty from
English Protestants, than Irish Papists; For (1) the English Protestants are
the Conquerors, the Irish Papists the conquered; and ancient as well as modern
experience has made it appear, the conquered never did (some think morally
never will) love the Conqueror; and though his Majesty should give the Irish
Papists not the half only, but the whole of this Kingdom: yet they will never
probably forgive the English Protestants for conquering them, nor consequently
heartily love that Royal Authority which first commissionated the Protestants
to do it.

5. Until these last unhappy and unnatural troubles, the English Protestants
in Ireland were never charged as guilty of any Rebellion; but the Irish Papists
in all opportunities never other than rebellious. Queen Elizabeth was the
mirror of her age, yet during all her Reign the Rebellions of the Irish Papists
in Ireland were very frequent. King James was another Solomon, a Prince of
peace, yet was his peace interrupted by the Rebellion of Irish Papists, and by
that only. King Charles the First was a greater than that Solomon, and the
wisest of men thought the Irish Papists fastened in 1641. to his Majesty by the
best of Governments; and to the English Protestants, by the strictest Ties of
interess, friendship, marriage and (which is more in their esteem) Gossiping,
and fostering; to the Public Peace, by their as flourishing, so free
condition; and to all, by those Royal Graces which his sacred Majesty at that
time indulged their Commissioners, such as themselves could desire; 'twas then
but ask and have: yet all this honey turned into gall; for at that very time in
which the King was exercising such high acts of Grace to them, the Irish
Papists plotted, and soon after perpetrated the worst of Rebellions; the worst
extensive, exulcerating generally; and intensive, breaking forth with more
perfidy, barbarism and cruelty than can be paralleled in any History.

6. Principles of Religion engage English Protestants to submit to the King as
Supreme; but Principles of Religion engage Irish Papists to advance as Supreme
a Foreign Prince, and limits all their obedience, with a Saving to the
pretended Apostolic See. Certainly his Majesty may expect more future
obedience from Protestants, whose consciences engage them to Loyalty; than from
Irish Papists, whose consciences are engaged to the Pope. Can his Majesty trust
them, if they be not faithful to their Conscience-ingagement? and if they be,
can he trust them when their Consciences engage them to his Enemy?

The next sort of Arguments respect some special Cases, as (1) of the
Transplantation, (2) of the Corporation.
Concerning the Transplantation, P. W. peremptorily concludes, That it cannot
be continued on account of their Crimes since 1648. nor stand with the
Articles, or with the equity of the Laws, much less with the Justice of the
Prince.

1. This Conclusion without any proof, with the same facility as it is said,
may be gainsaid.

2. The foundation of those Articles, and consequently the Articles themselves
are thrown down by the Irish Papists; wherefore it matters not as to his
Majesty, what can or cannot stand with them.

3. Many other Countries and Ages have formerly on less grounds used
Transplantation, and been justified therein as just and equal, by Lawyers and
Casuists.

4. Observe his Sacred Majesty's Royal and Fatherly indulgence even to those
Irish Papists, who being Innocent, sued out Decrees, and obtained possession of
Lands in the Province of Connaught and County of Clare. First, Positively; for
though they had bound themselves up therein by their own Act, in which though
his Majesty says in the 14 page of his Gracious Declaration of the 30 of
November 1660. We might without any injustice deny to relieve them; yet his
Clemency is so great, That in the same 14 page of his said Declaration, he
breaks those fetters which they had bound themselves in, and orders them to be
restored unto their former estates.

Secondly, Comparatively; his Majesty uses those innocent Irish Papists with
more tenderness than even those which He honors with the high Title of his
Friends in England and Ireland, as appears in the 18 and 19 pages of the said
Declaration: For though such are not to expect that his Majesty should pay back
to them the Moneys they were compelled in the evil times to disburse for their
Compositions, the payment whereof they would have avoiden had it been in their
power, as much as the Irish Papists would have avoided their Transplantation:
yet his Majesty's Friends are not relieved from their own Act, when the
innocent Irish Papists are relieved from theirs.

5. Observe the insolency of P. W. for though his Sacred Majesty in Council, by
his said Declaration published to the world in print, declared that some other
transplanted Irish are to stand bound by their own Act, and not to be relieved
against it; yet P. W. is so far from acknowledging and magnifying his Majesty's
Mercy in using the innocent Irish Papists with more favor, than even those
happy persons whom his Majesty honors with the high title of being his Friends,
that P. W. peremptorily says, viz. The Transplantation cannot be continued on
account of their crimes since 1648. nor can it stand with the Articles, or with
the equity of the Laws, much less with the Justice of the Prince.

6. That the Justice of his Sacred Majesty in Council may appear to be such, in
not breaking so much of the Transplantation, as is confirmed by the said
Declaration, I desire these following particulars may be thoroughly considered:

(1) If such transplanted Irish Papists into Connaught and Clare should plead
that the Force of the late horrid Usurpers constrained them to go thither in
person; I answer, yet no Force lay upon them to sue out Decrees, and obtain
possessions of Lands there in liew of their former forfeited Estates in the
other Provinces. And it is only in point of Land that the said Transplantation
is continued: so that their doing of what they could not avoid, is not made
conclusive to them, but only their doing of that which they could avoid, and
yet solicited and brought to effect, is made binding to some of them. To which
I shall add, that those to whom it is made obliging, are only such as having
no title to innocence, (for all Innocents are freed from Transplantation) have
no title to any of their former Estates. And therefore this confirming of them
in the compensation of that, to which they had no right, should invite them to
acknowledge his Majesty's Mercy, which yet P. W. in their behalf exclaims
against as injustice.

(2) Though all these guilty Transplanted Irish have forfeited their right to
the Articles extorted from his Majesty in 1648. and though by those Articles
(had they been as punctually observed by them, as they have been generally and
often violated by themselves yet) his Majesty was not obliged to hinder them
from making an unequal bargain or exchange for those their forfeited Lands,
which by his mercy they were restored unto, nor to confirm to them those Lands
which they sued for in satisfaction of their former Estates; yet his sacred
Majesty confirms to them, in confirming their Transplantation, those Lands
which they themselves had obtained from the Usurpers, as a compensation for the
Lands they left, and to which they had not the least shadow of a Title, because
they had broken, yea often, if not always, the said Articles of peace
vouchsaved to, and extorted by them, in the year 1648.

(3) The persons themselves who are transplanted, have by their public Agents
made the continuance and settlement of the Transplantation the subject matter
of several Petitions and Addresses to the RVMP: therefore as for them to decry
it now, argues in them a fuller readiness to obey Force, than Right: so the
continuance of it being in effect but a granting of their own desires and
petitions, they can justly blame none but Themselves. To prove the truth of
this, I shall set down the Titles and chief Heads of two petitons presented to
the RVMP. The one is in print, and thus addressed: To the Supreme Authority the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. The humble Petition of Sir
Robert Talbot Baronet and Garrot Moor Esquire on the behalf of themselves and the
distressed Irish, Submittees upon Articles of War, and others who are to have a
certain proportion of their estates by the Act for the settling of Ireland,
held forth in the year 1652. Wherein, to use their own words, They humbly show,
That the Petitioners upon confidence of enjoying the benefit of several
Declarations and Articles of War held forth unto them by Authority of this
Parliament, etc. did readily subject and put their Consciences, Lives and
Fortunes as in a secure Sanctuary under the protection of this Commonwealth,
having ever since walked peaceably and in due conformity to the Government,
without the least defection therein; That since the Interruption given to the
sitting of this Parliament in the year 1653. No Christian Nation can parallel
the sufferings of the Petitioners, etc. which render the Petitioners as fit
Objects of your Honors piety, justice and compassion, as any who may challenge
your protection. Notwithstanding the Petitioners withered hopes, and former
confidence, being afresh revived by your Honors return to the management of the
present Government, and their propensions so great to peace and quietness, that
rather than ravel into the settlement, They do willingly acquiesce in the
Transplantation, albeit it was not executed by any legal power, as not being
derived from your Honors. Soon after in the same Petition follow these words:
They do apprehend that contrary to your Honors pious intentions manifested in
the said Act for settling of Ireland, they may be postponed or neglected,
unless provided for in the Act of settlement now to be established: And
therefore the Petitioners humbly pray, etc. This Petition was delivered by the
said two Agents for the Irish Papists at the door of the House of Commons in
England, and entered by the Clerk of the Rump.

The other Petition was in writing, and subscribed Robert Talbot, Garret Moor:
the Title of it is, To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, etc. Supplications humbly tendered by Sir Robert
Talbot Bar. and Garret Moor Esquire for and on the behalf of themselves and the
distressed Roman Catholics of Ireland, in order to be therein relieved by the
Act of Settlement now to be passed. Their second Supplication in this Petition
is set down in these words, viz. That the estates assigned unto the Petitioners
in the Province of Connaught and County of Clare be confirmed unto them. The
third Supplication in the said Petition is in these words, viz. That the
Decrees obtained by any of the Petitioners pursuant to the Articles and
Qualifications be put in a way of satisfaction and for the time past put in
equal condition with others who have had the benefit of their Decrees. The
fourth Supplication of this Petition is expressed in these words, viz. That
there having been no time limited by this Parliament for the Petitioners to
enter and prosecute the claims according to their respective Qualifications,
and the interruption given to the sitting thereof soon after the Act of
Settlement, having hinderd many from doing the same; and that others through
absence, poverty, and the short sitting of the Court for the adjudication of
Claims, appointed since the said Interruption, could not do it, That a farther
time be allowed unto such to enter and prosecute (as aforesaid) their Claims.
The fifth Supplication is expressed in these words, viz. That several of the
Petitioners are able to make appear their constant good affection and adherence
to the Commonwealth, for whom a competent time to be allowed to make out the
same, is humbly supplicated, and that these and such of the Petitioners as have
already done the same, may have the benefit held forth unto them by the Act for
settling of Ireland.

These expressions being verbatim in the said two Petitions, I shall only
observe from thence what follows, 1. The persons who presented these Requests
to the RVMP, did it not only for themselves, but for the Papists of Ireland,
in whose behalf they own themselves to be Sollicitors. 2. Those two Gentlemen
(their public Agents) were persons of too much knowledge and discretion to have
done any thing, especially of so high a nature as this, for so great a body of
people, without sufficient power from themselves so to do 3. That these their
Agents Addresses to the RVMP were by allowance and command from themselves,
needs not better to be proved, than by the Irish Papists ever since continuing
those their two Agents in public employment for them, even to this day.

4. To that very RVMP by whose immediate Commission the horridest of Murders
was acted, they scruple not to make their application, and even by the style of
the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. and
that twice. If P. W. should say they were necessitated to petition, and that
their petition would not be received without it were so directed, I answer, No
consequence of their suffering could be so great, as the guilt of owning the
RVMP by the twice before mentioned Titles. The single Advocate of the Irish
Papists, viz. P. W. lays it as a guilt upon all the Protestants of Ireland,
that some of them fought under one of the Regicides to recover their own
Estates, and punish the guilt of the first Rebellion, and their often violation
of their Articles; and yet their public Agents in behalf of all the Papists of
Ireland, own all those Regicides to be that Supreme Authority.

5. But if the Consciences of the Irish Papists were hardened enough to run
into a certain sin, but in the expectancy of an uncertain advantage, why yet in
their printed Petition did they use these guilty expressions, viz. They did
readily subject and put their CONSCIENCES, Lives and Fortunes as in a secure
Sanctuary under the protection of that Commonwealth. Though if they would
petition, they may say there was a necessity to style the RUMP, the Supreme
Authority; yet sure they cannot say there was a necessity in the body of the
Petition to insert such criminal words: therefore since the Body of the
Petition is more than consonant to the Title of it, it is but reasonable to
believe, the Title they gave the RVMP, was as voluntary as the expressions with
which they treat them. If they would but make his Sacred Majesty, what in print
they acknowledged the RVMP was to them, viz. A secure Sanctuary to put their
Consciences, Lives and Fortunes in; if what is past could not be remedied, yet
the mischiefs to come might perhaps be prevented.

6. But as if the immediate before mentioned respects to the RVMP had not been
sufficient, they pay them others, professing in these words, viz. Their
withered hopes and former confidences are a fresh revived by the RVMPS return
to the management of the Government, under which their propensions to peace and
quietness are so great, that they willingly ACQVIESCE in the TRANSPLANTATION.
Would they be but as joyful for his Sacred Majesty's restoration, as they say
they were for the RVMPS, and had they been as willing to express their
propensity to the peace and quietness of this Kingdom, under his Majesty's
undoubted Authority, as under the RVMPS usurped power, P. W. had been exempt
from the Guilts of writing and printing his Letter, and I from the trouble of
answering it. The Irish Papists are not only content to declare, They
willingly acquiesce in the Transplantation; but to heighten the merit of that
performance, they add these words, viz. Albeit it was not executed by any legal
power: yet had they stopped there, those their last words had been true, and
sure the RVMP would have had arrogance enough to have assumed to themselves,
without an explanation from the Petitioners, that thereby was meant, what their
Agents positively say in the immediate next following words, viz. As not
derived from your Honors. Though the Irish Papists in their engagements, nay
Oaths to others, are not without their Equivocations and Mental reservations,
etc. yet to the RVMP, when they might have left themselves, (as to the last
expression,) to a fair explanation, they voluntarily cast it behind them, in
these clear words, As not derived from your Honors. Those which now pretend to
such Loyalty to his Majesty, voluntarily confess, No execution was legal that
was not derived from the RVMP; is not this implicitly, if not explicitly, an
owning in the Irish Papists the legality of the RUMPS power, even in the Bloody
Murder of his Sacred Majesty, that being derived from those the Irish Papists
call Their Honors. But it is no wonder, that those to whom the Irish Papists
did rerdily subject themselves, and put their Consciences, lives and fortunes
as into a secure sanctuary, should have so much plainness, kindness and
obedience for them. May we not too from thence infer, till they consider his
Sacred Majesty, as they professed they considered the RUMP, his Majesty may not
well expect from them, that ready subjection and propensity to peace, which in
their said Addresses they promised to those Usurpers.

7. Observe, all this is said and done since the Peace of 1648. yea part of it,
and that the most criminal too, but some few months before his Majesty's
blessed restoration; with what face could the Irish Papists by the same Agents
plead for the Articles of peace before his Majesty, as inviolable observers of
them; who but a few weeks before owned the RUMP for the Supreme Authority:
owned that they readily did subject and put their Consciences, Lives and
Fortunes, as in a secure sanctuary, under their protection: owned their
withered hopes and former confidence was afresh revived by the RUMPS return to
the management of the Government: owned, their propensions to peace and
quietness under the RUMP to be so great, that as one evidence thereof, they
willingly did acquiesce in the Transplantation; with these superlative
expressions, Albeit it was not executed by any legal power, as not being
derived from their Honors. The very Murderers of his late Majesty of Glorious
Memory are the elected Sanctuary of the Irish Papists, not only for their
lives and fortunes, but even for their CONSCIENCES also. That bloody Power
which made the Royal Line of England, and all good Subjects of England,
Scotland and Ireland so long wither, is by their return to Government, that
only which makes the hopes of the Irish Papists to revive and spring. That
Power is by the Irish Papists owned to be the only legal one, by which all our
Laws and Liberties were cut up even by the very roots. Were there nothing but
this to make them forfeit the Articles they so plead for, it were but too much;
if this be their observance of their Recognition of his Majesty, though the
Pope may absolve them, God will not. Sure P. W. cannot prove any one of the
Protestants whose whole number he so calumniates, to be so criminal, as I have
proved even the Generality of the Irish Papists to be, in this one particular;
I bate him many others. And doubtless 'twas a less sin in the seduced
Protestants to submit for a while to him, who cast down those English
Murderers, and helped them against these Irish Murderers, than readily to
subject their Consciences, Lives and Fortunes to those Parricides, yea to own
them as their secure Sanctuary for all, and so pathetically to exult in their
second Usurpation.

8. In the many forementioned passages, both of the written and the printed
Petition, they press for the Confirmation of the Transplantation, and the
benefit of the Rules for adjudging of Qualifications, and make the granting
thereof to be effects of the RUMPS Piety, Justice and Compassion. The Irish
Papists are pleased to beg that Grant, as an act of piety, justice and
compassion in the RUMP, which his Sacred Majesty confirming, (and much more to
the advantage of the Irish) P. W. calls an Injustice. And in the 6. and 7.
Paragraphs of the said written Petition, they set forth that several of the
Petitioners are able to make appear their constant good affection and adherence
to the Commonwealth, that some have already actually done it: And in effect,
That the number of those so adhering and of constant good affection to the
Commonwealth was so great, that they sue even for a longer time than had been
allowed, for the proving thereof; they being so many, that they were
straightened in time to make out that Truth.

There are other clear observations and inferences which I could make out of
those two Petitions, which I decline; enough having been said to evince what I
promised to prove upon this Head: and I have much behind to answer, to which I
hasten.

The Guilt of the Corporations in part instanced.
The 2. special Case concerns the Irish Corporations which P. W. with his usual
confidence determines, cannot be excluded on any account that may stand with
his Majesty's Gracious Concessions; nor can there be any reasons of State which
may accord with a good conscience to exclude them; yet he confesses with a
paradventure, That two or three of them deserved punishment, and Limerick a
severe one.

The Corporations of Ireland that P. W. mentions were so notoriously guilty in
overthrowing the foundation of that peace wrested from His Majesty, that it
seems strange how any one can be found to plead for them, especially to his
Grace the Duke of Ormond, who knows their actings. Their Education rendered
them most able of any know their duty; their Incorporation most capable of any
to deliberate concerning their duty; their Fortifications and men most secure
to discharge their duty; yet these above all other persons and places, put
forth with greatest Arguments of choice and freedom, the highest acts of
Treachery and Rebellion. The evidences whereof amount to much more than P. W's.
paradventure, and the subject reaches much farther than P. W's. two or three
Corporations, it being the general practice of all such, into which his
Majesty's L. Lieutenant desired admiss^ion. P. W. confesses, That Limerick
deserved a severe punishment, and certainly the demerit must be great, which
extorts this confession even from their Advocate; nor was their crime less than
laesae Majestatis, for they insolently opposed the admission of his Majesty's
Viceroy: though 1. their Mayor had invited him, 2. Iretons storm threatened
their wrack, 3. the L. Lieutenant offered to steer that Vessel, and to
adventure his person and Fortune in the same bottom with them. But surely if
Limerick deserves many stripes, Gallway and Waterford proportionally to their
crimes deserve more. Gallway after the Articles of 1648. (so much and
groundlesly pleaded) 1. searched (to use his Graces own words) with force and
arms for the L. Lieutenant, as if they judged him a Traitor. 2. They treated
with the Duke of Lorrain to be Protector of Ireland, as if they judged
themselves Lords of all. 3. They refused to admit any Garrison commissionated
by his Majesty's authority, and surrendered that Town (as if they esteemed
themselves a Free State) without consulting the Marquess of Clanrickard then L.
Deputy, though resident within few miles thereof, and though he were of P. W's.
own Nation and Religion. But I will not say that even those double Ties were
less powerful to beget a respect for him, than his representing the Kings
person, and his own worth, were incitements to P. W's. Countrymen so highly to
affront him. Waterford likewise after those Articles of 1648. denied a passage
to the L. Lieutenant and his Army, though at that time his Lordship was
strengthened with the conjunction of the Vlster Forces, in pursuit of the Enemy,
who were weakened by a long Winter-March, multiplicity of Garrisons, want of
necessaries, and sickness of the Soldiers; nay offered himself to become an
hostage, and to commit the Army to another conduct; yea so horrid was their
perfidie, that when afterward the L. Lieutenant and seven more were
occasionally received into that City, the Citizens combined either to take away
his life, or deliver him up prisoner to the Usurpers; for the prevention
whereof, he was forced suddenly and secretly to withdraw thence.

What falsehood will P. W. be afraid to suggest to Strangers, and what
wickedness will he be afraid to patronize at home, when he shall dare thus to
assert to the L. Lieutenant himself, and publish it in print to the world, That
no reasons of State can accord with the dictates of a good Conscience, to
exclude these Corporations from the future capacity of repeating such signal
acts of Rebellion. But P. W. as farther motives of favor to the said
Corporations, adds and says, 1. The hand of God has punished them; 2. Some
were faithful amomg them; 3. The English Protestants are more criminal.

First, The hand of God has punished them: But that the Magistrate should
spare, because God punishes, is a non sequitur. Though the Lord sent hornets
before Israel to drive out the Hivite and the Canaanite, and the Hittites; yet
he commands Israel to destroy those Nations, and their name from under heaven.

2. P.W. says, There have been many faithful subjects in those Towns, even in
the most criminal of them; and God was so far from involving the just in the
destruction of the wicked Sodomites, that if he could find there but ten just
men, he would for their sake pardon all the rest.

1. The sin of Apostasy seems worse in some respect than other sins; and
therefore on this sin, Lots wife, whom God had rescued from the destruction of
Sodom, though but for looking back to it, is immediately turned into a pillar
of Salt. I heartily wish the Irish Apostates would remember Lots wife.

2. Though God would not involve the righteous in the punishment of the wicked
but delivered just Lot; yet he transplanted him into Zoar, and condemned Sodom
and Gomorra with an overthrow, making them an Example to those that after
should live ungodly. Even so his Majesty has taken care for the innocent, in
his Gracious Declaration, without justifying the wicked, and for the innocent
has provided a Zoar, whether their souls may escape and live.

3. Since P. W. professes his thoughts to be far from desiring to obstruct the
securing the peace of the Country; let him consider how advisable it is to
put a sword into a Madmans hand, or to capacitate such rebellious spirits to
hurt themselves and others.

Since Limerick, nothwithstanding the hand of God, and mixture of good,
deserved a severe punishment; and since Gallway and Waterford are not less
deserving; ought not those Corporations and their Advocate rather to acknowledge
his Majesty's gracious indulgence and mercy, in remitting the severity of the
Laws: than to exclaim thus insolently against his Royal proceedings as unjust,
unequal, and such as cannot accord with a good Conscience.

The Guilt of English Protestants and Irish Papists compared.
Thirdly, P. W. returns to his former Comparison between the Irish Papists and
the English Protestants; and in prosecution thereof, urges, 1. That the worst
of the Irish Papists were never Regicides; 2. That they fought against such
men, when England, Scotland and the Protestants of Ireland deserted the Royal
Cause.

As to the first, That the Irish Papists are not Regicides; let it be
considered, That the Doctrine of Regicide is common in the Romish Schools, and
the Practice in their Courts.

2. That to touch the Anointing, is virtually to touch the Anointed. Take
away the Regalia, and in effect you tak away the King. The Irish Papists were
so guilty hereof, that they not only usurped all the Royal peculiars, but also
set up a Government distinct from, and opposite to his Majesty's in a General
Assembly; yea therein they Enacted, viz. That no Temporal Government or
Jurisdiction should be assumed, kept or executed in Ireland, or in any Province
or County thereof, other than what should be approved or instituted by their
General Assembly. Had the Devil had leave to touch Job's person, he would not
have spared him, when he touched all that was his.

3. Did not the Irish Papists, distrust, disobey, oppose and excommunicate the
L. Lieutenant, and absolutely disclaim his Majesty's authority in him; did they
not conspire to Murder Him, or which is worse (if worse can be) to deliver him
to the worst sort of Murderers? Surely those who dealt thus with such a
Servant, if the Son had been sent to them, would not have scrupled his Murder,
that the inheritance might wholly be theirs.

As to the 2. That when England, Scotland and the the Protestants of Ireland
wholly deserted the Royal Cause, the Irish Papists fought against the Regicides
in defense of his Majesty's right.

1. It is no less calumnious than false, to charge England, Scotland and the
Protestants of Ireland to have wholly deserted the Royal Cause: and it is
amazing to consider how any Irish Papist (I am loath to say Rebel) dare thus by
a Letter even to the Duke of Ormond, and printed paper to the whole World,
impeach the Nations of England and Scotland, and all the Protestants of Ireland
to have wholly deserted the Royal Cause: what may not Foreigners credit
against us abroad, if P. W. dare thus to charge us at home?

But a Narrative of the matter of Fact is the clearest expedient to refute this
slander: wherein let England and Scotland answer for themselves; (if any Answer
seem necessary to so palpable a falsehood) and let the Protestants of of
Ireland excuse my zeal, if I urge some clear instances (though I pretermit
many) for their vindication.

Those which P. W. slanders with having deserted the Royal Cause, when the
Irish Papists fought against the Regicides in defense of his Majesty's Rights,
were even the very first in Ireland which proclaimed his Majesty, my L.
Lieutenant also at the head of them; and that duty was performd by the
Protestant Army in the Province of Munster, the same year in which by giving
the Irish Papists some considerable defeats, the said Papists were reduced to a
real necessity of submitting to his Majesty, which yet they but seemingly did.
But possibly P. W. was at that time so busy in preparing those Articles of
Peace which were to fetter his Majesty, that he had not leisure to hear how his
Protestant Subjects freely proclaimed him. It is also undeniably true, that a
considerable Body of the Protestants of Ireland under the L. Lieutenant, though
mingled with the Irish Papists, fought constantly against the Regicides, nay
after the said Irish Papists would have been Kegicides themselves, at least so
far such as conspiring to murder his Majesty in effigy at Waterford etc. did
amount unto, and never declined that quarrel, till by the infidelity of their
Accusers, they were not only disabled to prosecute it, but as several of
themselves have confessed, were reduced at last, even for the preservation of
their lives, to keep as strict Guards against the Irish Papists as against
Cromwell. All which his Grace having found was but too true, he withdrew
himself at last out of the Kingdom and permitted those Protestants to withdraw
them selves from the Irish: Therefore let any unbyassed person judge whether the
Irish Papists or all the Prtestants were wholly the deserters of the Koyal
Cause; or which of them fought longest against the Kegicides: if the insolence
and disloyalty of the Irish Papists were such, even when Cromwell was at their
gates, what would it not have been without that Curb. But I see though P. W.
remembers what he should not, yet he can forget what he should remember.

In the years 1641 and 1642, the Protestants in Ireland not only fought as his
Majesty's Subjects, but by his command and with his Commission against the
Irish Rebels; in the year 1643, a Cessation was concluded by his Majesty's
Authority, and the Irish engaged by Articles; both English and Irish by duty,
to transport their Armies to England for his Majesty's service. The English did
it, the Irish only made a show (till the English were gone) of doing of it,
and then plotted and attempted the destruction of the few English remaining in
Munster, whereby the Lord of Inchiquin, who then commanded in that Province by
the Kings Commission; and the English with him were necessitated to stand on
their own defense, yet this is the first pretense which the Irish Papists make,
that the English Protestants deserted the Royal Cause. Can even Malice it self
judge, the Protestants designed the deserting of the Kings Service, when they
sent their Army to the King, by which only they were capable of disserving
him: nay sent it in that very Juncture of time, wherein they had as much cause
to fear the ruin of themselves and Families, from the often Violations of the
Cessation by the Irish Papists, after that Cessation was made, as from their
inhumanities before. But yet, when his Majesty's Service required it, though
the answering thereof, by transporting their Armies into England, threatened
more than a probable ruin to them at home from the Irish Papists, who then
delayed, and indeed never after would send an Army to the King into England;
yet the Protestants did not so much as hesitate, but cheerfully exposed
themselves to the danger, to pay the duty, and receive the honor of their
obedience.

The same infidelity and Treachery which Munster, and the parts more remote
first experienced, the L. Lieutenant and the Protestants with him at Dublin at
last tasted: And his Grace was thereby compelled in the year 1647. (with his
Majesty's permission, if not Order) to resign Dublin and all the adjoining
Garrisons into the hands of the Parliament, which is the second pretension for
this slander.

On these occasions the English Protestants of Ireland (not by choice but
necessity, (and a necessity only created by the Irish Papists themselves) not
by the Protestants own private acts, but the necessitated acts of those that
were set over them by his Majesty's authority) came into the Stream, with the
violence whereof they confess themselves afterward hurried into such
miscarriages as made their hearts ache; yet (they hope) less criminal than those
in the Irish Rebellion, or to any degree of Apostasy, which deserves the
scandal that P. W. lays on them, of wholly deserting the Royal Cause.

For 1. Notwithstanding the violent endeavors of both Papists and Anabaptists,
not many of the Protestants of Ireland have declined the Church of England, in
her greatest Trials, whose principles are not only most consonant to Truth,
but also most useful and dutiful to the Royal Cause: and for that reason were
opposed most by the two extremes. So that Old Protestants in the Anabaptist
dialect, was the same with Royalist, and by them the Protestants of Ireland
were dealt with accordingly. And 2. as the principles, so the practices of the
Protestants vindicate their loyalty. 1. They submitted this Kingdom to his
Majesty; not as England and Scotland, by the concurrence of the General and
General Officers, but without them, nay against them, 2. Though they saw the
difficulty of that attempt, and foresaw the hazard from Anabaptists (who then
in chief commanded the Army in Ireland) if they succeeded not; and from Irish
Papist pretenders (whose necessities had driven them to serve themselves by his
Majesty in Flanders) if they succeeded; yet were they early (if not the first)
and free without Articling in the duty of their submissions. And least P. W.
who says many things that are not true, should deny this, which is so signally
true, I will cite the undeniable Testimony of his Sacred Majesty himself, which
follows in these words in the 2. page of his Majesty's gracious Declaration for
the settlement of Ireland: We acknowledge that our good Subjects of the Kingdom
of Ireland have born a very good part in procuring this happiness, that they
were EARLY in their dutiful Addresses to us, and made the same professions of a
resolution to return to their duty and obedience to us, during the time of our
being beyond the seas, which they have since so EMINENTLY made good and put in
practice.

Here is not only a profession of duty, but a making of it good, and putting
it in practice. Here is not only an early owning of his Majesty's Authority,
but an owning it when he was divested from the actual exercize of it, and that
too (as to Ireland) by the Irish Papists. And this is also the first fruits of
the Protestants having recovered the power of Ireland, and that with no less
hazard than loyalty.

3. To make the Discrimination yet clearer: The Irish Papists at first
murdered and fought against his Majesty's good Subjects, to take from him his
Crown. The Protestants of Ireland fought aganst his Enemies to restore him to
it. The Papists of Ireland were seemingly good Subjects, but to become more
dangerous Rebels. But the Protestants of Ireland if seemingly Rebels, were
such, but to become more useful Subjects. The last action of the Irish Papists,
when they had the power, was to expel his Majesty's Authority, with
circumstances as wicked as the very sin: but the first action of the English
Protestants, when they were in power, was to restore his Majesty's Authority,
with circumstances almost as dutiful as the Action it self.

Lastly, Not to hold a candle longer to the Sun, I will but instance one other
experiment, and against an experiment there is no arguing; and the instance of
this experiment is even in the very Case now controverted, and in which also my
L. Duke of Ormond himself was the Judge. In the year 1650. when it came in
Question, which were the worst, the Irish Papists, or the seduced Protestants.
He permitted all those worthy Protestants which till then he served under him,
to come off to the rest of the Protestants, though then headed by Iret^n
himself; esteeming them safer with that real Regicide so accompanied, than with
those pretended Antiregicides, so principled. Certainly he esteems those less
ill to whom he sends his Friends, than from whom he sends them. If so wise and
so faithful a Servant to his Majesty, as the L. Lieutenant is, had had any hope
that the Irish Papists would ever have returned to their Loyalty, doubtless he
would never have sent away from them, so many powerful helpers of it, and
friends unto it: and if his Grace had not had more than hopes that the English
Protestants would have returned to their obedience as soon as they had got the
power of doing it, he would never have sent his friends unto them. The Wisdom
of his Grace's foresight has been happily justified in the Result. For all the
Protestants which then came off, were eminently instrumental and concurring in
the duty of accomplishing that blessed Event. I dare as truly as confidently
say, the most of the Protestants of Ireland only served under the Usurpers,
but to bring the Irish Papists to those terms which without the force of
English swords they would never have been brought unto. The Ancient and Modern
often breaches of Faith which the Irish Papists were guilty of, made it too
evident to many of the Protestants, that nothing could bind them but steel and
iron. The truth of both these positions is clearly read in that issue which the
Providence of God has effected. However the once Seduced Protestants of Ireland
are willing to take shame to themselves, and give glory to God, in confessing
their Guilt such, (though not by causing, yet by complying with the late
Usurpation, though to a good end) that they readily acknowledge they ow their
lives and estates wholly to his Majesty's Grace and indulgence; and will be
more joyful to employ both in the honor and duty of his service, than now they
are in having received both from his mercy and goodness. For it is fitter to
discharge obligations, than to contract them. The lively sense the once seduced
Protestants of Ireland have of their failings, and of his Majesty's Clemency,
so justly humbles them, that they can take no pleasure to recriminate others,
farther than by showing the Injustice of P.W's. comparisons; which they are
more troubled he gave them a rise to do, than after the rise was given they
were troubled to find out what fully has done it. But in regard the Irish
Papists in all their discourses, as well as their Papers, pretend to the
defense of his Majesty's Right; it seems even necessary, by way of answer to
the other branch of this proposition, to rub up their memories. 1. That in 1641
the Irish Papists unprovoked (1) rebelled, (2) robbed the Protestants of more
personal Estate, than the Fee-simple of all the forfeited Lands in Ireland is
worth; (3) in a few Months murdered about two hundred thousand innocents; (4)
with a sin next to Blasphemy, as now they pretend his Majesty's defense, so
then they pretended his Authority. The PRETENDING whereof having been so horrid
a sin, (for it was no less than to have entitled his then Sacred Majesty to all
their unparalled crimes, nay to have made him the Author of them) I think it
a duty to the memory of that Glorious MARTYR, to present the Reader in this
place with what will clearly evince their malice therein to be as great, as his
then Majesty's Innocence; and nothing can better illustrate the vastness of
this, but by proving it is a parallel to that. I could instance many signal and
clear evidences of this Truth, besides that memorable one which follows: But
since I have in most of my Answer made use of their own writings, and prints,
to make out their guilt: in this very particular I will pursue that method, and
only cite the Preamble of their own Remonstrance, delivered by the L. Viscount
Gormanston, Sir Lucas Dillon, and Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, to his Majesty's
Commissioners at the Town of Trim in the County of Mead, on the 17 of March
1642. In which Remonstrance of Grievances (for so they call it) after they have
taken notice that his Majesty had authorized Commissioners to hear what they
should say, or propound, these very words follow, viz. Which your Majesty's
gracious and Princely Favor we find to be accompanied with these words, viz.
Albeit we do extremely detest the odious Rebellion which the Recusants of
Ireland have, without ground or color, raised against Us, Our Crown and
Dignity. Words which deserve to be written with a Beam of the Sun, as eternal
monuments of his Majesty's Justice, and their Guilt; nor were they spoken in a
corner, but spoken under the Great Seal, and even in that Commission which
those False-accusers were to see and hear read; and by those expressions they
were sufficiently provoked to have pleaded that Authority they so falsely
pretended, had they had the least shadow for that black calumny. In these Royal
expressions also (if at least the Irish Papists have the Modesty (I bate them
the Justice) to acknowledge the King was a fitter Judge of their Crimes, than
they themselves were) the actings of the chief Governors of Ireland, when that
horrid Rebellion brake out, are fully vindicated: for the said Irish were so
far from being provoked unto it by those, that no less a testimony than the
word of that great, just and wise Prince proves, they had no ground, nay not so
much as a color for it.

2. In the year 1646, and after a peace concluded with them, they attempted, by
a Treachery not to be paralleled by any but themselves, to cut off the Lord
Lieutenant and Army with him, who marched out of Dublin on security and
confidence of that peace.

3. The same year, the Council and Congregation of the confederate Catholics
of Ireland, obliged their General Preston by a solemn Oath, in these very
words, viz. To exercize all acts of Hostility against the L. Marquess of Ormond
by name, and his party; and to help, advise with counsel, and assist in that
service the L. General of Vlster employed in the same expedition.

This Oath is a fruitful Theme to declame upon, but I will limit my
observations upon it, only to these following particulars. 1. Least any should
doubt they are his Majesty's Subjects; least any of themselves should repent
the sin of not having been such, they swear (that they may raise their crimes
above pardon) to exercize all acts of Hostility against his Majesty, in the
person of that noble Lord who had then, as now, the high honor to represent
him; If killing be an act of hostility, they in this Oath swear to kill him; if
this be not actual Regicide, I am sure it is not their fault that it is not.
This horrid Oath takes off all disguises, and makes their sin as visible as
great. And if such a Crime be capable of accession, it did contract it by the
same persons engaging privately, about the same time, (as I have been assured
by an undeniable Testimony) That he would serve the King, which he afterward
endeavored to excuse only by saying, His Army was not Nuntio-proof. By which
it appears indisputably whether the Irish Papists are Subjects to the King, or
to the Pope.

(2) Instead of repenting and making amends for the late violated peace in the
year 1646, they swear to destroy him, with whom they had made it.

(3) This Oath reduced the taker of it to a sad Dilemma, either to Rebellion or
Perjury.

(4) This Oath evidences that nothing is so powerful with the Irish Papists, as
to destroy his Majesty's Government; since the uniting of the Old Irish Papists
and the Old English Papists, which the Pope himself could not effect: the
dethroning of his Sacred Majesty has accomplished. They that could never agree
in any thing else, agree in this, and it is made the very Bond of their
iniquity. I will say no more on this subject, but that Herod and Pilate could
be friends, when it was to crucify Christ.

4. In the year 1647, from Kilkenny Ian. 18. the Popish Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and Commons of the confederate Catholics of Ireland employ
Commissioners to Rome, France and Spain, to invite a foreign power into
Ireland, particularly to Rome their titular Bishop of Ferns and Nicolas Plunket
Esquire (who was Knighted by the Pope for his good service therein, and is now one
of the confident Advocates for the Irish Papists as defenders of his Majesty's
Rights, and against the Protestants of Ireland as deserters of the Royal Cause)
these, I say, were authorized to declare, viz. That they raised arms for the
freedom of the Catholic Religion, which are their own very words in the third
Article of those their Instructions.

In their Remonstrance in the beginning of the Rebellion, whatever they said
necessitated some few discontents to take up arms, then they took off the vail,
and positively said, That they raised arms for the freedom of the Catholic
Religion. Certainly if ever they may be believed to speak true, it is when they
speak to the POPE; and if ever any thing may be believed to be the voice of all
the Irish Papists, it is when the Popish Lords Spiritual and Temporal and
Commons of the confederate Catholics speak in one Assembly. What is meant by
the Freedom of the Catholic Religion has been practically expounded by the
Professors of it in Ireland; not only affirmatively, that those which are of
it, should enjoy the public and undisturbed exercize thereof themselves; but
negatively, to be an exclusion of the public, if not private, exercize of the
True Religion. Many instances I could present the Reader of this, but I shall
only set down two: The 1. is Dean York a reverend Minister of Gods word,
during his residence at Gallway, was not allowed to pay the last duties of
Christian burial to those Protestants which died in that Town; but was forced
to bury them, nay his own children privately in his Garden. The 2. is, That my
L. Duke of Ormond, though owned by the Irish Papists to be the Kings L.
Lieutenant, and consequently representing his Sacred Majesty's person, was
still denied the use of so much as one Church or Chapel, wherever the said
Papists had the power; nay one of the Generals of the Irish PAPISTS, now
living, told my L. Lieutenant at Kilkenny, That if the King in person came into
Ireland, he should not be allowed by them One Church to celebrate his Devotions
in: to whom his Grace made a return, proportionate to the disloyalty of that
Declaration, and part of that return being prophetical, and since fulfilled, I
shall here insert the words, viz. I hope to live to so all of that mind to be
without one Church in Ireland to say Mass in. By these two instances it is
evident, That the direct meaning of those words, The Freedom of the Catholic
Religion, is no other than the total banishing out of this Kingdom the exercize
of the Religion established in it, by Truth it self, and by the good and
wholesome Laws of the Land.

5. In another part of the third Article of the said Instructions, these very
words are inserted, viz. The cofederate Catholics do intend that you let his
Holiness know, their resolution to insist upon such Concessions and Agreements
in matters of Religion, and for the security thereof, as his Holiness shall
approve of, and be satisfied with.

This palpably evinceth, that the Papists of Ireland being Subjects, or Rebels,
depends wholly upon the Popes pleasure: For let his Majesty grant them what he
will, yet his pretended Holiness's approbation must be the rule by which only
they will be bound. And this is made most evident by the words of the nineth
Article in the said Instructions, which follow in these words, viz. In case his
Holiness will not be pleased to descend to such Conditions, as might be granted
in matters of Religion, then you are to solicit for considerable aids, whereby
to maintain a war, and to ascertain and secure the same etc. And soon after in
the same nineth Article, these words follow, viz. You are to make application
to his Holiness for his being Protector of this Kingdom; and by special
instance to endeavor his acceptance thereof, etc.

Still the Pope is their King; and that he may be so almost in name as well as
in power, they solicit him by special instance to accept that Title, under
which he might act that power: so that it is not the Confederate Catholics
fault, if a PROTECTOR were not in Ireland, before the Sectaries had set up one
in England. Nay their Commissioners then sent to France and Spain, were
required in case of the Popes refusal of being their Protector, to offer it to
either of those Kings, nay to any Popish Prince, from whom (to use their own
words) they might have most considerable aids. In effect, they are willing any
one should govern them, but he who only had the Right to do it. But yet as
becomes obedient sons of the Church of Rome, the Pope has the advantage of the
preemption.

It appears the Irish Papists hang, as their Faith in God, so their Loyalty to
their Prince, on the Popes sleeve; and certainly it is not probable that those
should defend his Majesty's Right, over whom (1) a foreign Prince, (2) such a
foreign Prince as considers His Majesty as an Heretic, and consequently an
enemy, has full power; and (3) That power on the strongest account, even that
of Conscience and Religion.

In the year 1648 another Peace was concluded with the Irish Papists, but after
that, they disowned, disobeyed, opposed, conspired to murder, excommunicated,
and banished his Majesty's Viceroy, as appears by the former instances.

In sum, when the power of Ireland was in the hands of the Irish Papists, they
designed and endeavored to betray it to Foreigners: But when in the hands of
the Protestants of Ireland, they absolutely, and without antecedent conditions,
submitted it and themselves to his Sacred Majesty.

As to their fighting against the Regicides,
I answer, 1. Vicious extremes are not only opposite to virtue, but also one
to the other; Papists and Sectaries oppose each other, and both the Protestants.

2. The Spaniard and the Dutch fought against the Regicides, yet neither of
them in the day of Trial, proved themselves friends to his Majesty's Rights.

3. It Is the Cause, not the Suffering only, which makes the Martyr; it is not
the fighting, but the ground and end of the fighting, which proves which is the
good Subject, and of that, let even P. W. judge by the former Instances.

The last Argument pretends to commutative Justice, and is ushered in by a
comparison and preoccupation.

The former thrice pressed way of comparison, is yet propounded here again, but
with less injustice here, than before; the comparison before was between
Papists and Protestants, here between Papists and Presbyterians, Anabaptists,
Quakers, Fifth Monarchy men, Independents.

To which I shall only say, Whatever tenants opposite to Regal power may be
found among any Sectaries, are, if not learned from, I am sure taught by the
Romish Schools. Papists and Sectaries like Sampsons Foxes, are tied by their
tails, though their heads be divided; their way may seem contrary, but they all
tend to the same end, the ruin of the Corn-field.

As P. W. ushers in his Arguments on one side with a comparison: so on the
other with a preoccupation, relating to the power of those which he calls
Adversaries, and declares it to be no greater than his Majesty is pleased to
make it.

To the truth of this Declaration the Protestants of Ireland freely consent;
professing to the world, that though their Army is such, as sufficed to subdue
the Irish Rebels when universally confederated throughout the Kingdom, and
supplied by Foreigners with Money, Arms and Ammunition, and strengthened with
no less than the Popes blessing and Nuntio: yet their power consists not in
Arms or Armies, Fortifications or Men; but in loyalty and obedience to his
Sacred Majesty's Commission and Authority; and is consequently, as P. W. says,
no greater than his Majesty is pleased to make it. And since this is the true
State of the Protestant, both principle and interest, As in truth it is, even
their Adversary being their Judge, it is likely therefore that P. W. declares
they are his Adversaries, (for I believe his Friends are other guess men) But
doubtless those are fittest to be trusted with power, who are no stronger by
it, even by their enemies acknowledgments, than He which gives it, is willing
to make it; than those who never had power, but what they forced from his
Majesty, and who never employed that power (the whole stream of their own
actions being their Judges) but against that Sacred Majesty from whom they
wrested it.

The Arguments following plead Justice, and that Justice grounded on the
Articles of 1648. and judged by the sad consequences threatened on the breach
thereof, whether we regard men or God.
Though concerning the Articles of 1648, enough has been instanced already,
yet to leave P. W. without occasion of Cavil, it will not be unfit to add
somewhat more here.

1. The Contents of those Articles are in themselves unwarrantable, except in
case of Necessity which has no Law. 2. The Condition of those Articles whereon
they were principally, if not only founded, has been often and entirely
violated by the Irish Papists.
The Contents of those Articles are unwarrantable unless in case of necessity,
because they are contrary to an higher obligation, according to the Rule both
of public and private justice.

1. His Majesty at his Coronation, binds himself to God, to govern these
Kingdoms according to their respective Laws; and let P. W. himself consider,
how agreeable it is to Law or public Justice, that the Militia, Treasury, an
Army of fifteen thousand Foot, two thousand five hundred Horse, of Irish
Papists, and even in effect the Legislative power it self, should be in the
hands of twelve men to be chosen by Irish Papists; or that there should be no
alteration in England of what they in Ireland should think fit to transmit to
his Majesty for the settlement of that Kingdom; or even that the Irish Rebels
should be pardoned without the consent of Parliament, when his Majesty in
Parliament the seventeenth year of his Reign, adjudged such pardon before
conviction to be null and void; hereby even when they treated with his Majesty
concerning the affairs of this Kingdom, assuming the Legislative authority of
it, by repealing the Statute made the 10. of Henry the VII. (commonly called
Poynings Law) and the explanatory Law thereof, in 3. and 4. of Philip and Mary.

And though hitherto they chiefly pleaded before his Sacred Majesty in Council,
but for so much benefit of the Articles of peace in 1648, as would restore them
to their forfeited Estates: yet if they had prevailed therein, upon the score
of that plea, it must in consequence have adjudged for them the benefit of all
the other Articles, as a right. For if any of those Articles are due to them by
an obligation of Justice, all are then due to them by the same obligation; and
since, as appears by his Majesty's Gracious Declaration in Council, of the 30
of November 1660. that they have no right to any of their forfeited estates,
nor any title but what his Majesty's mercy and bounty has vouchsafed safed to
diverse of them; it thence follows, That his Majesty in Council has adjudg'd,
They have no right to those Articles. For as an adjudication of his Sacred
Majesty of their title to any one of the said Articles, had entitled them to
all: so an adjudication of his Majesty in Council, That they had not a right to
that one they pleaded for, has adjudg'd them to have no right to any.

2. Was not his late Majesty of glorious memory before those Articles, (1)
preingaged to the Adventurers for many of the forfeited Lands in Ireland; (2)
in the strictest form of engagement, even by an engagement in Parliament; (3)
on the account of strictest justice, even by way of sale; (4) on the best
account of sale, the end thereof being to reduce the Irish Rebels: therefore
might not these Arguments which P. W. urges in this instance against the
breach of public Faith, be at least more appliable to this engagement of his
late Majesty, to his now Majesty's Declaration at Breda, and his gracious
Declaration of the 30. of November 1660; which were all Acts of choice,
premeditation and freedom: than to those Articles of 1648, which was an act of
necessity and rebellious force. The Casuists and Schoolmen will easily resolve
P. W. that the later and lesser obligation, ought to give place to the elder
and greater. But if P. W. object, that if his Majesty were under an obligation
preceding and opposite to theirs, why did he enter into an obligation unto
them? To that I answer, 1. That then it was not Res integra; for his Majesty's
Rebellious Subjects, even some of the Adventurers themselves had superinduced a
necessity upon his Majesty, which as he could not foresee when he made his
first contract: so by all the ties of natural preservation, he was bound to
take away, when they were brought upon him; and it could not be a breach of
Faith in the King to them, who made it (as things then stood) impossible to
perform it. 2. Though necessity be an unhappy plea, yet when it is a true, it is
an allowable one. (3). That very necessity which constrained his Majesty to
those Articles, had they been observed by those with whom they were made, would
have invited all honest Englishmen to have cheerfully waited, till by the
expected fruits and effects of that Peace, his Majesty might have been enabled
to have satisfied them; nay they would rather have lost their money, than his
Majesty should have broken his Faith with them, that had kept it with him, and
would have been so serviceable to him; besides his Majesty might have been so
soon reseated in his throne, that the debts of the Crown would have been so
small, and his Subjects ability and affections so great; that he might and
would easily have satisfied the Adventurers desires, without forfeited Land in
Ireland, even by their own consent. But the breach on the Irish Papists side,
has occasioned so long and chargeable a War, that their forfeitures, together
with the vast sums sent out of England into Ireland, and raised in Ireland it
self, are scarce able to defray that expense, which their own violation of
Faith has engaged the Crown in: so that it is but just, that the Bear-skin (as
far as it will go) should contribute to pay for the healing of those wounds,
which the Bear it self had given. His Sacred Majesty in the 3. page of his
Declaration, speaking upon these Articles, uses these very words: viz. When
they who wickedly usurped the Authority in this Kingdom, had erected that
odious Court, for the taking away the life of Our dear Father; no body can
wonder that we were desirous, though upon DIFFICVLT CONDITIONS, to get such an
united power of our own Subjects, as might have been able, with Gods blessing,
to have prevented that infamous and horrible Parricide.

In these clear and Royal expressions the world may see what was the only
incentive to his Majesty, for his granting of that Peace, even no less than the
preventing of the Murder of his blessed Father, and the bloody consequences of
it: And therefore if that were the hopeful effect of those Concessions, had
they been observed on the Irish side; may not we (without too much straining)
infer, that the breach on their side, contributed to, if not acted that
unparalled Crime. To commit the sin, and not to prevent the sin, when men
have the preventative power of it, are very near allied, if not the same Crimes.

I shall also here again observe, that what P. W. calls Freely putting
themselves and their power into my L. Lievtenants hands; his Sacred Majesty
justly marks with these observable expressions, [ upon difficult Conditions;]
may I not therefore from thence also well infer, That P. W's. Clients, do
nothing so freely as when they put difficult Conditions on His Majesty.

Though I have said and proved by undeniable evidences, That the Irish Papists
have violated and broken the Articles they extorted in 1648; yet because P.
W's. Tenants obliges him to believe Works of supererrogation, I will gratify
him in practicing in this particular, one of his own principles, by adding
farther what follows, to evince the Irish Papists have egregiously broken the
said Peace; the foundation of which, is the Recognition made by them of his
Majesty's Sovereignty, and their Obligation to obey and uphold it, with their
Lives and Fortunes, which is therefore not only inserted after the Title, as a
part of the Agreement, but premised to all the rest, as the Ground and
Principle of the following Graces and Securities, which without it, are like a
Castle in the air, that has no foundation, and therefore cannot stand.

Besides the 18th Article of the said Peace expressly excludes from the benefit
thereof, such as should after offend. The doubt then that remains, turns on
these two Hinges, 1. Whether this Condition or Recognition were broken. 2. By
whom it was broken.


The first appears affirmatively, beyond contradiction, in the many former
instances; for after the conclusion of those Articles, the Irish Papists
despised, disowned, rejected, expelled, banished and excommunicated the L.
Lieutenant, and all adhering to him, and in him, his Majesty's Authority.

Secondly, It clearly appears, That even those who made these Articles with the
Lord Lieutenant, were guilty of their Breach: For if they were not able to keep
this Condition inviolable, they transgressed that duty expressed in the
Recognition, and were Abusers both of His Majesty's Authority and Service. And
if they were able to keep this Condition inviolable, they are guilty for not
accordingly keeping it.

Thirdly, These Articles were not made with any individuals singly considered,
but with the then Ruling Power of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, for
accordingly the phrase in the Title is, viz. [ Articles of Peace, made and
concluded with the General Assembly.] And in the Conclusion, [ Signed by Sir
Richard Blake Knight, in the Chair of the General Assembly, by Order, Command
and unanimous Consent of the said Catholics in full Assembly.] Seeing then
their Ruling Power made the said Recognition, and that their Ruling Power
published the Breach thereof to the world, as is evident by their Declaration
of the twelfth of August 1650. so by many other insolent violations, though His
Majesty's Grace and Mercy has indulged to the particular actings of many
Individuals, yet in relation to those Articles, or an account of any Obligation
in Justice due to them, they are not to be regarded.

Yet his sacred Majesty's justice to, and tenderness of the said Irish Papists
has abundantly appeared, not only in his having in person still heard them upon
the said Articles of Peace, but also in giving them near 2 years time to prove
all they pleaded, and so long left the Kingdom unsettled, that they might be
fully heard in all their Allegations; nay, even by his giving Them a liberty
which never yet was given to any, even a free sight of the Bill of Settlement,
which was humbly presented to Him by the Lords Justices and Council, pursuant
to Poynings Law, and a full liberty to make all the objections they could
against it; which yet they have been so far from acknowledging as an effect of
his Royal Care and Indulgence, that in all their Answers (which I have
diligently perused) I do not find so much as a bare taking notice of that
unpresidented Favor. But possibly since by that Indulgence their guilt has
been but the more evidenced, they untruly consider the consequences of that
mercy to be, what only was intended in the extending of it, and therefore were
loath to pay his Majesty thanks for what has but more discovered their Crimes.
But yet this is but proportionate to the rest of their proceedings: for since
they call his sacred Majesty's mercy an injustice, they may at the same rate
decline paying Acknowledgments for his condescentions to them.

Having thus proved that the Peace was broken by the Irish Papists after it was
made, I shall now say something to prove that it was DESIGNEDLY broken BEFORE
IT WAS MADE.

If by a previous Engagement and Oath the Irish Papists confirmed their first
confederacy not to be dissolved by the Peace which then they seemingly
pursued. If they combined to make themselves IVDGES of his Majesty's Actions,
and to appeal to themselves upon every Occurrence that they should be
inclinable to misinterpret; notwithstanding their Protestations of obedience to
his Majesty's Authority, then I conceive the whole peace thereby is on their
part made void and null. But that they did so, is clearly evident, and that by
an OATH solemnly taken (not by private men, or a factious party, but) by all
the Prelates, Noblemen, and Gentlemen that were the Grand Committee, upon
concluding the said Peace, That in case of non-performing of the Articles
thereof, (that is to say, If all the particulars therein were not carried on
according to their liking) they were to continue the Association and Union of
Confederate Catholics, and to do ALL Acts preservative thereunto.

In this place it seems to me requisite to let the Reader know what that Union
and Association of the Confederate Catholics was, which they swear to
continue; which I shall instane in somce particulars, out of their own
Originals now remaining on Record.

In the first Roll they swear in these very words, viz.

I A. B. do promise, protest and swear before God and his Saints and his
Angels, That I will during my life bear true Faith and Allegiance to my
Sovereign Lord Charles by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, and to his HEIRS and lawful Successors, and that I will to my power,
during my life, defend, uphold and maintain all his and their JUST
PREROGATIVES, Estate and Rights, the Power and Privileges of Parliament of
this Realm, the Fundamental Laws of Ireland, and the FREE EXERCISE OF THE ROMAN
CATHOLIC FAITH AND RELIGION THROUGHOUT THIS LAND, and the Lives, just
Liberties, Possessions, Estate and Right of all those that have taken, or shall
take this Oath, and perform the Contents thereof; and that I will OBEY and
RATIFY all the ORDERS and the DECREES MADE and TO BE MADE by the Supreme
Council of the Confederate Catholics of this Kingdom concerning the said
public Cause. And that I will not SEEK or RECEIVE directly or indirectly ANY
PARDON or protection for any Act DONE or TO BE DONE touching the General Cause,
without the consent of the Major Part of the said Council; and that I will not
directly or indirectly do any Act or Acts that shall prejudice the said Cause;
but will to the hazard of my life and estate, assist, prosecute, and MAINTAIN
the same.

Moreover I do further swear, That I will not accept of, or submit unto ANY
PEACE made or to be made with the said Confederate Catholics, without consent
and approbation of the General Assembly of the said Confederate Catholics, and
for the preservation and strengthening of the Association and Union of the
Kingdom, that upon any peace or accommodation to be made or concluded with the
said Confederate Catholics as aforesaid, I will to the uttermost of my power
insist upon, and maintain the ensuing propositions, until a peace as aforesaid
be made, and the matters to be agreed upon in the Articles of peace be
ESTABLISHED and SECURED by PARLIAMENT. So help me God and his holy Gospel.

In this their first Confederacy Oath, they swear flat and known
contradictions: for they swear to bear true Faith and Allegiance to the King,
and with the same breath they swear they will obey and ratify all the Orders
and Decrees made and to be made by their supreme Council, who had then actually
cast off the Kings Authority, and set up a Government in opposition to his
Majesty's. It had sure been at least enough to swear to obey and ratify all
Orders and Decrees they had made, without increasing that guilt by the high
accession of swearing to obey and ratify all to be made by the Supreme
Council. Herein they show, what the POPE is to them in Spirituals, their
Supreme Council is in Temporals, whom they obey with a blind and implicit
Faith.

They swear also to maintain the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and in the
same breath they swear to maintain the free exercise of the Roman Catholic
Religion, which is expressly against Law; as it is, that any should govern the
Kingdom, but by his Majesty's Authority; which they assumed and usurped in all
the essentials of it: nay not only the matter of the Oath is against those
Laws they swear to maintain; but even the taking or imposing of any Oath which
by Law is not warranted, is a violation of the Laws: But they are so far from
owning these their Crimes, that they swear they will not seek or receive
directly or indirectly any pardon or protection for any thing done or to be
done, touch-this General Cause, etc. They can be content to seek and receive a
Pardon from the POPE for sins to come, but they swear they neither will seek or
receive directly or indirectly a Pardon for, nay not so much as a Protection
from his Majesty, for sins past, without the consent of their Supreme Council.
This is a fine bearing Faith and Allegiance to the King, this is a good
upholding and maintaining the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. They swear too,
that these Acts of highest Rebellion, they will to the hazard of their Lives,
and Estates assist, prosecute, and maintain.

But they proceed further, for they swear not to accept of, or submit to ANY
PEACE made or to be made without the consent and approbation of the General
Assembly of the said Catholics: ANY PEACE, that is, let the Conditions be
never so good, let the Person that grants them be the King Himself, they will
not accept of it, they will not submit unto it, without, etc.

If the King would so far forget those signal Crimes which made them need his
Pardon and Protection, and would not so much as name them, but make a Peace
with them, as if they had never done any offense, yet they swear, that not one
of them shall accept of, or submit to such a Peace, but as is before expressed;
nay, to show how perfect a ROMISH Confederacy it is, if any Individual should
be struck with the horror of his Crimes, he cannot fly to the Kings Mercy for
Pardon or Protection, without Perjury: And to inveagle such as had not then
been polluted with those sins, they swear to protect all such as shall enter
into their guilt; and thereby in consequence threaten to ruin such as shall
not: This is admirable bearing true Faith and Allegiance to the King, and
maintaining the Laws of the Kingdom!

But this is not all, for they further swear in these words, viz. For the
preservation and strengthening of the Union of the Kingdom upon any peace to be
made or concluded with the said confederate Catholics as aforesaid, They will
to the uttermost of their Power, insist upon and maintain the ensuing
Propositions, until a peace as aforesaid be made, and the matters to be agreed
upon in the Articles of peace be established and secured by Parliament.

The first Proposition to which this Oath relates, and to which it is annexed,
is expressed in these words, viz. That the Roman Catholics both Clergy and
Laity in their several capacities have the free and public exercise of the
Roman Catholic Religion and Function throughout the Kingdom, in as full luster
and splendour as it was in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, or other
Catholic King his Predecessors, Kings of England and Lords of Ireland, or in
England.

That is to say, That none should be admitted to live in Ireland but Papists:
for none or very few but such; were in the Reign of those Kings in Ireland.

The second Proposition mentioned, follows in these words, viz. That the
secular Clergy of Ireland, viz. Primates, Archbishops, Ordinaries, Deans, Deans
and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, and all other Dignitaries, Parsons,
Vicars, and all persons of the secular Clergy, and their respective
successors, shall have and enjoy all, and all manner of Jurisdictions,
Privileges and Immunities in as full and ample manner as the Roman Catholics
secular Clergy had or enjoyed the same within this Realm, at any time during
the Reign of the late King Henry the Seventh, sometime King of England, and
Lord of Ireland, any Law, Declaration of Law, Statute, Power, or Authority
whatever, to the contrary notwithstanding.

That is to say, Their Wills must be the Law; and since they think fit to set
up POPERY in Ireland, and to banish the true Religion out of it, it is but
requisite they should take the maintenance from the Legal, and give it to the
Titular Clergy. And least we should doubt this to be the true meaning of the
second Proposal, they clearly explain it in the fourth, which follows in these
words, viz. That the Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Ordinaries, Deans, Deans
and Chapters, Archdeacons, Chancelours, Treasurers, Chaunters, Provosts,
Wardens of Collegiate Churches, Prebendaries and other Dignitaries, Parsons,
Vicars, and other Pastors of the Roman Catholic secular Clergy, and their
respective successors, shall have, hold enjoy all the Churches and
Church Livings, in as large and ample manner, as the LATE PROTESTANT CLERGY
respectively enjoyed the same, on the first day of October in the year of our
Lord 1641. together with all the profits, emoluments, perquisites, liberties,
and the rights of their respective Sees, and Churches belonging; as well in
places now in possession of the Confederate Catholics, as also in all other
places that shall be recovered by the said Confederate Catholics from the
adverse Party, within the Kingdom, SAVING to the said Roman Catholic Laity
their Rights, according to the Laws of the Land.

That is to say, Our Clergy shall have All, therefore yours can have nothing;
this is a perfect Fifth-Monarchy Principle, for here Dominion is only founded
in pretended Grace, none being to have the benefit of the Laws of the Land, but
the Papists. Nay, his Sacred Majesty, because a PROTESTANT, is as such, denied
any one of those Rights, which the meanest of the Irish Rebels, because a
PAPIST, is to enjoy, as such; and lest their words for it should not be taken,
they confirm it with an OATH. The Legal and Orthodox Clergy of Ireland may see
in this, what goodly Provision had been made for them, and their respective
Successors, if this pious Roman Catholic Confederacy had succeeded.

But least this their first Oath of Confederacy might be thought a thing they
were surprised into, in the first heat and fury of the Rebellion; and least the
takers of it should forget what the Imposers of it would have them believe they
were bound unto by it; some time after, premeditately, and in cool blood, they
caused it a second time to be taken in terminis, and subscribed with a preamble
to it, the close whereof, runs in these Words, viz. And for that it is
requisite that there should be an unanimous consent and real union between all
the Catholics of this Realm, to maintain the premises and strengthen them
against their adversaries, it is thought fit by them, that they, and whosoever
shall adhere unto their party, as a Confederate, should for their better
assurance of their adhering fidelity and constancy to the public Cause, take
the ensuing Oath* viz. I A. B. etc.

In the beginning of the said Preamble, they give the priority and precedence of
place to the Defense of their own Estates and Liberties, to that of the defense
of his Majesty's Regal Power, Prerogatives, Honor, State, and Rights; That is
to say, They will mind themselves before the King, which they fully explain in
the third Oath of their Union and Confederacy, which after their rejection of
the Peace concluded with them by his Majesty's Authority, they entered into,
took and subscribed, and which follows in these words, viz.

I do swear and protest that I will adhere to the present Union of the
Confederate Roman Catholics that REJECTED THE PEACE lately agreed and
proclaimed at Dublin; and do nothing by Word or Deed, Writing, Advice, or
otherwise, to the prejudice of that Union, and will to the uttermost of my
power, advance and further the good and preservation of it, and of his
Majesty's Rights, and the privileges of free born Subjects to the Natives of
this Kingdom.

The two former Oaths seem to them to be only the THEORY of Rebellion, and
they were loath to stop there, therefore they proceed in this third Oath, to the
PRACTICE of it. In the first and second Oath, they swear they will obey and
ratify all the Orders and Decrees made, and to be made by the Supreme Council
of the Confederate Catholics; and in this third Oath, they very abundantly
observe what they swore in the two precedent ones; but although in both those
they swore as positively, I am sure much more justly (though not justifiably)
du rig their Lives to bear true Faith and Allegiance to the King, and though
that just part of the Oath has the priority of place, in both Oaths, yet the
priority of obedience, when it came in competition which should be most
binding, viz. either those parts which related to their obedience to his
Majesty, or those which related to their obedience to their General Assembly,
they practically interpret it for, and adjudge it to the latter.

In their two first Oaths, they swear they will not accept of, or submit unto
any Peace made or to be made with the said confederate Catholics, without the
consent and approbation of their General Assembly.

But either this Peace which they swear to reject, was made with the consent
and approbation of their General Assembly, or without their consent or
approbation: If the latter, how can the Generality of the Irish Papists plead
for the benefit of what their Governing Power was against; If the former, then
against their two preceding Oaths, they reject that Peace which by their
General Assembly's consent and approbation had been concluded, and which (at
least by a strong implication) they were sworn to observe. I know of no Oath of
theirs which bound them to more then not to accept of peace from his Majesty
without the consent and approbation of their General Assembly, till this third
was taken and subscribed. When they are not guilty enough by old Oaths, they
will make themselves guilty enough by entering into new Oaths. Doubtless the
guilt of two solemn Oaths, not to make peace with their King, without the
approbation and consent of their own fellow Subjects, even of their own setting
up, and that too, as one of the products of a bloody Rebellion, was guilt
enough; but in their third Oath, they proceed farther, and reject that peace
which even themselves had solicited, and which was highly advantageous for
them, only because the HEADS of the Catholic Confederacy had then hopes of
getting more from the King (whose condition then began to decline) by
Rebellion, then by Peace. Nay, that which their two former Oaths did not oblige
them unto, viz. To reject a Peace made with his Majesty when CONSENTED TO, and
APPROVED BY their General Assembly, They SWEAR TO OBSERVE; and that which their
two former Oaths obliged them unto, viz. During their lives to bear true Faith
and Allegiance to the King, they WILL NOT OBSERVE, though the rate of that
crime amounts to no less then to a double, if not a treble Perjury.

I must here acquaint the Reader, That this third Oath of Union and
Confederacy, whereby they rejected the Peace, is, as the two former Oaths,
without a date in its Original now on Record; possibly it was their intention
thereby to insinuate to the people, that the Engagement they entered into, was
a duty incumbent on them from the first, and was to have no end. But if P. W.
should say that this Oath had only reference to the rejected Peace in Anno
1646. I will only answer, The same Inferences are of the same force in
reference to the rejected Peace in Anno 1648. and therefore if they be not
rightly applied as to the time, yet they be as to the thing.

Certainly no written wickedness can ascend higher then in that same Oath, in
which they swear to reject, and actually do reject his Majesty's Authority,
when clothed with peace, even a peace of their own seeking, and highly
advantageous to them, they also swear to preserve his Majesty's Rights. I can
find no consistencie in the said Oath, unless they mean it to be his Majesty's
Right, to be governed and used according to the pleasure of the Roman Catholic
Union and Confederacy; nor can I tell what they mean by preserving the
Privileges of freeborn Subjects to the Natives of this Kingdom, unless
thereby they mean, that those Privileges are parramount to his Majesty's
Authority, and they the only Judges and Preservers of them.

But because the Irish Papists endeavor to extenuate the sins of entering into
their first and second Confederacie-Oath, by pleading that their engagements in
them were but temporary, and were not to be conclusive, but as they should be
established and secured by Parliament; I think it necessary least by that
specious pretense the Reader might be deluded, to set down here how they
designed that Parliament should be constituted: which I shall do out of the
Original of their Instructions remaining in my hands.

The Title of those Instructions is, viz. Instructions for the Lord Viscount
Mountgarret, Lord President of our Council, etc. And the rest of the
Commissioners employed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's most faithful
and dutiful Subjects, the Confederate Catholics of his Highness Kingdom of
Ireland, etc. unto the Lord Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, etc.

The words of the 22. Article of these Instructions, are these, viz. You are to
be Suitors to his Majesty to have a Parliament helden before the Lord Marquess
of Ormond, or a CATHOLIC, or a NATIVE well-affected.

I doubt if these Commissioners had not been immediately employed to the then
Lord Marquess of Ormond (now Duke of Ormond) they would scarcely have named him
to be the person before whom the desired Parliament should have been holden;
for since even while they made a direct address to his Lordship, they had the
presumption to add, viz. Or a Catholic, or a Native well-affected, if his
Grace were not to have seen what they desired, they would not have mentioned
Him. And the truth of this appears clearly in the Paper entitled, The sense of
the Congregation of the Clergy upon the Instructions presented to them, to be
given the Agents to be now employed to France. Dated the 21 of December 1647.
wherein to use their own words, they say, viz. We offer the ensuing Articles,
which we desire may be drawn up into Instructions with the rest, to be given to
the said Agents, with Order to insist on them, and in no sort to recede from
them.

The first of those Instructions are in these words, viz. First, that an
Instruction be given the said Agents for getting the Lord Deputy, or other
chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom to be A ROMAN CATHOLIC.

In this the Reader may evidently find, though when the Irish Papists make
Addresses to the Lord of Ormond they are so discreet as to name Him for the
person before whom the Parliament shall be holden, yet when they may write what
he is not to see, they absolutely leave Him out, and desire that the Parliament
may be holden before a chief Governor that is a Roman Catholic, with this
addition, viz. AND IN NO SORT TO RECEDE FROM THIS INSTRUCTION.

The second Particular which the said Congregation of the Clergy desire may be
added to the Instructions to be given to their Agents, then designed to be sent
to the Queen and Prince, then in France, and which they are to INSIST UPON, and
IN NO SORT to recede from, is expressed in these very words, viz. 2 d.
Instruction. That the particular Articles or Concessions to be obtained for
Religion, may be published together with the Temporal Articles; and that until
both be published together, THE PEACE MAY NOT OBLIGE NOR BE ACCEPTED BY THE
CONFEDERATE ROMAN CATHOLICS: And that the QUEEN NOR PRINCE come not to this
Kingdom till the Peace be published as aforesaid, and accepted by the Nation.

By this it undoubtedly appears that no peace would be accepted of by the Irish
Papists, but such a one as even by the Royal Assent, was to give them the whole
Kingdom in Fact and Power, if not in name: Nor was the QUEEN and PRINCE, his
now Majesty, so much as to come into Ireland, till Ireland was in effect given
away to the Crown.

Although this Paper entitled The sense of the Congregation of the Clergy,
have many Particulars as full of Disloyalty and Rebellion, as those I have
already mentioned, yet I shall set down no more but the seventh Paragraph,
which they desire may be past into an Instruction; which follows in these
words, viz. That if a PROTECTOR must be chosen for the Nation, it may be his
HOLINESS. And that the Nation may not by choosing Spain or France for
Protector, be necessitated to make the other of them not chosen their Enemy
abroad, and thereby rend the Kingdom at home into division.

This in my opinion evinceth, that as bad as the Papist Clergy in Ireland were,
yet the Original design of choosing a PROTECTOR was the Act of the LAY PAPISTS,
but indeed when a foreign Protector was resolved upon, the Popish Clergy as
became true Sons of the Romish Church, were singly for the Popes having the
Protectorship, and fortify that their desire with a very material and politic
consideration, if not threatening, viz. That unless it were so, it might rend
the Kingdom into Divisions. But I desire the Reader woul observe that rending
of the Kingdom would not have proceeded from the casting off of his Majesty's
Authority, but from the PAPAL, FRENCH AND SPANISH FACTIONS, who would have
contended for the Sovereignty of this Kingdom: But not so much as the least
word mentioned that the Kingdom would have been rent by the resistance of any
party in his Majesty's behalf: Though three foreign Powers would have found
Friends to have countenanced their respective designs, yet his Majesty's
lawful Right could not find any numerous Assertors of it.

Having thus done with the Paper entitled The sense of the Congregation, I
shall now proceed to acquaint the Reader with the residue of those
Instructions, which will let him plainly see how they projected that Parliament
should be constituted which was to establish and secure the Articles of Peace
insisted on. One of which I have already particularized, and now shall proceed
to the rest.

The 24th Instruction is set down in these words, viz. You are to be Suitors to
his Majesty, that all Indictments, Out-Lawries, Attainders, and other Acts,
made, published, or done, in the Courts of Dublin, or elsewhere in this
Kingdom, or the Kingdom of England, in prejudice of the said Catholics, or any
of them, since the seventh day of August 1641. shall be before he sitting of
the Parliament here, taken off the file, and vacated; and so declared by his
Majesty's public Proclamation.

This is a good preparation for composing a fit Parliament for the ends of the
Confederate Catholics. Before they did any thing for the King, they press the
King would by a Proclamation vacat the legal proceedings of the Court of
Justice. They desire to be put in a capacity to act new crimes, by a
forgiveness of the old.

The 11th Instruction runs in these words, viz. You are to be humble Suitors to
his Majesty, That such as are already employed or appointed, or that shall now
be appointed to execute the Office of Sheriff by our party, in the several
Counties of the Kingdom shall stand: and the said Offices to be conferred upon
them by Letters Patents.

Though the Sheriffs of Ireland are pricked by the chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom, yet they will themselves name those Sheriffs, that
thereby they might be in a condition to be sure the respective Knights of the
Shires for their intended Parliament should be Roman Catholic Confederacie-Men.

The close of the 26 Instruction is in these words, You are to procure that no
new Corporations shall send Burgesses to Parliament, without the allowance of
Parliament first had.

The 13th Instruction runs in these words, viz. You are desire that such
Corporations as anciently sent Burgesses to the Parliament, be now admitted,
notwithstanding that by the power of some late Governors, they were of later
days debarred of this privilege.

By these three Instructions the Reader may see how well they would have
constituted the House of Commons for the Catholic Confederacy; first,
Sheriffs who are to be Judges of the Elections of the Knights of the Shires
they would nominate, and have his Majesty commissionate by Letters Patents.
Secondly, some old Buroughs who had scarce an Inhabitant in them, and who
therefore for several preceding Parliaments had no Writs sent unto them to make
Elections, they desire now may send Burgesses to their intended Parliament: And
Buroughs who are by the Kings Charter to send Burgesses to Parliament, and who
are numerously planted with Protestants, were to send none to serve for them in
Parliament.

Thus far the Confederates had well provided for themselves in the constitution
of the House of Commons, now I shall let the Reader see that their care was no
less in the constitution of the House of Lords: For the 23 Instruction is in
these words, viz. That no Lord not estated in this Kingdom, or estated in this
Kingdom, and not resident here, shall have vote in the said Parliament of this
Realm, by PROXY or OTHERWISE.

The King is the Fountain of Honor; but here the Confederate Catholics will
stop the Stream of it; as they think sit; voting by Proxy, which is the
undoubted Right of the Peers, they will not admit; and those Peers who by the
Rebellion of the Confederates were expelled out of Ireland, must be denied
their Rights, even when a peace is concluded; Nay possibly those Peers might
not be considered as estated Lords, whose Estates the said Confederates had
possessed themselves of; so that by the Acts of the Rebellion they were to lose
their Lands, and by the Desires of the Rebels to lose their Votes: And perhaps
if Protestant Peers which the Rebellion had forced into England would have
returned into Ireland to vote in this intended Parliament, they might (had this
Instruction took place) been denied to vote in Person, as well as by Proxy, on
account that they were not estated persons by reason their Lands were then in
the possession of the Rebels, who had taken good care that the Peace should not
oblige, nor be accepted by the confederate Catholics, till all the Articles of
it were established and secured by Parliament.

The Confederates rest not here, but to make all things surer, the 44th
Instruction is set down in these words, viz. That such as shall be recommended
by the supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics, shall be by his Majesty
called by Writ to sit in the Upper House.

In the 23d Instruction before mentioned, they attempt to hinder the
constitution of the House of Peers to be as by Law and Custom it ought to be;
and in this 44th Instruction they attempt to constitute it as it ought not to
be. In the foregoing Instruction they endeavor to stop the true Fountain of
Honor, and in this Instruction they would make themselves to be the Fountain
of Honor. Nor does this Instruction run with the introductive words of the
former, viz. You are to be Suitors, or humble Suitors to his Majesty, but
positively set down, as if what they demanded were rather a Right, then a
Favor; neither do they limit their recommendation of such as are to be called
to sit in the Upper House, to such only as were his Majesty's Subjects, or his
Rebels, but indefinitely, viz. all that shall be recommended by the Supreme
Council of the confederate Catholics; so that the forming of the House of
Peers, the great and inseparable Right and Prerogative of the Crown, they not
only desire to WREST from the King, but also they desire to VEST IT IN
THEMSELVES: Nor do they stop there, but by this Instruction (had it been
granted) they would have had the power to have constituted the House of Lords
OF FORRAIGNERS, and doubtless amongst those, his HOLINESS's NUNTIO, then
amongst them, would scarcely have been forgotten.

Thus far the Catholic Confederacy had well provided for the composition of
the House of Commons and the House of Peers, as far as concerned the Temporal
Lords; Now I shall let the Reader see that their care was no less in providing
that the House of Peers should be as well constituted for the Spiritual Lords,
which they manifest in their 25th Instruction, which follows in these very
words, viz. You are to be Suitors to his Majesty, that the Writs of summons be
issued to the ARCHBISHOPS AND BISHOPS WITHIN OUR QVARTERS, and they to have
PLACE AND VOTE in Parliament.

This is a Request INDEED, here is not only a taking away of the Right of the
Protestant Archbishops and Bishops, but a giving of it to the Papists: Nay,
would not this have been (if granted) an owning that the POPE by his
Consecration had the Right to send Peers into the House of Lords, if not to
create them. But since they were sworn by their Confederacy to have the free
and public exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion and Function throughout
this Kingdom in its full luster and splendour, as it was in the Reign of King
Henry the seventh, or any other Catholic King his Predecessor, Kings of
England and Lords of Ireland, it is no wonder they take the surest Ways to reach
that End. But yet the wisdom of the Kings of England, and their experience of
the Irish Papists has been such, that had all these Instructions been granted
to them, yet they could not have reached their Design, which the said Papists
well knew, and therefore to throw down ALL Impediments, in their 21th
Instruction, which follows in these very words, they further desire, viz. You
are to be Suitors to his Majesty, That upon the first sitting of the next
Parliament, That an Act may be transmitted for the suspension of POYNINGS HIS
ACT, entitled, An Act that no Parliament shall be holden in this Land, until
the Acts be certified into England, and all other Acts enlarging or explaining
the same. And that it be afterward left to the consideration of the
Parliament, whether the same shall be ALL TOGETHER REPEALED or continued.

In these Instructions the Confederates show a Catholic Care of the Roman
Catholic Cause: They were not contented to attempt by force and open Rebellion
to wrest this Kingdom from the Crown of England, but having failed thereof in
that way, they endeavor to effect it in this: first they will have a PAPIST
chief Governor, and that (to use their own words) the Commissioners must not
only INSIST UPON, but must IN NO SORT RECEDE FROM; Then they must have a
Parliament, and that not only to be constituted against the Kings undoubted
prerogative, the known and ancient Laws of the Land, and Privileges and Rights
of both Houses, but also must be composed according to the desires and
inventions of the Irish Papists: and because by Poynings's Act no Bill or Bills
could be transmitted into England till first they had past the chief Governor
or Governors and privy Council of this Kingdom, and then were certified to his
Majesty and privy Council in England, by the said chief Governor or Governors,
and privy Council to be good and expedient for this Kingdom, and then were not
to pass in Parliament here, but as approved of by his Majesty and Council in
England, and remitted hither under the Great Seal of England; whereby the Crown
of England was wisely secured that nothing should be enacted here to the
prejudice of it: The said Irish Papists desire that in their said next
Parliament Poynings's Act might be suspended, and all other Acts enlarging and
explaining the same; and then that it may be left to the consideration of the
Parliament, SO CONSTITUTED, whether the same shall be ALTOGETHER REPEALED, or
continued; that is to say, That the LAMB be put into the Claws of the WOLF, and
then leave it to the consideration of the Wolf whether or no he would devour
him. If it should be said, That the forementioned Instructions were only the
Confederates desires to his Majesty; I only desire to know whether they made
those desires with an intention to have them denied or granted: If the first it
was ridiculous, if the last it was rebellious. But by all this it undeniably
appears, If the providence of God, and His Sacred Majesty's Wisdom and Care had
not disappointed the boundless designs of the said Irish Papists, not only
the Protestant Religion and the Professors of it in Ireland had been LOST, but
also this Kingdom had been LOST to the Crown of England, for the said Irish
Papists were to have held what they then rebelliously possessed till their
Articles of Peace had been established and secured by Parliament, and if they
could have had a Parliament such as they designed, all the Kingdom would in
effect have been theirs by Authority of Parliament; so that either way they had
secured themselves as much as their CONFEDERATED WISDOMS could project.

But since the most essential parts of the Articles of Peace were to be finally
obliging but as they were to be confirmed by Act of Parliament in the next
Parliament which should be assembled after the perfecting the said Articles;
let P. W. remember this present Parliament is the first that has been called
together in Ireland since the conclusion of the Peace, and let him see in the
GREAT BILL OF SETTLEMENT how far the Parliament thinks fit to put their
sanction to those Articles. If P. W. should say, This is not such a Parliament
as his Countrymen intended at and before the making of those Articles; I shall
join with him in his saying thereof, and shall only add, That GOD AND HIS
SACRED MAJESTY be praised, it is not such a Parliament.

I must desire the Readers excuse for these digression^ which I thought
necessary, that he might the better know, even out of the Originals of the
Papers of the Irish Papists, what kind of Parliament that was, by which they
had designed to establish and secure the Articles of their Peace, as also what
that Association and Union of the Confederate Roman Catholics is, which their
Grand Committee swore to continue, and to return unto upon the concluding of
the Peace in 1648. in case they themselves judged the Articles thereof at any
time unobserved unto them. I wish the said Irish Papists think not themselves
TO THIS DAY bound by it; nay; I wish they do not think it INDISSOLVEABLE.

This horrid Oath of the Grand Committee beforementioned, is now so
undeniable, (though it was then managed in the dark, and carried on with all
possible secreeie) that it was by all their Titular Bishops in their published
Excommunications against the Lord Lieutenant, interpreted and insisted on, as a
most CONSCIENTIOVS engagement to invite all their Nation to a disobedience of
his Majesty's Authority; whereby they have not only argued themselves guilty
of the greatest unworthiness and treachery, men could possibly be faulty in;
they have not only forfeited all that Grace and Favor which could be intended
them by that Peace, and invalidated all the Articles of it; but they have
likewise continued to themselves the guilt of their Rebellion and Confederacy
to this present DAY, and lie obnoxious to the utmost penalty of the Law for the
same, unless his Majesty's Mercy be greater then their Crimes; and consequently
P. W's causeless curses and threatenings are not to be feared.

Those Threatenings respect MEN The Irish Papists. The Judicious Protestants.
Those Threatenings respect GOD.
First P. W. tells us that the hearts of the Irish Papists would by such
proceedings be estranged from his Majesty: The sense whereof is, that the Irish
will follow the King for naught but the LOAVES; nay, it had been happy for
Ireland if the very Loaves themselves would have prevented their hearts from
being estranged; but it is morally impossible while such a National and
Religional distinction continues: The experience of the last Rebellion, if no
other proof thereof had been, evinceth the estrangedness of the Irish Papists
to be such, that the Interest in them of the greatest Nobleman in Ireland when
for the Crown, is not so considerable, as a popish priests against it.
Wherefore the estrangedness P. W. mentions must still be expected, but with
this difference, That the BEAST if pampered, will Kick, if kept low, OBEY.

Secondly, P. W. fore-tells that the Judicious Protestants will on such
proceedings be perpeturlly jealous, notwithstanding any Declaration from Breda,
or Acts from Westminster.

Though P. W. may be a true Seer of the estranged hearts of the Irish papists,
yet I dare charge him to be a false Prophet concerning judicious protestants;
for though they duly value his Majesty's Declarations and Acts of Grace, as
signal Expresses of his Goodness; yet their confidence rests on the inward
principle in his Majesty's Breast, whereto without such Expresses, or Articling,
or capitulating for such (as the Irish papists did) they freely submitted, and
are more confirmed by their late experience to continue in that duty.

But if in P. W's judgment the ungrounded apprehension of any violation or
breach of promise may estrange the hearts of the Irish papists from his
Majesty, whom they are bound in conscience to love, honor and obey,
notwithstanding miscarriages in Government; and if the like apprehensions may
cause jealousies in judicious protestants notwithstanding Declarations and Acts
of Parliament, let it not seem strange or hard (at least to P. W. and his
Countrymen) if a continued Series of Covenant-Breaches, Rapines, Murders,
Massacres, Crueltys, Perfidies, Treasons and Rebellions exercised by the Irish
papists against the Crown and protestant Religion, raise jealousies in the
hearts of all judicious Protestants. Or if his Majesty be pleased on these
accounts in his great Justice, Wisdom and Goodnsss to restrain them from
further ruining others first, and then themselves.

The Crown has often lost by Credulity what it has got by Valor; it has
lost by pretense of Peace what it had gained in open War: The Kings interest in
France was thus lost, the GOD of peace prevent the like in Ireland.

The consequence threatened in respect of God, are dreadful judgments, such as
P. W. confesses to have bin wonderfully inflicted on the Irish Nation for
their breach of the peace in 1646. and such as were inflicted on Saul's house
for his breach with the Gibeonites.

I see the best Wits have not always the best Memories, else P. W. would have
remembered the breach made by his Nation in 1641. and since 1648. as well as in
1646. for those doubtless were as criminal as this: but possibly he thinks it
was more sin for his Countrymen to violate what they obliged themselves to as a
FREE STATE, then what they were obliged to do as SUBJECTS; and therefore thinks
their sins in 1646. were greater then in 1641.

But if all were pardoned by the peace made in 1648. why does he remember the
Judgments for the breaches in 1646? if he thinks all were not, why does he not
remember the breaches made in 1641. and at least attribute some of those
Judgments to that breach?

But I had almost forgot what perhaps P. W. may plead in answer to my
Objection, and that is no less then the POPE's BULL of indulgence and pardon
published in Latin in Ireland, and thus carefully (for so much of it as
follows) translated into English.

URBANUS OCTAVUS. Ad futuram rei memoriam.
Having taken into our serious consideration the great Zeal of the Irish
toward the propagating of the Catholic Faith, AND THE PIETY OF THE CATHOLIC
WARRIORS IN THE SEVERAL ARMIES OF THAT KINGDOM (which was for that singular
fervency in the true worship of God, and notable care had formerly in the like
case by the Inhabitants thereof, for the maintenance and preservation of the
same Orthodox Faith, called of old, THE LAND OF SAINTS,) and having got certain
notice how IN IMITATION OF THEIR GODLY AND WORTHY ANCESTORS, they endeavor BY
FORCE OF ARMS to deliver their thralled Nation from the Oppressions and
grievous Injuries of the Heretics, wherewith this long time it has been
afflicted, and heavily burdened, and GALLANTLY do what in them lies TO
EXTIRPATE AND TOTALLY ROOT OUT those Workers of Iniquity, who in the Kingdom of
Ireland had infected, and always striven to infect the Mass of Catholic
purity, with the pestiferous Leaven of their Heretical contagion; WE THEREFORE
BEING WILLING TO CHERISH THEM with the gift of those Spiritual Graces whereof
by God we are ordained the only Disposers on earth, by the mercy of the same
almighty GOD, trusting in the authority of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul,
and by virtue of that power of binding and losing of souls, which GOD was
pleased (without our deserving) to confer' upon us: To ALL and EVERY ONE of the
faithful Christians in the aforesaid Kingdom of Ireland, NOW and FOR THE TIME
MILITATING AGAINST THE HERETICS and other Enemies of the Catholic Faith; they
being truly and sincerely penitent, after confession, and the Spiritual
refreshing of themselves with the sacred Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ, DO GRANT A FULL AND PLENARY INDULGENCE AND ABSOLUTE REMISSION FOR ALL
THEIR SINS, and such as in the holy time of Iubilee is usual to be granted to
those that devoutly visit a certain number of privileged Churches within and
without the walls of our City of Rome; by the tenor of which present Letters
for once only and no more, we freely bestow the favor of this absolution upon
all and every one of them, and withal desiring heartily all the faithful in
Christ now in Arms as aforesaid would be partakers of this most previous
Treasure.

To all and every one of the aforesaid FAITHFUL CHRISTIANS We grant license and
give power to choose unto themselves for this effect any fit Confessor, whether
a secular Priest, or a regular of some Order; as likewise any other selected
person approved of by the Ordinary of the place, who after a diligent hearing
of their Confessions shall HAVE POWER TO LIBERATE AND ABSOLVE THEM from
Excommunication, Suspension, and all other Ecclesiastical Sentences and
Censures, by whomsoever, or for what cause soever pronounced or inflicted upon
them, as also FROM ALL SINS, TRESPASSES, TRANSGRESSIONS, CRIMES AND
DELINQUENCIES HOW HEINOUS AND ATROCIOUS SOEVER THEY BE, etc.

Dated at Rome in the Vatican or St. Peter's Palace, the 25th day of May, 1643.
and in the 20th year of our Pontificate. M. A. MARALDUS.

This BULL of Indulgence and Pardon of the Pope either is an answer to my
question, or it is not; if P. W. should say it is not an answer to my Question,
then it remains still in force: if P. W. should say that it is an answer to my
Question, then I desire the unbiased Reader to consider whose Subjects the
Irish papists are: For His late Majesty of Glorious Memory under His Great Seal
declares in these very words, viz. We do extremely detest the ODIOVS REBELLION
which the Recusants of Ireland have without Ground or Color raised against Us,
Our Crown and Dignity: But the Pope by his Bull calls that Rebellion of the
Irish Papists, an imitation of their godly and worthy Ancestors, with this
farther addition, That the said Irish Papist GALLANTLY do what in them lies TO
EXTIRPATE AND TOTALLY ROOT OUT THE PROTESTANTS, who he is pleased to call
Workers of Iniquity. Nay, his Holiness proceeds farther, for being willing to
cherish them in their Rebellion, he dispenses to them the gift of spiritual
Graces, of which he says he is under GOD the only Disposer on earth, and
therefore grants them a full and plenary indulgence and absolute remission for
all their sins, trespasses, transgressions, crimes and delinquences, how
heinous and atrocious soever they be. If the Pope's power over the Irish
Papists be so great, I shall not wonder their obedience to the King is so
little: neither shall I admire that Rebellions have been so frequent in Ireland
for the time past, nor doubt they will be as frequent for the time to come, if
the strength of the Irish Papists proportions their inclinations, and if the
said Papists consider fighting against the Kings Authority is Merit, and dying
in that Quarrel is MARTYRDOM. Their propensity to the sin of Rebellion needed
not those two double incentives to it, viz. If they succeed, HEAVEN and IRELAND
is theirs; if they succeed not, HEAVEN is theirs: His Sacred Majesty will have
but little hold of men who are acted by such Principles, and by such beliefs. I
desire also it may observed, this BVLL was sent them in May 1643. at which time
the Irish Papists were in the height of their Rebellion; for they then had
neither Cessation or Peace to plead, which might entitle them so much as to the
Name of Subjects. It may be also this pardon of the Pope's made them the more
cheerfully swear neither to seek or receive directly or indirectly a pardon
from a King. I hope the Reader will also observe that the design of the Irish
Papists by their Rebellion, what ever they pretended for it, was no less then
TO EXTIRPATE AND TOTALLY ROOT OUT THE PROTESTANTS, and this attested by the
POPE himself, which he calls a GALLANT ACT, and an imitation of their GODLY
ANCESTORS, which proves that General if not Universal Massacrings has not been
only the attempted sin of the Irish papists of this Age, but had descended to
them by inherritance, and some wish it may not be conveyed to their
Posterities. It Is likewise worthy the Readers observation, Though his Sacred
Majesty might warrantably have done unto those Irish papists what they would
have done to the protestants, and though persons of such bloody principles and
designs as the POPE owns the said Irish papists to be, and incourages them to
persevere in, with assurance of pardon here, and Heaven hereafter, are not very
likely to be obedient Subjects to the King, or good Neighbors to their fellow
Subjects; yet not one of them suffers merely for his Religion, and many of
them, though guilty, are pardoned and restored. This practically and clearly
shows the difference between the true mother and the false mother, as also how
much more consonant to CHRIST's Doctrine and Practice the HEAD OF THE
PROTESTANT CHURCH does act, then the HEAD OF THE POPISH CHURCH does act; and
MAN can in nothing be so well like unto GOD, as in being merciful as GOD is
merciful.

But for all P. W's fencing, I am confident were his Countrymen as fully
pardoned for their breaches of the Articles made in 1648. as by that peace P.W.
says (whatever he thinks) they are pardoned for their breaches in the year
1646. he would as well attribute his Countrymens sufferings to the breaches of
1648. as to any preceding. But I see it is easier for his Majesty to forgive
TWO Rebellions, then for P. W. acknowledge ONE, which he is so far from doing,
that upon a supposititious covenant-breach on the Kings side, he thereby
insinuates a charge against the most faithfully indulgent of Princes. But the
protestants of Ireland dare APPEAL CHEERFULLY even to the Tribunal of GOD
HIMSELF, that the Judgment may fall where the breach is.

And since P. W. acknowledges that all the wonderful judgments fallen upon the
Irish Nation is for the breach of the Articles of 1646. and that I have fully
proved in many signal instances, the Articles ni 1648. were no less broken by
them, let all men consider how visible the breach was which he CONFESSES, when
the breach in 1648. is so visible, which he DENIES: And since all the past
judgments on his Countrymen, he owneth, were only inflicted for the breach in
1646. let him and them, if they please, ascribe the punishments to come in the
Bill of Settlement, to their breaches in 1641. and to their breach of the
Articles in 1648. for doubtless these deserve some judgments as well as that.

I fully own Faith should be observed wherever it is given, as long as the
conditions for which it is given are observed: And I as heartily confess that a
violation of Faith calls down the severest of Gods punishments; for all
promises made before the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, when broken, are
not broken singly to those to whom, but even also to him before whom they are
made; and God will not be mocked: I wish those which now think such judgments
on such breaches just and inevitable, had in 1641. in 1646. in 1648. and many
times since, so well remembered the truth of that position, as not to have run
into those sins, which must, as an inevitable consequence of them, draw down
such punishments. But since what is past cannot be recalled, I will pray they
may avoid in the future, what for the time past they might have prevented. But
because P.W. has instanced the case of Readiness children and the Gibeonites, I
will endeavor to show how far it is parallel to that case to which he unjustly
applies it, and how far it is not.

First how far it is Parallel.

1. Joshua knew not the persons of those with whom he made that league; neither
did the King know the hearts of those with whom he made that peace. 2. Those
were neighbors, nay lived amongst the Israelites to whom Joshua promised
peace, though they said they were of a far Country; the Irish were neighbors,
at least locally; nay they lived long amongst us, though at last they would not
let us live among them; but indeed they were from a very far Country, even from
Rome it self. 3. Those deluded Joshua into that league, and said they were his
servants, when they were his Enemies; the Irish Papists did also delude the
King into that peace, and said they were Subjects, when indeed they were
Rebels. Thus far the Parallel holds.
Now I will show in what, and how much it differs.

1. The Gibeonites deluded Joshua into a peace; but the Irish Papists (to use
His Sacred Majesty's own words) forced, compelled, necessitated him into
Cessations and Peaces. 2. The Gibeonites were Strangers, but the Irish Papists
were (at least ought to have been) Subjects. 3. The Gibeonites never broke
those Conditions granted to them, though by those conditions they were made in
effect Slaves; but the Irish Papists broke, yea often, if not always theirs,
though after an unparalleled Rebellion they were in effect made Lords of all
Ireland, even the bloody Stage upon which they had acted their guilt. 4. Readiness
children were not executed for their Father his having made the Gibeonites
hewers of wood, and drawers of water, (the utmost that the Protestants desire
even to the worst principled of the Irish Papists) but for killing the
Gibeonites after they were peaceable Slaves: So that those judgments P. W.
seems to threathen his Majesty with, if they have not the Articles of 1648.
made good, he and his Countrymen have only reason to fear; for his Majesty kept
them, and they have broken them. Since the breach of Faith is so foul a Sin,
and deserves such heavy Punishments, even by P. W's own confession, and since
it is fully proved those for whom he pleads, have not only once, but often,
yea always broken their Agreements; let them with patience bear what they have
drawn upon themselves; and let him henceforth employ his Pen and his Press in
inviting his Countrymen rather to acknowledge his Majesty's mercy, that no more
are punished, then that some are, and that so little too, comparatively to
their crimes.
I will from P. W's Parallel take a rise for the inserting of two particulars:
The first is, If any of the children of P. W's Clients lose their Lands, though
actually they were not guilty of their Fathers Rebellions, let him remember,
even in the case which he instances, that the seven sons of Saul were hanged up
unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, though they had not actually slain those
Gibeonites for which they themselves were punished. Let him also remember that
till Justice was done, the famine lasted; and after it was done, the famine
ceased. Those lost theirs lives for their fathers sin; but these (if any) lose
but their fathers forfeited Lands for their Fathers crimes. The second is,
Though even the Spirit of God it self witnesses, That Saul sought to slay the
Gibeonites in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah; yet that it self
could not silence or suspend the Justice of God. And therefore let P. W. know,
That though in the third Article of their Instructions to the titular Bishop of
Fernes, and Sir Nicolas Plunket, (their Commissioners to Rome) they own to the
Pope that in their zeal they raised Arms for the freedom of the Catholic
Religion, yet no zeal in Religion can apologize for, or will hinder the effects
of Gods Justice on his Countrymen for their unparalleled murders, and their
often breaches against Nature, and against Stipulation: To do evil that good
may come of it, may be the Doctrine of Rome, but is not the Doctrine of Christ;
and by the Fruit the Tree is best known.

THE CONCLUSION.
The Conclusion, or concluding Wish, [ That his Grace the Duke of Ormond may be
as another Joseph to his Brethren] the Hearts of the Protestants of Ireland
close with; desiring that he may be a Joseph not only to the Israel of GOD,
[The Religious Protestants] but also a Joseph even to the Egyptians themselves,
feeding and preserving them, yet so as becomes Pharaoh's Steward, reserving the
LANDS of all but the priests to the KINGS's free dispose, and removing, that
is, TRANSPLANTING THE PEOPLE from one end of the borders of Egypt, to the other
end thereof.

May herein the Practice of Joseph be his Pattern, and the Blessings of Joseph
be his Portion! The Blessings of Heaven above, the Blessings of the Deep that
lies under, the Blessings of the Breasts and the Womb; these Blessings be on
the Head of this Joseph, and on the Crown of the HEAD of Him that was separate
from (those which call themselves) HIS BRETHREN.

FINIS.

