The last ARTICLES OF PEACE Made, Concluded, Accorded and Agreed upon the 30.
day of July, 1646. by and between His Excellency, James Lord Marquis of Ormond,
Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom of
Ireland, His Majesty's Commissioner, to Treat and Conclude a Peace with His
Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects of the said Kingdom, by virtue of His
Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal of ENGLAND,

Bearing date at Buckingham on the 24. day of June, in the Twentieth year of
His Reign, for and on the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty of the one part;

AND Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, and others appointed and Authorized by His
Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects, by virtue of an Authority of the said
Roman Catholic Subjects, bearing date the sixth day of March, 1645. and in
the One and twentieth year of His Majesty's Reign, of the other part.

PVblished by Authority and Command of the Lord Lieutenant and Council there.

Imprinted first at Dublin by William Bladen, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty; and now Reprinted at London for Edw. Husband, Printer to the
Honorable House of Commons, Sept. 7.1646.

By the Lord Lieutenant and COUNCIL.
ORMOND.
Whereas Articles of Peace are made, concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by
and between Us, James Lord Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant General, and
General Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, His Majesty's
Commissioner to Treat and conclude a Peace with His Majesty's Roman Catholic
Subjects of the said Kingdom, by virtue of His Majesty's Commission under the
Great Seal of England, bearing Date at Buckingham on the 24. day of June, in
the Twentieth year of His Reign, for and on the behalf of His most Excellent
Majesty of the one part; and Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery and others, appointed
and Authorized by His Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects, by virtue of an
Authority of the said Roman Catholic Subjects, bearing Date the sixth day of
March, 1645. and in the 21. year of His Majesty's Reign, of the other part, a
true Copy of which Articles of Peace is hereunto annexed, We the Lord
Lieutenant and Council do by this Proclamation in His Majesty's Name publish
the same, And do, in His Majesty's Name, strictly charge and command all His
Majesty's Subjects, and all others Inhabiting or Residing within His Majesty's
said Kingdom of Ireland, to take notice thereof, and to render due Obedience to
the same in all the parts thereof.

And as His Majesty has been induced to this Peace out of a deep sense of the
miseries and calamities brought upon this His Kingdom and people, and out of a
hope conceived by His Majesty that it may prevent the further effusion of His
Subjects blood, redeem them out of all the miseries and calamities under which
they now suffer, restore them to all quietness and happiness under His
Majesty's most gracious Government, deliver the Kingdom in general from those
slaughters, deprecations, rapines and spoils which always accompany a War,
encourage the Subjects and others with comfort to betake themselves to Trade,
Traffic, Commerce, Manufacture, and all other things which uninterrupted may
increase the wealth and strength of the Kingdom, beget in all His Majesty's
Sujects of this Kingdom, a perfect Unity amongst themselves, after the too long
continued Division amongst them: So His Majesty assures Himself that all His
Subjects of this His Kingdom (duly considering the great and inestimable
benefits which they may find in this Peace) will with all duty render due
obedience thereunto. And We, in His Majesty's Name do hereby Declare, That all
persons so rendering due Obedience to the said Peace, shall be protected,
cherished, countenanced and supported by His Majesty and His Royal Authority,
according to the true intent and meaning of the said Articles of Peace.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the Thirtieth day of July, 1646. Ri.
Bolton, Canc. Roscomon. Cha. Lambart. Gerrard Lowther. Fr. Willoughby. Robert
Forth. Dillon. La. Dublin. Geo. Cloyne. Arthur Chichester. Hen. Tichborn. Tho.
Lucas. Ja. Ware.


God save the King.
Articles of Peace made, concluded, accorded, and agreed upon, by and between
his Excellency JAMES Lord Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant General, and
General Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, His Majesty's
Commissioner to Treat and conclude a Peace with His Majesty's Roman Catholic
Subjects of the said Kingdom, by virtue of His Majesty's Commission under the
Great Seal of England, bearing date at Buckingham, the 24. day of June, in the
twentieth year of His Reign, for and on the behalf of His most Excellent
Majesty, of the one party; And Richard Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Donogh Lord
Viscount Muskery, Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, Dermot O Bryen, Patrick Darcy,
Gefferey Brown, and John Dillon, Esquires, Appointed and Authorized by His
Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects by virtue of an Authority of the said
Roman Catholic Subjects, bearing date the sixth day of March, Anno Domini,
One thousand six hundred forty five, and in the twenty one year of His
Majesty's Reign, Authorizing them and others, or any four or more of them to
Treat and Conclude a Peace in the said Kingdom of Ireland, with His Majesty's
said Commissioner, for and in the behalf of His Majesty's said Roman Catholic
Subjects on the other party.
INprimis, It is Concluded, Accorded and Agreed upon, by His Majesty's said
Commissioner, for and on the behalf of His most Excellent Majesty, and the said
Richard Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir Robert
Talbot Baronet, Dermot O Bryen, Patrick, Darcy, Geffery Brown and John Dillon,
Esquires, on the behalf of the said Roman Catholic Subjects; And His Majesty
is graciously pleased, that it shall be provided by Act of Parliament to be
passed in the next Parliament to be held in this Kingdom, That the Professors
of the Roman Catholic Religion in the said Kingdom or any of them be not
bound or obliged to take this Oath expressed in the Statute of Secundo Eliz:
commonly called the Oath of Supremacy, And that the said Oath shall not be
tendered unto them, and that the refusal of the said Oath shall not redound to
the prejudice of them, or any of them, they taking the Oath of Allegiance In
haec verba. I. A. B. do truly acknowledge, confess, testify, and declare in
my conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES is
Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of other His Majesty's Dominions
and Countries, and I will bear Faith and true Allegience to His Majesty, and
His Heirs and Successors, and Him and them will defend to the uttermost of my
power against all conspiracies and attempts whatsover, which shall be made
against His or their Crown or Dignity, and do my best endeavor to disclose and
make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, or to the Lord Deputy
or other Governor for the time being, all Treasons or Traiterous Conspiracies,
which I shall know or hear to be intended against His Majesty or any of them,
and I do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and
truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God, etc. So as by the
same Act it be further Provided and Enacted, that if any Roman Catholic
happen to be promoted, presented or advanced to any Ecclesiastical promotion,
dignity or benifice according to the form now used in the Protestant Church of
Ireland, That the freedom and exemption aforesaid shall not extend to any such
Roman Catholic; Or if any being Protestant, be advanced, promoted or
presented to any Ecclesiastical benefice, dignity or promotion, shall
afterward happen to become a Roman Catholic, that the freedom and exemption
aforesaid shall not so far extend to any such Roman Catholic, but that upon
tender of the said Oath, and refusal thereof, he be for that cause left subject
to privation of the said benefice, dignity or promotion, according to the said
Statute; And it is further concluded, accorded and agreed, by and between the
said parties, that for all matters concerning the first Proposition of the said
Catholics, viz. That all Acts made against the professors of the Roman
Catholic Faith, whereby any restraint, penalty, mulct, or incapacity, may be
laid upon any Roman Catholic within the Kingdom of Ireland, may be Repealed,
and the said Catholics to be allowed the freedom of the Roman Catholic
Religion. That His Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects be referred to His
Majesty's gracious Favor and further Concessions; And that no clause in these
A'rticles shall or may hinder His Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects, or
any of them from the benefit of His Majesty's further Graces and Concessions;
And that no use shall be made of the Papers past on this Treaty, or any of
them, concerning the said first Proposition, which may in any sort hinder the
said Roman Catholic Subjects, or any of them, from His Majesty's further
Concessions. And that His Majesty's said Commissioner and other chief Governor
or Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, shall cause whatsoever shall
be further directed by His Majesty to be passed in Parliament, for and on the
behalf of His said Roman Catholic Subjects, to be accordingly drawn into
Bills, and transmitted according to the usual manner, to be afterward passed as
Acts in the said Parliament.

2. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by and between the
said parties, And His Majesty is graciously pleased to call a new Parliament to
be held in this Kingdom, on or before the last day of November next ensuing,
and that all matters agreed on by these: Articles to be passed in Parliament,
shall be transmitted into England, according the usual form, to be passed in
the said Parliament, and that the said Acts so to be agreed upon, and so to be
passed, shall receive no alteration or diminution here or in England; Provided,
that nothing shall be concluded by both or either of the said Houses of
Parliament, which may bring prejudice to any of His Majesty's Protestant Party,
or their Adherents, or to any of His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects party,
or their Adherents, other then such things as upon this Treaty shall be
concluded to be done, or such things as may be proper for the Committee of
Privileges of either or both Houses, to take cognizance of, as in such cases
heretofore has been accustomed, and such other things as shall be propounded
to either or both Houses by the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or
Governor for the time being, during the said Parliament, for the advancement
of His Majesty's Service, and the Peace of the Kingdom, which Clause is to
admit no construction, which may trench upon these Articles or any of them.

3. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by and between the
said parties, And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that all Acts,
Ordinances and Orders made by both or either Houses of Parliament, to the
blemish, dishonor, or prejudice of His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects of
this Kingdom, or any of them, sithence the 7. of August, 1641. shall be
vacated, and that the same, and all exemplifications, and other Acts, which may
continue the memory of them, be made void by Act of Parliament.

4. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by and-between the
said parties, And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that all
Indictments, Attainders, Outlawries in this Kingdom, and all the Processes and
other proceedings thereupon, and all Letters Patents, Grants, Leases,
Custodiams, Bonds, Recognizances, and all Records, Act or Acts, Office or
Offices, Inquisitions, and all other things depending upon, or taken by reason
of the said Indictments, Attainders, or Outlawries, sithence the 7. of August,
1641. in prejudice of the said Catholics, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, or the Widows of them or any of
them, shall be vacated and made void in such sort, as no memory shall remain
thereof to the blemish, dishonor, or prejudice of the said Catholics, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or the Widows of
them or any of them, and that to be done immediately after concluding of these
Articles, and at furthest before the first day of October next; Or in case the
said new Parliament be called sooner then the said last day of November, then
forty days before the said Parliament. And that all impediments which may
hinder the said Roman Catholics to Sit or Vote in the next intended
Parliament, or to choose or to be chosen Knights and Burgesses to Sit or Vote
there, shall be removed before the said Parliament, Provided, that no man shall
be questioned by reason of this Article for mesne rates or wastes, saving
wilful wastes committed after the first of November, 1645.

5. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by and between the
said parties, And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that all debts do
stand in state as they were in the beginning of those troubles, and that no
grant or disposition made, or to be made, thereof, by virtue or color of any
Attainder, Outlawry, Fugacy or other Forfeiture whatsoever, or otherwise, shall
be of force, and this to be passed as an Act in the said next Parliament.

6. Item, It is concluded, accorded and agreed, by and between the said
parties, And His Majesty is graciously pleased, that for the securing of the
Estates or reputed Estates, of the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and Freeholders,
or reputed Freeholders, as well of Connaught, and County of Clare, or Country
of Thomond, as of the County of Limerick and Tipperary, the same to be secured
by Act of Parliament according to the intent of the 25 Article of the Graces,
granted in the fourth year of His Majesty's Reign, the Tenor whereof, for so
much as concerns the said Proposition, does ensue in these words, viz. We
are Graciously pleased, that for the securing of the Inhabitants of Connaught,
and Country of Thomond, and County of Clare, that their several Estates shall
be confirmed unto them and their Heirs, against Us, and our Heirs and
Successors, by Act to be passed in the next Parliament to be holden in Ireland,
to the end the same may never hereafter be brought into any further question by
Us, Our Heirs and Successors; In which Act of Parliament so to be passed, you
are to take care, that all Tenures in Capite, and all Rents and Services, as
are now due, or which ought to be answered unto Us, out of the said Lands and
Premises by any Letters Patents past thereof, since the first year of King
Henry the Eight, or found by any Office taken from the said first year of King
Henry the Eight, until the 21. of July, 1615. Whereby our late dear Father, or
any His Predecessors actually received any profit, by Wardship, Liveries,
primer Seisins, mesne rates, Ouster le mains, or fines of alienations without
license, be again reserved unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors; And all the rest
of the premises to be holden of our Castle of Athloane, by Knights Service,
according to Our said late Fathers Letters, notwithstanding any Tenures in
Capite sound for Us by Office since the 21. of July, 1615. And not appearing in
any such Letters Patents, or Offices, within which rule it is His Majesty's
pleasure, and it is so concluded and agreed, that the said Lands in the
Countries of Limerick and Tipperary, be included, but to be held by such Rents
and Tenures only as they were in the fourth year of His Majesty's Reign:
Provided always, and it is the intention of the said parties to these presents,
that the said Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and Freeholders, or reputed Freeholders
of the said Province of Connaught, County of Clare, and Country of Thomond, and
Counties of Tipperary and Limerick, shall have and enjoy the full benefit of
such Composition and Agreement, which shall be made with His most Excellent
Majesty for the Court of Wards, Tenures, Respites and Issues of Homage, any
clause in this Article contained to the contrary notwithstanding: And as for
the Lands within the Counties of Kilkenny and Wickloe, unto which His Majesty
was Entitled by Offices taken or found in the time of the Earl of Straffords
Government is this Kingdom; His Majesty is graciously pleased, that the state
thereof shall be considered in the next intended Parliament, wherein His
Majesty will assent unto that which shall be just and Honorable; And it is
further concluded and agreed, by and between the said parties, and His Majesty
is further graciously pleased, that the like Act of Limitation of His Majesty's
Titles for the security of the Estates of His Subjects of this Kingdom, be
passed in the said Parliament, as was Enacted in the 21. year of His late
Majesty King James His Reign in England.

7. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by and between the
said parties, And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that all
Incapacities, imposed upon the Natives of this Kingdom, or any of them as
Natives, by any Act of Parliament, Provisoes in Patents, or otherwise, be taken
away by Act to be passed in the said Parliament; And that they may be enabled
to erect one or more Inns of Court, in or near the City of Dublin, and that
such Students, Natives of this Kingdom, as shall be therein, may take and
receive the usual Degrees accustomed in any Innes of Court, they taking the
ensuing Oath, viz. I. A. B. do truly acknowledge, profess and declare in my
Conscience, before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles is
Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of other His Majesty's Dominions
and Countries, and I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, and
His Heirs and Successors, and Him and them will defend to the uttermost of my
power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made
against His or their Crown and Dignity; and do my best endeavor to disclose
and make known to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, or to the Lord Deputy
or Governors for the time being, all Treasons or Traiterous Conspiracies which
I shall know or hear to be intended against His Majesty or any of them; and I
do make this Recognition and Acknowledgement Heartily, and Willingly, and
Truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian: So help me GOD. And that they may
erect one or more Universities, to be Governed by such Rules and Orders as His
Majesty shall appoint: And it is further concluded and agreed, by and between
the said parties, and His Majesty is graciously pleased, that the said Roman
Catholic Subjects may erect and keep Free-Schools for education of Youth in
this Kingdom, any Law or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding; all the
matters of this Article to be passed as Acts of Parliament in the said next
Parliament.

8. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is graciously pleased, That places of Command,
Honor, Profit and Trust in His Majesty's Armies in this Kingdom, shall be upon
perfection of these Articles actually, and by particular instances conferred
upon His Roman Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom; And that upon the
distribution, conferring and disposal of the places of Command, Honor, Profit
and Trust in His Majesty's Armies in this Kingdom, for the future no differnnce
shall be made between the said Roman Catholics, and other His Majesty's
Subjects, but that such distribution shall be made with equal indifferency,
according to their respective Merits and Abilities; And that all his Majesty's
Subjects of this Kingdom, as well Roman Catholics as others, shall for his
Majesty's Service and their own security, arm themselves the best they may,
wherein they shall have all fitting encouragement, And that places of Command,
Honor, Profit and Trust in Civil Government in this Kingdom, shall be, upon
passing of the Bills, in these Articles mentioned, in the next Parliament,
actually and by particular instances conferred upon His Majesty's Roman
Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom, And that in the Distribution, conferring,
and disposal of the places of Command, Honor, Profit and Trust, in the Civil
Government, for the future, no difference shall be made between the said Roman
Catholics and others His Majesty's Subjects, but that such distribution shall
be made with equal indifferency, according to their respective Merits, and
abilities, And that in the distribution of Ministerial Offices, or Places which
now are, or hereafter shall be, void in this Kingdom, equality shall be used to
the Roman Catholic natives of this Kingdom as to other His Majesty's
Subjects; That the Command of Forts, Castles Garrisons, Towns, and other Places
of Importance in this Kingdom, shall be conferred upon His Majesty's Roman
Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom upon perfection of these Articles, actually
and by particular instances, and that in the distribution, conferring and
disposal of the Forts Castles, Garrisons Towns and other places of Importance in
this Kingdom, no difference shall be made between His Majesty's Roman
Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom, and other His Majesty's Subjects, but that
such distribution shall be made with equal indifferency, according to their
respective Merits and Abilities.

9. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is further Graciously pleased, That His Majesty
will accept of the yearly Rent or annual sum of Twelve Thousand pounds sterlin,
to be applotted with indifferency and equalily, and consented to be paid to His
Majesty His Heirs and Successors in Parliament, for and in lieu of the Court
of Wards in this Kingdom, Tenures in Capite, common Knights service, and all
other Tenures within the cognizance of that Court, And for and in lieu of all
Wardships, primer Seisms, Fines, Ousterlemaines, Liveries, Intrusions,
Alienations; Mesnerates, Reliefes and all other Profits, within the cognizance
of the said Court, or incident to the said Tenures or any of them, or Fines to
accrue to His Majesty, by reason of the said Tenures or any of them, and for,
and in lieu of Respites, and Issues of Homage, and Fines for the same; And the
said yearly rent being so Applotted and consented unto in Parliament as
aforesaid, then a Bill is to be agreed on in the said Parliament, to be passed
as an Act, for the securing of the said yearly Rent, or annual sum of Twelve
Thousand pounds, to be applotted as aforesaid, and for the Extinction and
taking away of the said Court, and other matters aforesaid in this Article
contained; And it is further agreed, that reasonable Compositions shall be
accepted for Wardships fallen since the 23. of October 1641. and already
granted; And that no wardships fallen, and not granted, or that shall fall,
shall be past, until the success of this Article shall appear; And if His
Majesty be Secured as aforesaid, Then all Wardships fallen since the said 23.
of October, are to be included in the agreement aforesaid, upon Composition to
be made with such as have grants as aforesaid, which composition to be made
with the grantees since the time aforesaid, it to be left to indifferent
persons, and the umpirage to the said Lord Lieutenant His Majesty's
Commissioner.

10. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that no Nobleman
or Peer of this Realm in Parliament shall be hereafter capable of more Proxies
then two, and that blanck Proxies shall be hereafter totally disallowed, and
that if such Noblemen or Peers of this Realm as have no Estates in this Kingdom
do not within five years, to begin from the conclusion of these Articles,
Purchase in this Kingdom as follows, viz. A Lord Baron two hundred pounds per
annum, a Lord Viscount four hundred pounds per annum, and an Earl six hundred
pounds sterper annum, shall lose their votes in Parliament until such time as
they shall afterward acquire such estates respectively; And it is further
agreed, that none be admitted into the House of Commons but such as shall be
Estated, and Resident within this Kingdom.

11. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed by and between the said
parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that as for and
concerning the Independency of the Parliament of Ireland of the Parliament of
England, His Majesty will leave both Houses of Parliament in this Kingdom to
make such Declaration therein as shall be agreeable to the Laws of the Kingdom
of Ireland.

12. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, That the Council
Table shall contain it self within it is proper bounds in handling matters of
State and weight fit for that place, amongst which, the Patents of Plantation,
and the Offices whereupon those Grants are founded, are to be handled as
matters of State, and be Heard and Determined by the Lord Lieutenant or other
chief Governor or Governors for the time being and the Council, publicly at
the Council board, and not otherwise; but Titles between party and party, grown
after these Patents granted, are to be left to the ordinary course of Law; and
that the Council Table do not hereafter intermeddle with common business that
is within the cognizance of the ordinary Courts, nor with the altering of
Possessions of Lands, nor make, nor use private Orders, Hearings, or References
concerning any such matter, nor grant any Injunction or Order for stay of any
Suites in any Civil Cause, and that parties grieved, for or by reason of any
proceedings formerly had there, may commence their suits and prosecute the
same, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Justice or Equity, for remedy of their
pretended Rights, without any restraint or interruption from His Majesty, or
otherwise by the chief Governor or Governors and Council of this Kingdom.

13. Item, It is further concluded, granted and agreed, by and between the said
parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that as for and
concerning one Statute made in this Kingdom in the eleventh year in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, entitled An Act for staying of Wool, Flocks, Tallow, and
other necessaries within this Realm, and one other Statute made in the said
Kingdom in the 12 year of the said Queen entitled An Act. (...)

And one other Statute, made in the said Kingdom in the 13. year of the
reign of the said late Queen entitled, An explanation of the Act made in a
Session of this Parliament for the staying of Wool, Flocks, Tallow and other
Wares and Commodities mentioned in the said Act, and certain Articles added to
the same Act, All concerning Staple or Native commodities of this Kingdom,
shall be repealed, excepting for Wool and Wool fels, and that such
indifferent persons, as shall be agreed on by the said Lord Lieutenant, and the
said Lord visc. Mountgarret, Donnogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir Daniell o Bryen
Knight, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Nicholas Plunket, Richard Bellings, Philip mac
Hugh Rely, Tirlogh o Neale, Thomas Fleming, Patricke Darcy, Gerrald Fernell and
Geffry Brown Esquires or any five or more of them shall be Authorized by
Commission under the great Seal, to Moderate and Ascertaine the Rates of
Ma^chandize to be exported, or Imported, out of, or into, this Kingdom as they
shall think fit.

14. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed, by and between the
said parties, and his Majesty is further graciously pleased, that care be had,
that the chief Governor, or Governors, of this Kingdom for the time being,
shall not continue in those Places longer then he shall find for the good of
his people here, and that they shall be inhibited to make any Purchase other
then by Lease for Provision of their Houses, dureing the time of their
Government.

15. Item, It is further concluded accorded and agreed, by and between the said
parties, and his Majesty in further graciously pleased, that an Act of
oblivion shall be passed in the next Parliament to extend unto all his
Majesty's Subjects, of this Kingdom and their adherents, of all Treasons and
Offenses, Capital, Criminal, and Personal, and other Offenses of what
Nature, kind, or quality soever, in such manner, as if such Treasons or
Offenses had never been committed perpetrated or done, That the said Act do
extend to the Heirs, Children, Kindred, Executors, Administrators, Wifes,
Widows, Dowagers, and Assigns, of such of the said Subjects, and their
adherents, who died on, or since the 23 of October 16^1. That the said Act do
relate to the First Day of the next Parliament; That the said Act do extend to
all Bodies Politic, and Corporate, and their respective Successors, and unto
all Cities, Bourrougaes, Counties, Barronies, Hundreds, Towns, Villages,
Tythings, and every of them within this Kingdom, for and concerning all and
every of the said offenses, or any other offenses or offenses, in them or any
of them committed or done, by his Majesty's said Subjects or their adherents,
or any of them, in^ or since the 23. of October 1641. That this Act shall
extend to Piracies and all other Offenses, committed upon the Sea by his
Majesty's said Subjects, or their adherents, or any of them, That in this Act
of Oblivion, words of Release, Aquittall, and Discharge, be incerred; That no
person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, Counries, Cities, Burroughes,
Barronies, Hundreds, Towns, Villages, Tythings, or any of them within this
Kingdom, included within the said Act, be Troubled, Impeached, Sued,
Inquieted, or Molested, for, or by reason of any offense, matter or thing,
whatsoever, comprised within the said Act, and the said Act shall extend to all
Rents, Goods, and Chattells taken, Detained, or grown due, to the Subjects of
the one side to the other, since the 23. of October 1641. to the Date of these
Articks, and also to all Customs, Rents, Arteares of Ren (...) Prizes,
Recognizances, Bonds, Fines, Forfeitures, Penalties and to all other Profits,
perq^^sites, and Dues, which were due, or did, or should, accrue to his
Majesty on, before or fince, the 23 of October 1641. until the perfection of
these Articles, and likewise to all m^sue rates, Fines, of what nature soever,
Recognizances, Judgments, Executions thereupon, and penalties whatsoever, and
to all other profits due to his Majesty since the said 23. of October and
before until this present, for, by, reason, or which lay within the survay or
cognizance of the Court of Wards; and also to all Respirts; Issues of Homage
and Fines for the same, Provided this shall not extend to Discharge or Remit
any of the Kings Debts, or Subsidies, Due before the said 23. of October 1641.
which were then, or before, levied, or taken by Sheriffs, Commissioners,
Receivers, or Collectors, and not then, or before accounted for, or since
disposed to public use of the said Roman Catholic Subjects, but that such
persons may be brought to account for the same, after full settlement in
Parliament and not before; Provided that such Barbarous, and Inhumane Crimes,
as shall be particularized, and agreed upon, by the said Lord Lieutenant, and
the Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Doimogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir Daniell o
Bryon Knight, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Nicholas Plunket, Richard Bellings,
Philip Mas Hugh Rely, Terlogh o Neale, Thomas Fleming, Patricks Darcy, Gerald
Fennel and Goffry Brouns Esquires, or any five or more of them, as to the
Actors, and Procurers, thereof, be left to be Tried and Adjudged by such
indifferent Commissioners as shall be agreed upon by the said Lord Lieutenant
and the said Lord viscount Mountgarret, Donogh Lord visc. Muskery, Sir Daniell
o Bryen Knight, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Nicholas Planket, Richard Bellings,
Philip mac hugh o Rely, Terlogh, o Neale Thomas Flewing, Patrick Darcy, Gerrald
Fennel, and Geffry Brown Esquires, or any five or more of them, and that the
power of the said Commissioners shall continue only for two years next ensuing
the date of these present Articles; Provided also that the Commissioners to be
agreed on for trial of the said particular Crimes to be Excepted, shall Hear,
Order and Determine all cases of Trust, where releife may or ought in Equity
to be afforded against all manner of persons according to the Equity and
Circumstances of every such eases; And his Majesty's Chief Governor, or
Governors, and other Governors and Majestrates for the time being, and all his
Majesty's Courts of Justice, and other his Majesty's Officers, of what
condition or quality soever, be bound and required to take notice of, and
pursue the said Act of Oblivion, without Pleading or Suite to be made for the
same; And that no Clerk or other Officers do make out, or write out, any
manner of Writts, Processes, Summons, or other Precept, for, concerning, or by
reason of any matter, cause, or thing, whatsoever, Released, Forgiven,
Discharged, or to be forgiven by the said Act, under pain of twenty pound
sterling; And that no Sheriff or other Officer do execute any such Writ,
Process, Summons, or Precept; And that no Record, Writeing, or Memory, do
remain of any Offense, or Offenses, released, or Forgiven, or mentioned to be
Forgiven by this Act. And that all other causes usually incerted in Acts of
General Pardon or Oblivion, enlarging His Majesty's Grace, and Mercy, not
herein particularied, be incerted and comprised, in the said Act, when the Bill
shall be drawn up, with the Exceptions already expressed, and none other;
Provided always that the said Act of Oblivion, shall not extend unto any
Treason, Felony or other Offense or Offenses, which shall be Committed or done
from or after the date of these Articles, until the first day of the before
mentioned next Parliament to be held in this Kingdom; Provided also, that any
Act or Acts which shall be done by virtue, pretense, or in persuance, of these
Articles or any of them, after the Publication of the said Articles, or any Act
or Acts which shall be done by virtue, color, or pretense, of the power, or
authority used, or exercised, by, and amongst, the confederat Roman
Catholics after the date of these Articles, and before the said Publication
shall not be accounted, taken, construed, or be, Treason, Felony, or other
offense, to be excepted out of the said Act of oblivion, Provided likewise that
the said Act of oblivion shall not extend unto any person, or persons, that
will not Obey and Submit unto the Peace, Concluded, and agreed on, by these
Articles.

16. Item. It is further concluded accorded and agreed, by and between the said
parties, and his Majesty is further graciously pleased, that an Act be passed
in the next Parliament prohibiting that neither the Lord Deputy, or other
chief Governor, Governors, Lord Chancellor; Lo. high Treasurer vice treasurer,
Chancellor, or any of the Barrons of the Exch^quer Privy Council, or Judges
of the four Courts, be Farmours of His Majesty's Customs within this Kingdom.

17. Item. It is further concluded accorded and agreed, by and between the
said parties. And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that an Act of
Parliament pass in this Kingdom against Monoples, such as was enacted in
England 21. Iacobr Regis, with a further clause of Repealing of all grants of
Monopoles in this Kingdom, and that Commissioners be agreed upon by the said
Lord Lieutenant, and the said Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Donogh Lord Viscount
Muskery, Sir Daniell o Bryon Knight, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Nicholas Plunket,
Richard Bellings, Philip mac Hugh Rely, Terlogh o Neale, Thomas Fleming,
Patricke Darcy, Gerrald Fennel, and Geffry Brown Esquires, or any five or
more of them, to set down the Rates for the Custom, or Imposition to be laid
on Aquavite, Wine, Oil, Yarne, and Tobacco.

18. Item, It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties, and his Majesty is further graciously pleased, that such persons
as shall be agreed on by the said Lord Lieutenant, and the said Lord Viscount
Mountgarret, Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir Daniel o Bryen, Knight; Sir
Lucas Dillon, Knight; Nicholas Plunket, Richard Bellings, Philip mac Hugh Rely,
Terlogh o Neale, Thomas Fleming, Patricke Darcy. Gerrard Fennel, and Geffry
Brown, Esquires; or any five or more of them shall be upon conclusion of these
Articles, Authorized by Commission under the great Scale, to Regulate the Court
of Castle Chamber, and such causes as shall be brought into, and censured in,
the said Court.

19. Item, It is further concluded, accorded and agreed, by and between the
said parties, And his Majesty is further graciously pleased, that two Acts
lately passed in this Kingdom, prohibiting the Pl^ming with Horses by the
tail, and the other prohibiting the burning of Oats in the Straw, be repealed.

20. Item, It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that upon
perfection of these Articles such course shall be taken against such (...) have
Dis^^ayed the Cessation, and will not submit to the Peace, if any shall Oppose
it, as shall be just, and for the Peace of the Kingdom.

21. Item, It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties, And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, forasmuch as upon
application of Agents from this Kingdom unto His Majesty in the fourth year
of his Reign, and lately upon humble Suite made unto His Majesty by a
Committee of both Houses of the Parliament of this Kingdom, Order was given by
his Majesty for Redress of several grievances, and for so many of those as
are not expressed in these Articles, whereof both Houses in the next ensuing
Parliament shall desire the benefit of His Majesty's said former directions for
Redresses therein, that the same be afforded them, yet so, as for prevention of
inconveniences to His Majesty's service, that the warning mentioned the 21.
Article of the graces, in the fourth year of his Majesty's Reign, be so
understood that the Warning being left at the persons dwelling houses, be held
sufficient Warning, and that, as to the 22 Article of the said Graces, the
Process hitherto used in the Court of Wards do still contin^e as hitherto it
has done in that, and has been used in other English Courts, but the Court of
Wards being compounded for, so much of the aforesaid Answer as concerns
Warning, and Process, shall be omitted.

22. Item, It is further Concluded, Accorded, and Agreed, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that Maratine
causes may be determined in this Kingdom, without driving of merchants or
others to Appeal, and seek Justice elsewhere; and if it shall fall out that
there be cause of an Appeal, the party grieved is to appeal to His Majesty
in the Chancerie of Ireland, and the Sentence thereupon to be given by the
Delegaces, to be Definitive, and not to be questioned upon any further Appeal,
except it be in the Parliament of this Kingdom, if the Parliament shall then
be sitting, otherwise not, This to be by Act of Parliament.

23. Item, It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties. And His Majesty out of His abundant grace and goodness to His
Subjects of this Kingdom is graciously pleased to assent, that His said
Subjects be eased of the increase of Rents lately raised on them upon the
Commission of Defective Titles, in the Earl of Straffords Government, this to
be by Act of Parliament.

24. Item, It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed upon, by and between
the said parties, And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that by Act
to be passed in the next Parliament, all the arreares of Interest of money
which did accrue, or grow due by way of debt, mortgage, or otherwise, and yet
not satisfied, since the 23. of October, 1641. Until the perfection of these
Articles shall be fully forgiven and be released; And that for and during the
space of three years next ensuing, no more shall be taken for use, or interest
of money, then five pounds per Cont. and in all cases of equity arising through
disability occasioned by the distempers of those times, the considerations of
equity to be alike unto both parties.

25. Item, It is concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the said
parties, And His Majesty is graciously pleased that the said Richard Lord
Viscount Mountgarret, Donogh Lord Visc- Muskery, Sir Daniel o Bryen, Knight,
Sir Lucas Dillon, Knight 3 Nicholas Pluncket, Richard Bellings, Phillip mac
Hugh o Ready, Terlogh o Neale, Thomas Fleminge, Patricks Darcy, Gerrald Fennel,
and Goffrey Brown, Esquires, shall be imediatly upon conclusion of these
Articles, Authorized by Act of State to proceed in, Hear, Determine, and
Execute within the Cities, corporate Towns, Counties and part of Counties, now,
or late, within the Quarters of the said Confederate Catholics, the ensuing
particulars, and all matters thereupon depending, And that the said Act of
State, and other the authorities hereafter mentioned shall remain of force
without Revoration, Alteration, or Diminution, until Acts of Parliament be
Passed according the purport and intent of these present Articles; only in
case of death of any of the said persons so to be authorized, the Lord
Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom for time
being, shall by the advice and consent of the persons so to be authorized, then
living, or any five or more of them, name others in the place of such who shall
be so dead, and the persons so to be named, to be Authorized as the former, And
that the persons to be Authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of them be
permitted without interruption to Applot Raise and Levic Means with
indifferency and equallitie, upon all His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects
of this Kingdom, for the Raising, Clothing, and bringing to Sea Ports, and
Maintaining there, until they be shipped Ten Thousand men promised by the
Consederate Catholics of this Kingdom to assist His Majesty, and to levy the
Arrearea of all Excises, and other Public Taxes already imposed by them, and
yet unpaid; and to call all Receivers and other Accomptants of all former taxes
and public dues, to a Just and strict Account, either by themselves, or by
such as they, or any five or more of them shall name and appoint, And that the
said persons to be authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of them shall
have power to Applot, Raise, and Levy, means, with indifferency and
equality, by way of Excises, or otherwise, in the several Cities, Corporate
Towns, Counties and parts of Counties now within the Quarters of the said
Confederate Catholics, toward the Maintenance of such Army or Armies as
shall be thought fit to continue, and be in pay, for the defense of the
Kingdom, and toward the maintenance of all the Forts, Castles, and Garrisons
within both, or either, of the now Quarters of either party, other then such
of the said Garrisons, Forts, and Castles, as from time to time, until there
be a settlement in Parliament, shall be thought fit by His Majesty's chief
Governor, or Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, by and with the advice and consent of the said persons so to be authorized, or any five or more
of them, not to be maintained at the Charge of the Public, Provided that His
Majesty's Lieutenant, or other chief Governors for the time being, be first
made acquainted with such Taxes, Levies, and Excises as shall be made, and the
manner of Levying thereof, and that he approve the same, And that the persons
to be authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of them shall be authorized
to appoint Receivers, Gollectors, and all other Officers, for such moneys as
shall be so assessed, and for the Arreares of all former Applotments, Taxes,
and other Public Dues yet unpaid, And that the persons so to be authorized,
or any five or more of them, in case of Refractoriness', or Delinquencie, may
Distraint, and Imprison, and cause such Delinquents to be Distrained or
Imprisoned, and that the Profits of the Estates, within the now Quarters of the
Confederate Catholics, of such as shall adhere to the Parliament, and not
submit to the Peace, be accounted as Public Dues, and be converted to the
Maintenance of the Kings Army, And that the said persons to be authorized as
aforesaid, or any five or more of them, shall have power to Applot, Raise, and
Levy means with indifferency, and equality, for the buying of Arms and
Ammunition, and for Entertaining of Friggors, in such proportion and manner as
shall be thought fit by His Majesty's Lieutenant, or other chief Governor, or
Governors, for the time being, by and wish the Advice and consent of the said
Richard Lord viscount Mountgarret, Donnogh Lord viscount Muskery, Sir Daniell o
Bryen Knight, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Nicholas Plunket, Richard Bellings,
Philip mac Hugh o Rely, Terlogh o Neale, Thomas Fleming, Patricke Darcy,
Gerrard Fennel and Geffry Brown Esquires, or any five or more of them, The
said Arms and Ammunition, to be laid up in such Magazines, and under the
charge of such persons as shall be agreed, by the said Lord Lieutenant, and the
said persons to be authorized, as aforesaid, or any five or more of them, and
to be issued, and the said Frigotts to be employed, by the Lord Lieutenant or
other chief Governor, or Governors for the time being, for the safety of the
Kingdom, by the advice and consent of the said Richard Lord viscount
Mountgarret, Donnogh Lord viscount Muskery, Sir Daniell o Bryen, Sir Lucas
Dillon, Nicholas Plunket, Richard Bellings, Philip mac Hugh o Rely, Terlogh o
Neale, Thomas Fleming, Patricke Darcy, Gerrald Fennel, and Geffry Brown, or
any five or more of them; And that the said persons so to be authorized as
aforesaid, or any five or more of them shall have power to Applot, Raise, and
Levy, Mesnes with indifferency, and equality, by way of Excises, or
otherwise, in the several Cities Corporate Towns, Counties and parts of
Counties, now within the Quarters and upon the Estates of the said Confederate
Catholics all such sum and sums as shall appear unto the said persons,
to be authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of them, to be really due,
for, and in discharge of, the public engagements of the said Confederate
Catholics incurred or grown due before the Conclusion of these Articles, and
that the said persons to be authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of
them shall have power to Applor, Raise, and Levy Means with indifferency and
equality by way of Excise, or otherwise, in the several Cities, Corporate
Towns; Counties and parts of Counties now within the Quarters of the said
Confederate Catholics as well for the persons to be authorized as aforesaid,
and also for such other person and persons as shall be Employed in Public
Affairs within the several Cities, Corporate towns, Counties, and parts of
Counties within the now Quarters of the said Confederate Catholics from time
to time until a settlement by Parliament, And that the said persons to be
Authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of them, make perfect Books of
all such moneys as shall be Applotted, Raised, and Levied, our of which Books,
they are to make several and respective Abstracte, to be delivered under their
hands, or the hands of any five or more of them, to the several and respective
Collectors, who shall be appointed to Levy, and Receive the same; and that a
duplicate of the said Books, under the hands of the said persons to be
authorized as aforesaid, be delivered unto His Majesty's Lieutenant, or other
Chief Governor or Governors for the time being, whereby a perfect account
might be given.

26. Item. It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties and His Majesty is graciously pleased, that for the preservation
of the Peace, and Tranquillity of the Kingdom, That the said Lord Lieutenant,
and the said Lord viscount Mountgarret, Donnogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir
Daniell o Bryen Knight, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Nicholas Plunket, Richard
Bellings Philip mac Hugh o Rely, Terlogy o Neale, Thomas Fleming, Patricke
Darcy, Gerrald Fennel, and Geffry Brown Esquires, or any five or more of
them, shall for the present, agree upon such persons who are to be authorized
by Commission under the great Seal, to be Commissioners of the Peace, Oyer and
Terminer, and Goal delivery, in the several Counties, and parts of Counties,
within the now Quarters of the Confederate Catholics, with such power as
Justices of the Peace, Oyerand Terminer, and Jail delivery, in former times of
Peace, have usual had; which is not to extend unto any Crime, or Offense,
committed before the 15. of September 1643. And to be qualiffied with Power to
Hear and Determine all Civil causes coming before them not exceeding ten
pounds; Provided that they shall not intermedle with Titles of Lands; Provided
likewise the authority of such Commissioners shall not extend, to question any
person or persons, for any Cattle or Goods, heretofore taken by either party
from the other, contrary to the Articles of cessations, but that the same shall
be left to be determined in such way, as by these Articles is already
prescribed, which Commissioners are to continue till settlement by Parliament,
Si tam diu se been gesserint, And if any who shall be so entrusted, shall
misbehave himself in the execution of such trust, within that time, that then
such other person or persons shall be appointed in his or their place, as shall
be agreed on by His Majesty's Chief Governor, or Governors for the time
being, by the Advice and Consent of the said persons so to be entrusted, or any
five or more of them, and the said Commissioners are to make their Estreates as
accustomed in time of Peace, and shall take the ensuing Oath, viz. You shall
swear that as Justice of the Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Goal delivery, in
the Counties of A. B. C. in all Articles of the Kings Commission to you
directed, you shall do equal right to the poor and to the rich, after your
Cunning Wit, and Power, and after the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and in
persuance of these Articles; and you shall not be of Council of any quarrel
hanging before you, And the Issues, Eines, and Amerciaments, which shall happen
to be made, and all Forfeitures which shall happen before you; You shall cause
to be entr d without any concealment or imbezeling, and truly send to the
Kings Exchequer; You shall not let for gift, or other cause, but well and
truly you shall do your Office of justice of the Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail deliverie in that behalf, and that you take nothing for your Office of
Justice of the Peace, Oyer and Terminer and Jail delivery to be done, but of
the King, and Fees accustomed; And you shall not direct, or cause to be
directed, any warrant by you to be made to the parties, but you shall direct
them to the Sheriffs, and Bailiffs of the said Counties respectively, or other
the Kings Officers, or Ministers, or other indifferent persons to do Execution
thereof, So help you God. And that as well in the said Commission, as in all
other Commissions and authorities, to be issued in persuance of these present
Articles, this Clause shall be incerted, viz. That all Officers, Civil and
Marshall, shall be required to be ayding and assisting, and obedient unto the
said Commissioners, and other persons to be authorized as abovesaid in the
execution of their respective powers.

27. Item, It is further Concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said Parties, And his Majesty is further graciously pleased, That none of the
now Roman Catholic party shall from henceforth, until there be a settlement
by Parliament, Sue, Impleade, or Arrest, or be sued, Impleaded, or Arrested in
any Court, Place. Judicature, or Tribunal, or before any Judge, Justice, or
Commissioner whatsoever, other then before the Commissioners aforesaid, or in
the several Corporations, or other Judicatures, within the now Quarters of the
said Confederate Catholics, as has, or have Power derived from His Majesty.

28. Item, It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that His
Majesty's Confederate Catholic Subjects do continue the possession, of such
of His Majesty's Cities, Garrisons, Towns, Forts, and Castles, which are
within their now Quarters, until settlement by Parliament, and to be
Commanded, Ruled and Governed in chief, by such as His Majesty or his chief
Governor of Governors of this Kingdom for the time being shall Appoint, and
His Majesty his chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom as aforesaid, is
to issue Commissions, and appoint such person, and persons, as shall be named
by His Majesty's chief Governor, or Governors for the time being, by, and
with the advice and consent of the said Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Donnough,
Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir Daniel o Bryen, Sir Lucas Dillon, Nicholas Plunket,
Richard Bellings, Philip mac Hugh o Rely, Terlogh o Neale, Thomas Fleming,
Patricke Darcy, Gerrald Fennel, and Geffry Brown, Esquires, or any five or
more of them, for the execution of such Command, Rule, or Government, to
continue until all the particulars in these present Articles agreed on to
pass in Parliament, shall be accordingly passed; only in case of death, or
Misbehaviour such other person or persons to be appointed for the said Command,
Rule, and Government to be named and appointed in the Place, or places, of him,
or them, who shall so die or Misbehave themselves, as the Chief Governor or
Governors, for the time being, by the advice and consent of the said Lord
Viscount Mountgarret, and the rest of the above mentioned parties to be
authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of them, shall think fit, and to
be continued until settlement in Parliament, as aforesaid.

29. Item, It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties, and His Majesty is further graciously pleased, that all Customs
belonging to His Majesty which from the perfection of these present Articles
shall fall due within this Kingdom, shall be paid into his Majesty's Receipt,
and to His use, any Request, Clause, or Demand, in the Act of Oblivion, or in
any other former Propositions to the contrary notwithstanding; Provided, that
all and every person and persons, who are at the present Entrusted within the
now Quarters of the Confederate Catholics, by them the said Confederate
Catholics in the Entries, Receipts, Collections, or otherwise concerning the
said Customs, do continue their respective Employments in the same, until
full settlement in Parliament; other then as to such, and so many of them, as
to the chief Governor, or Governors, for the time being, by the advice and
consent of the said Lord Viscount Mountgarret, and the other persons to be
authorized as aforesaid, or any five or more of them shall be thought fit to be
altered, and then, and in such case, or in case of death, or misbehaviour, or
other alteration, of any such person or persons, such other person or persons
to be employed as shall be thought fit, by the Chief Governor or Governors
for the time being, by, and with the advice and Consent of the said Lord
Viscount Mountgarret, and the rest of the persons to be authorized as
aforesaid, or any five or more of them; And as to His Majesty's Rents to grow
due, at Easter next, and from thenceforth, the same to be payable unto His
Majesty notwithstanding any thing contained in the Article of the Act of
oblivion, or in any other Article to the contrary, but the same not to be
Written for, or Levied, unitll a full settlement in Parliament, as aforesaid.

30. Item. It is further concluded, accorded, and agreed, by and between the
said parties; And His Majesty is further graciously pleased, That the
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail delivery, to be named as
aforesaid, shall have Power to hear and Determine all Murders, Manslaughters,
Rapes, Stealths, Burning of Houses, and Corn in Reeke, or Stacks, Robberies,
Burglaries, force^ble entries, Detainers of Possessions, and other Offenses,
commiteed, or done, and to be committed and done from the 15 day of September,
1643. until the first day of the next Parliament. These present Articles, or
any therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding; Provided that the
Authority of the said Commissioners shall not extend to question any person,
or persons, for doing or Committing and Act whatsoever before the conclusion of
this Treaty by virtue or color of any Warrantor direction from those in
public Authority among the Confederate Catholics; nor unto any Act which
shall be done after the perfecting and concluding of these Articles by virtue
of pretense of any authority, which is now by these Articles agreed on;
Provided also the said Commission shall not continue longer then to the first
day of the next Parliament. In witness whereof his Excellency the Marquess
of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Jreland His Majesty's Commissioner to that part
of these Articles remaining with the said Richard Lord Viscount Mountgarret,
Donnogh, Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir Robert Talbot, Baronet; Dermot o Bryen,
Patrick Darcie, Geffry Brown, and John Dillon, Esquires; And the said Richard
Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Donnogh, Lord Viscount Muskery, Sir Robeat Talbot,
Barronet; Dermot o Bryen, Patricke Darcy, Geffry Brown and John Dillon,
Esquires; to that part of these Articles remaining with the said Lord
Lieutenant, have put their hands and seals at Dublin this 28 day of March
1646. and in the two and Twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign King
CHARLES King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc.

FINIS.

