(...) II (...) A. D^ Blois. Sculp.


A TREATISE Of the Art of WAR: Dedicated to the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty.

And Written by the Right Honorable ROGER Earl of ORRERY.

In the SAVOY: Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange.

M. DC. LXXVII.

To the KING:
SIR,
THE Ultimate and Only Legitimate End of War is, or at least ought to be,
among Christians, The Obtaining of a Good and Lasting Peace.

And the sole Right in Your Majesty's Dominions, of Making War and Peace, being
One undoubted Prerogative of Your Imperial Crown, I believed a Treatise of the
Art of War, written by One who has the Happiness to be born Your Subject;
Ought, SIR, to be Dedicated Only to You; Yet I durst not presume to do it,
before I had most humbly begged and obtained Your Majesty's Leave, to lay it at
Your Feet.

I have, SIR, in the short Introduction to this Treatise, lamented that none of
Our English Generals, whom I know of, (except the Noble Sir Francis Vere) has
left to Posterity, his own Observations in War: When not Only, no Nation (as I
believe) has Excelled them in Military Conduct, in Success, and in Valor; But
also when they had the Illustrious Examples of diverse great Captains, inviting
them to do it, who, in many Ages past, and possibly in all succeeding Ones,
will be at least as much esteemed and celebrated for their Commentaries, as for
their Victories; since All who more desire to merit the Title of Commanders,
than only to bear the Name, will more Instructively read the Commentaries or
Memorials of one famous General, written by himself; than All the Relations of
Battles, Victories, and Conquests, written by the ordinary Historians: For they
tell us chiefly but the Events of Wars, rarely the true Methods, the Arts, and
the Industries, by which they have been managed; when the knowledge of these,
is exceedingly more useful, than the knowledge of those.

I therefore most heartily wish, That the present Age, and the future, may owe
to Your Majesty the preserving them henceforth from the like unhappiness, by
Your expressly Ordering all such us hereafter shall have the Honor to Command
Your Fleets or Armies, to Present You constantly in writing, and under their
hands, a particular Account of all their most important Actings, of their
Observations in the War, and the Motives which induced them at any time to do
as they did.

Such Memorials, in my humble Opinion, would be of eminent Advantage, to All
those of the present Times, to whom Your Majesty would vouchsafe to Communicate
them; and to All those which in the Future should enjoy the Benefit of Perusing
them.

It would more than probably, make All Your Majesty's chief Commanders the more
circumspect in forming their final Results, when they should know, that so
Great and Exact a Judge of Reason, as Your Majesty is, would still examine and
weigh the validity of them.

For though it is too usually said by some, and believed by others, That
Success does cover all the Faults and Errors in War* Yet doubtless the wiser
Portion of Mankind, had much rather owe their Victories to their good Conduct,
than to (what is termed, by the World) their Good Fortune; Nay, had rather be
less Successful, by stedily pursuing the Dictates of Right Reason, than be more
Victorious, by declining them at any Time; Since Wise Councels are still within
the Power of Wise Men; But Success is not.

And if I might presume to acquaint Your Majesty, with my humble Belief on this
Subject, I durst say, That no Profession in the World, is more built on true
Reason, and sound Judgment, than the Military is; For both those are
essentially requisite, to Generals, and the chief Officers under them.

As some manifestation of this Truth, I shall particularize but one Instance,
and that shall be in Battles; which are the most Glorious, and commonly the
most important Acts of War; wherein usually the moments to obtain the Victory
are so few, that while an unconsummated Reasoning is considering, the
opportunity of acquiring it, is vanished.

So that even the Romans themselves; who were so jealous of what they called
their Liberty, as though they dreaded to entrust the Supreme Power in One, yet
they were never under Exigencies indeed, but they chose a Dictator; as is
evident in the Cases of Quintus Cincinnatus, Furius Camillus, Fabius Maximus,
and diverse others; Necessity making them practice, what Reason could not induce
them to confess.

Nor did the Grecians owe their famous Victory at Marathon, to their having Ten
Generals; but to their Generals having that Reason, which the State of Athens
wanted; The placing of the absolute Power in Miltiades.

All which seems, SIR, to evidence, That the management of War is Practically
acknowledged to be best placed in One, if that One is blessed with the highest
humane Prerogative of Well-Reasoning; and therefore illustrates, That a good
General ought to have a perfect and clear Understanding, else he will be too
apt to imitate what others have done, merely because they did it.

Nor have I ever known or read of any famous Captain, who was not also a Person
of strong Judgment, and blessed with great Presence of Mind, on all Emergencies.

Yet we too often see, and I wish we may never feel, the fatal Effects of it;
That in War, as in most other things, though of the nearest and highest
Concernment to us, we take upon Trust, and with an implicit Belief, whatever
we are taught by those, under whom we learn our first Rudiments.

Whereas if we would undergo the Duty, (I had almost said enjoy the Delight)
solidly to examine the true Reason of Things, and then only embrace and
practice what after such Inquiry, we were convinced was the very best; we
should be less Magisterially imposed upon by others, and be more satisfied in
what we our selves undertook.

I think, SIR, no rational and considering Man was ever convinced, merely by
another saying, the Imperialists or the French, or any other Nation, do thus,
and thus, in the Wars, unless withal he is acquainted and satisfied, with the
Reasons why they do it; For Reason, not Custom singly, is what considering Men
will only follow, and the chearfullest Attempts are animated from first
convincing of the Judgment.

I know, SIR, the Art of War has been in many Ages, Altered, Cultivated, and
Heightened; Yet no Monarch, State, or General, though never so Absolute, did
ever make any considerable Alterations in the Military methods of his Country,
but Reason was produced, or at least pretended, to Authorize Them.

Whatever conduces most to bring all things to be weighed in that Balance, is
what I would Promote; I have, SIR, much Reverence for Old Customs, but much
more for Reason; so that had I had the misfortune to have been born and
educated in Spain, yet I am confident I should not now have been for Arming the
Cavalry with Lances, or for Charging the Ordnance, in a Sea Fight, Over-deck.

If Reason will not make Men change irrational Customs, Losses will; which are
the usual Converters of all those, on whom Ratiocination at first does not
operate.

I have designed this whole Treatise shall consist of Two Tomes, partly because
it will be too Voluminous in One, but chiefly to know if the first may have the
Honor and Happiness, to be acceptable to Your Majesty; since the only Rule I
have set up to my self, of liking or disliking any thing I do, is, As Your
Majesty shall Approve or Disapprove it.

I have prepared the chief Materials for the remaining Tome, in which is to be
contained the Greatest, the most Useful, and the most Intricate parts of the
Art of War.

If this now Published shall be blessed with Your Majesty's Favor, I shall have
therein the highest Encouragement, to proceed; but if it is not, I shall have
more reason to Apologize for having written so much, than to do it for writing
no more.

I was not induced to undertake this Work, at the Importunity of many Friends;
nor by the Flattery of diverse others, who endeavored to persuade me it might be
of some Use to Your Majesty's Subjects; nor yet to evidence, (when Your Majesty
had as much above my Desert, as Expectation, raised me by Your Letters Patents,
to be the Major General of Your Majesty's Army in Ireland,) I had not entirely
neglected to study the Duties and Knowledge of the Military Art, (though
possibly this last might have been no unpardonable Design) but the chief Ends
which induced me to compose this Treatise, were Two:

The first was, That to perform the Work well, was highly desirable; and I
would provoke others to do, what, I acknowledge, I am only able to attempt.

The second was, That as from the first Time I had the Blessing to know Your
Majesty, and the high Honor to be employed by You, (which having been both at
one and the same time, I might be proud of it with more Reason, than I could be
condemned for being so) I paid my healthful Time to Your Service; so now I
would humbly endeavor to evidence to Your Majesty, and to all others, that I
Dedicate my sickly Time to the same Duty, whereby all the Parts of my Life,
will appear Devoted to Your Service, which cannot be more the Debt, than to
discharge it acceptably, is and will be, to the last moment of my Life, the
utmost Endeavor, and the highest Satisfaction of,

May it Please Your Most SACRED MAJESTY; Your Majesty's most Humble, Most
Obedient, and Most Entirely Devoted Subject and Servant, ORRERY.

The Titles of the several Chapters, with the Pages where they Begin and End.
The Choice and Educating of the Soldiery Begins Page 4 Ends Page 22 The Arming
of the Soldiery 23 35 The Disciplining of the Soldiery 36 41 The Ordering of
Garrisons 42 58 The Marching of an Army 59 72 The Camping of an Army within a
Li^ or (...) 73 147 The Chapter of Battles 14^ 20^

LICENSED,

November. 17. 1677. ROGER L'ESTRANGE

ERRATA.
PAge 1. Line 14. for peaceable, read peaceably. Page 3. Line the last save
one, for embrain^g, read embracing. Page 6. Line 9. for made, read makes. Page
19. Line 22. for all, read ill. Page 23. Line 13. and 27. for Iavelet, read
Iavelin. Page 24. Line 9. for fo, read for. Ibid. Line 27. for Jury, read Jury.
Ibid. Line 28. for of their, read other. Page 25. Line the last, for then to,
read and not. Page 26. Line 13. blot out of. Ibid. Line 26. add of after day.
Page 27. Line 7. for will, read would. Ibid. Line 16. for front, read fight.
Page 28. Line 13. after day, add of. Page 30. Line 35. blot out made. Page 31.
Line 36. for he, read him. Page 39. Line 28. for division, read divisions. Page
40. Line 9. for do, read does. Page 43. Line the last, blot out as, after
prove. Page 46. Line 26. for they, read their. Page 47. Line 15. and 17. for
Parrepett, read Parrapets. Page 48. Line 10. for would, read will. Page 50.
Line 13. after it, read is. Page 52. Line 14. for on, read in. Page 53. Line 30.
for their, read the. Page 54. Line 5. for open, read opened. Page 55. Line 35.
for ot, read on. Page 57. Line 15. for surprised, read surprisal. Ibid. Line
16. for Parropett, read Parrapett. Page 59. Line 30. for is, read are. Page 60.
Line 10. after discover, point it with a semicolon; Page 65. Line 10. after
not, read so. Page 66. Line 17. and 18. for expediti^, read expedition^y. Page
67. Line 22. after another, blot out for. Page 75. Line 6. for a^, read and.
Ibid. Line 8. for dersues, read derives. Page 81 Line 3. for Retrenchments,
read Intrenchments. Page 87. Line 14. for breadth, read length. Page 90. Line
33. for 3, read 2. Page 92. Line last, for 2, read 3. Page 94. Line 32. for as,
read are. Page 96. Line 15. for set, read sell. Page 126. Line 35. for
favored, read indulged. Page 128. Line 20. for on, read in. Page 133. Line 13.
for Continents, read Continent. Page 134. Line 18. for Ottomen, read Ottoman.
Page 135. Line 17. for 18 or 19, read 8 or 9. Page 150. Line 36. for Francis
the First, read Charles the Ninth. Page 154. Line 30. for Jury, read Jury. Page
156. Line 23. for that, read the. Page 158. Line 35. and 37. for Hostatii, read
Hastati. Ibid. Line 36. and 38. for Principi, read Principes. Page 159. Line
14. for easy, read easier. Ibid. Line 17. after in, add a. Page 165. Line 25.
for if, read of. Page 170. Line the last save (...). for Economies, read
oeconomies. Page 171. Line 7. for 320000, read 318000. Page 191. Line 14. for
Lines, read Line. Ibid. Line 32. for Squadron, read Squadrons. Page 192. Line
32. for Faces, read Paces. Page 196. Line 30. after may be, read thereby. Page
202. Line 25. for follow, read following. Page 205. Line the last, for
estimable, read esteemable.
A TREATISE OF THE Art of WAR.
THough no one Nation in the World, has acquired more Glory by Arms, than the
English has done; yet I never saw, or indeed so much as credibly heard of, an
entire Treatise of the Art of War, written in our Language.

Whether those who were Ablest to Compose it, esteemed it unadvisable to have
the Secrets of that Fatal, but Necessary Art, prostituted as it were, by being
made Common to All: Or whether they did present what they writ, to their Kings
only; who, if Martially inclined, kept them as Secrets, unfit to be
Communicated; or if Peaceable, neglected, and buried them in crowds of other
useless Writings: Or whether in those former Warlike days, that Needsul
Science was so universally known by great Commanders, that every one in
particular, esteemed it needless to write an express Treatise, of what was
known to All in general; Or whether that great Profession by daily Experiments,
did so Improve, and Heighten, as what in one War, was worthy to be known; in
the next War was so much better Cultivated, and Refined, as rendered it as
impossible to set down Standing Rules, and Maxims, for making War, as to take
the utmost height of one, who is still growing: Or whether the great Commanders
of those Ages, differed in opinion, as to the Methods, and Principles of War,
and therefore would write no Set Treatise on that Subject, lest thereby they
should raise a War of the Pen. But from whatsoever Cause or Causes it
proceeded, (which is above my skill to determine) yet doubtless their Silence
therein, is to be Lamented. For we are thereby deprived of the Experience of
our Ancestors, for many Ages; And Experience is not only the Greatest, but the
Truest Teacher; even as much as the Practice, surpasses the bare Theory.

It is very worthy of Observation, though the present way of Fighting, and of
Arming our Soldiery, be very different from what was practiced by the Greeks,
and Romans, who were in their Times, the Great Masters of the Military Art; yet
the Famousest Captains of the Latter, and the Present Age, take the Ancients,
but especially Julius Caesar, for their Example, in all the Noblest and Best
Principles of War, whose Commentaries are not enough to be extolled, both for
the Modesty, and Policy of them. And it is to the Experience of those Famous
Nations, that we owe most of that Discipline, which now, on our own Trials, we
have judged worthiest to be observed and imitated. For though the use of all
Firearms, and of Cannon, were Entirely unknown to them, which has much altered
the manner of making War: And though they Fought with their Files exceeding
deep, which we with much Reason have Altered; yet as to the Main, we owe to
them most of our Knowledge: And the Difference seems Little more, than between
Old-fashioned Plate, hammered into New; where though the Form is changed, yet
the Substance remains.

When I mention an entire Treatise of the Art of War, I intend thereby, The
Method of Choosing, of the Soldiery. Arming, Educating, and Disciplining, The
Well ordering of Garrisons, Ways of Marching an Army. How to Camp within a
Line, or without any, Quarter in Villages, Attack or Defend Quarters, Give
Battle, or to Avoid it. Besiege, Approach, Assault, and by Breach, of Cannon,
or Mine, to Carry, or Defend Towns and Fortresses, with all the Appendages
which belong to those several Branches of the Military Art.

Which Generals, include many important Particulars, worthy the knowledge of
every one, who takes upon himself the profession of a Soldier. For though the
Name of a Soldier is common; yet it is Rare, to find the Thing itself.

I have therefore, by way of Essay, thought fit to set down what I have learnt
by Reading, by Discourse, and by my own Experience; having had the Honor and
Misfortune to have been an Officer and Commander for above Four and thirty
years; much of which time I did not Act by the Example of others, but by
weighing the Reasons by which others did, or pretended to Act; embraincg what
on Examination I found Rational, and rejecting what others did, only because
they were taught it. For Reason ought to be preferred before Customs, which are
not founded on it; ever submitting my Opinions to all such, who oppose them by
stronger Arguments than those I have built mine upon; For I much more desire to
follow what is the Best, than that others should follow me, if my Maxims are
not such.

Whatever else this Essay may produce, yet I hope this one Good may be caused
by it, even that of Inviting some Abler Person to undertake the Work; whereby
if mine should not prove advantageous, yet it may produce what will be so; and
effect that by another, which it wanted strength to perform of itself.

Of the Choice and Educating of the Soldiery.
WE are not so careful either in the Education of our Youth for the War, or in
the Choice of Men to be Soldiers, as the Ancients were. The Greeks had public
Masters or Teachers, not only to instruct their Youth in the use of Arms, but
also public Schools for that end: the Teachers they called Tactici, the
Schools Gymnasia; and it was even a Reproach and Ignominy to any, who had not
learnt to handle his Arms, in those Gymnasia's erected and endowed for that
End. Nay, some have with Reason believed, that while their Youth were Training
up in those Schools, they were Fed, and Lodged, as if they had been actually on
Duty in the Field; which doubtless was a Method worthy of Praise, and
Imitation: For thereby not only in an instant they were able to form an Army of
a Soldiery expert in the use of their Arms, but also to have it consist of Men
accustomed to the Diet and Incommodities of War: For without the latter, the
former would have been of little and short benefit; since to know how to use
Arms, and not to have Bodies inured to Hardships, would have been very little
Significant, if not Destructive.

But we, when we raise Men, compose our Soldiery of Volunteers, and Pressed Men,
both generally unexpert in the use of Arms, and unaccustomed to the hardships
of War; whereby, if suddenly after their being Listed, they should be led on
Service, they would be exposed to Defeats, and the Countries they are to
defend, to Ruin.

His Majesty that now Reigns, has done more toward the redress of this great
Evil, than all His Predecessors, having, by Act of Parliament, settled the
Militia in the Cities, and Countries, whereby many are instructed in the use of
their Arms: But this yet is far short of what the Greeks did practice; For our
Trained Bands, especially in the Countries, rarely meet to Exercise, and then
return at Night, where they feed well, and lie warm: whereas the Greeks had
Schools constantly to teach their Youth, to fit them for War, before they were
called to it; and were also accustomed to the Fare and Lodgings of Soldiers,
the last of which our Trained Bands are too much strangers unto.

Besides, to be taught to handle Arms, and to endure hardship during Youth,
makes men more dext'rous in the former, and more robust as to the latter, than
middle-aged men can be, who at those years, do but begin to learn.

To which I must add, That our Volunteers generally (except such young
Gentlemen as Honor, desire of Knowledge, and hope of Preferment call to the
War) consist of such, as go to it, because they have not wherewithal to
subsist in Peace; and indeed are but too frequently debauched, idle Persons,
who having lived in Excess and Laziness, are the less capable to undergo the
Life of Soldiers. And as to those which are Pressed, they have still a hankering
to return, are commonly grumbling that they have been Pressed; and not minding to
become Soldiers, are not studious to learn a Profession, which they never
intend to practice.

The Turks, who possess the Empire of Greece, in imitation perhaps of the
Grecians Gymnasia's, erected in Constantinople, in the time of Amurath the
First, their College of Ianizaries, composed of the strongest and activest
Tribute Children of the Christians; whom they sent first into Asia, and
distributed amongst the Turkish Husbandmen there, to teach them the Language,
and to inure their Bodies to toil and hardship; then they were brought to
their College at Constantinople, where those Youths were taught the exercise
of Arms, and continued in hardships, whereby they became the Pillar of that
Warlike Monarchy. For though they have several other orders of Soldiery, as the
Asapi, Timariots, Spahi's, etc. yet the Ianizaries are the Soul of their
Armies, and the Guards of their Sultans; for from their Childhood they are
chosen, and bred up to all the Functions and Difficulties of War, which made
them so expert and considerable: And though during the Reigns of the last
Sultans, they have been very mutinous, and have by their Insurrections often
hazarded that Monarchy, as appears by their having murdered Sultan Achmat,
deposed Mustapha, set up Morat in the Throne, and Pretorian like, have cast
down, and set up their Emperors as they pleased; yet this proceeded not from
their Institution, but from the Corruptions of it: For while their Sultans lead
them to the Wars, none were more daring against an Enemy, nor more obedient to
Discipline, than they: But from the death of Selymus the Second, since when,
their Emperors as it were began to mew themselves up in their Seraglio^s, and
that the Ianizaries (that is the main Body of them, for still Parties of them
were in their Armies) were thereby settled Inhabitants of Constantinople, they
became effeminate, lazy, and consequently mutinous; for they not only addicted
themselves to Trade, but also to Wine, and lastly to Marry; which were against
the Rules of their primary Institution, and probably they may be thereby, the
cause of the subversion of that Empire, as they were of the growth of it, while
they were kept to their first Discipline and Institutions.

The Mamelukes too, which were so long Masters of Syria and Egypt, were like
the Ianizaries Trained up from their youth to Arms, and hardship. And though
their Empire were sorely shaken by the great Tamerlane, and finally subverted
by Selymus the Second, yet they were ruined only by Numbers, not by Courage;
For neither of those great Conquerors could have selected out of their vast
Armies, a Body of Men no more numerous than the Mamelukes, which could have
vanquished them; so great is the strength which is built on Armies trained up
from their youth to Wars, and after kept under a strict Military Discipline.

By these Gymnasia's it was, that the Greeks had such excellent Forces, that
though they had but little Territories, and those Cantonized, and often divided
by Interests, and Jealousies; yet they long defended their Liberty against the
Persians, and others, who were exceedingly their Superiors in all things, but
true Military Discipline, which clearly evidences the excellency and virtue of
it.

But yet by reason the Province of Greece (if I may so call it) consisted of so
many little Sovereignties, and Republics, they were indeed but only fit to
defend themselves, not to increase their Dominions; which they never did
considerably, till by Art, and Force, first by Philip, then by his Son
Alexander the Great, they were in a measure incorporated; and then the World
saw how a handful of Greeks, did by their Discipline, Conquer most of Asia, and
in a short time, subverted that mighty Persian Empire, more likely to have
given the Law to Europe, than to have received it, from so small a part and
People of it.

I do not find that the Romans had such public Teachers, and Schools, to fit
their youth for Arms, as the Greeks had. But yet they were exceeding curious in
the choice of their Soldiers, some instances whereof I shall enumerate.

Romulus the first Founder of Rome, when the City began to be populous, divided
the whole People of it, into Military Orders; every embodied number of them,
consisted at first of Three thousand Foot, and Three hundred Horse, which they
called Legion; that is, Chosen. And after the conjunction of the Sabins with
the Romans, the Legions were doubled, and consisted of Six thousand chosen
Foot, and Six hundred Horse; but since then, the numbers of a Legion have often
varied, and been less.

Tullus Hostilius the third Roman King, divided the Roman People into five
distinct Classes or Tribes; the Richest were obliged to Arm, and Mount
themselves, and wholly composed their Cavalry; the three next remaining
Classes, served for their Infantry; the fifth Class, as consisting of the
Poorer, and ancienter People, were exempt from War, and were left at home to
get Children, and follow Manufacture and Husbandry; their Infantry, according
to their Abilities, and Ages, were distinguished thus, into Velites, Hastati,
Principes, and Triarii, who were all Armed according as by the institution of
their several Orders, had been at first established.

All these Tribes being Rendezvous'd without Arms, the Tribunes composed the
Velites of such as were the very youngest, and poorest of the said three
Tribes; the Hastati were composed of the better sort of the Poorest, and
Youngest; the Principes were composed of the most Vigorous, and Active
remaining; and the Triarii, of the gravest and elder sort of the said Tribes.
But in effect I find that the Roman Infantry only consisted of three distinct
Bodies, viz. the Hastati, Principes, and Triarii; for the Velites rarely, if
ever, were a distinct body; but both in the Embattellings and Camp^ngs, (as
shall be hereafter more particularly set down) they were mixed with the other
three.

It is true, some ancient Authors mention other Classes of the Roman Infantry,
as Tironi Rorarii, and Accensi, which I take to be all a younger sort of
Soldiery, only employed (as most commonly the Velites were) in loose Parties,
to use missil Weapons, and gaul an Enemy; but were never a body that fought in
formed Battalions, or with a firm foot.

After the expulsion of the Tarquins, and in them of the Roman Kings, they
chose Annually two Consuls, which Consuls chose the Four and twenty Military
Tribunes, which were in each Consular Army; but afterward the People
themselves would often choose them; All the four first Classes of the People,
but such as were in the Field, were Annually called by the Consuls to the
Capitol, or else to the Field of Mars; and whoever failed to appear, was
rigorously punished.

The Romans obliged none to be Soldiers but from the Age of Seventeen, to the
Age of Five and forty; And to encourage all their People to turn Soldiers, none
could be admitted to any Civil Magistracy in Rome, that had not served ten
years complete in the Wars; nor any under the Age of Twenty seven years, was
capable of a Civil Office: And every one was obliged (of the Twenty eight years
during which he was tied to the Wars if the State required it) actually to have
served Fifteen years; so that when they came to the Age of Forty five years,
and had served Fifteen years thereof in War, they were no longer obliged to
bear Arms, unless it were for the guarding and defense of the City, and then
were usually called Emeriti.

It was also a standing Rule among them, that none could attain to the dignity
of one of the Four and twenty Military Tribunes, that had not actually served
at least Five years in the Wars; and this favor also, was only extended to the
first Fourteen of them who were chosen out of the Four and twenty; and for the
remaining Ten, none could be Elected, that had not served Eleven years in the
Infantry, or Fifteen years in the Cavalry; which proves how much more the
Romans esteemed the Foot-service, than the Horse.

Four Legions always composed a Consular Army, and commonly they had two such
Armies annually; this was the Primitive Institution. And though through the
exigency of their Affairs, they had often more than eight Legions at once
entertained, yet the rest were distributed to, and commanded by their Pretors,
Proconsuls, and other Chiefs. When Hannibal was in Italy, they had at once
Twenty three Legions on foot; and Julius Caesar had Ten Legions at once in the
Wars against the Gauls: but this was when the vigor of the Laws declined, or
the very Being of their Commonwealth was at stake. Of the Four Legions which
composed a Consular Army, Two of them were always of the Allies, and they were
chosen just as those in Rome had been; only the Allies, as the need required,
were bound to send the double number of Horse; because their Countries being
much larger than the City Territories, were abler to furnish the Army with
Horse.

Before they proceeded to the Election of Soldiers, they divided the Four and
Twenty Military Tribunes, to the Four Legions, in this manner: Of the Fourteen
youngest Tribunes, they appointed Four of them to the First Legion; Three, to
the Second; Four, to the Third; and Three, to the Fourth: And of the Ten
ancientest Tribunes, they appointed Two, for the First Legion; Three, for the
Second; Two, for the Third; and Three, for the Fourth: by which, every Legion
had six Military Tribunes, and in every Legion the younger, and elder Tribunes
were dispersed.

The Four and twenty Tribunes thus chosen and appointed, they drew the Tribes
by Lots; out of the first; they chose four Soldiers of the equallest goodness
they could; out of which four, the six Tribunes of the first Legion chose one,
the six Tribunes of the second Legion chose one, the six Tribunes of the third
Legion one, and the six Tribunes of the fourth Legion had the remaining one.
After this, they chose other four Soldiers as equally good as they could, out
of the first Tribe; and then the Tribunes of the second Legion, chose one
first; the Tribunes of the third, chose next; the fourth, next; and the first,
had the one Soldier remaining: And thus they did alternatively, till the
Legions were composed out of all the Tribes, so that the first Legion had no
advantage in the choice of its Soldiers over the other three; but though this
was a tedious way of choosing, yet it was a very impartial one, and proves they
stuck at no trouble, when it was to do equally to all. After the Foot Soldiers
were chosen, the Censors chose the Cavalry.

The choice of the Private Soldiers being thus made, the Tribunes of every
Legion made every Soldier, one by one, swear to obey, and do all that should be
commanded him by his Superiors; which was performed, by every man's raising his
right hand, and holding the thumb of it upright.

The Tribunes then divided every Order of the Soldiers into Centuries, and
Cohorts; out of every one of which, they made two Elections, each of ten men;
the first Election as the most honorable, assisted at general Councils of War,
and were in effect what the Captains are in our times; those of the second,
were in the nature of Lieutenants; and though those of both the said Elections,
were called Centurions, yet the former were called, First Centurions, those of
the last, Second Centurions.

After this, the said Centurions chose their Vexillarii, who were in the nature
of the Ensigns of our times, but there were two of them to every Cohort.

Then they made choice of Twenty Tergiductors, who were those that ordered the
Rear of the Cohorts, whereby they had to every Cohort, two Chiefs in the Head,
and two in the Rear, besides their Vexillarii.

A Roman Legion was usually divided into five Orders; the Infantry made four,
viz. the Velites, Hastati, Principes, and Triari, the Cavalry one; every one of
these four Orders of Foot were divided into ten Companies, those of the
Infantry were called Centuries, Cohorts, or Manniples, those of the Cavalry
Turmae.

Every one of the three first Orders of the Infantry consisted of twelve
hundred Soldiers, which were divided into ten Companies, every one of which
consisted of One hundred and twenty Soldiers. The fourth Order, that of the
Triari consisted but of Six hundred Soldiers, which made ten Companies, each of
sixty Soldiers.

The Horse of a Roman Legion were but three hundred, which made ten Troops,
each of thirty, so that usually a Roman Legion consisted of Four thousand two
hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse, divided into forty Companies, and ten
Troops. They have, as I said before, often varied in their number, but this has
most usually been the quantity of Soldiers, Foot, and Horse, which composed a
Roman Legion.

The Military Tribunes, commanded their Legions by turns, two at a time, for
two months together, and so alternately it went round.

There is great variety of Opinions amongst ancient Authors about the Names of
Centuries, Cohorts, and Manniples. But it is thought they were but several
Appellations of the same thing, though in some places of Titus Livie, one may
find a distinction from the Cohorts to the Centuries, and from the Centuries to
the Manniples; which many think did proceed from the Legions being sometimes
increased to six thousand, nay to seven thousand men, and therefore such
Subdivisions have been made.

We are left much in the dark, as to the choice of the Soldiery amongst the
Greeks, whether it be by reason that the times in which they were most famous,
be remote; or that the Language is not so generally understood as the Latin; or
that the Romans having Conquered them, suppressed all traces of their methods
therein; yet their Gymnasia's, and their Tactici, evidence enough they were
sufficiently careful in that important particular; for none can expect to have
a good Orchard, who has his Trees out of a bad Nursery.

It Is worthy observation, that we seldom or never read, that the Greeks, or the
Romans, pressed Soldiers for the Wars, which is a thing so frequent in most
Countries, in our times, and possibly most in England, of any Kingdom; I cannot
fancy that this does entirely proceed from their being more Martially inclined
than the English were, and are; who (without flattery to my Countrymen) I
think are as little apt to fear, as much daring in Danger, and as ambitious of
Honor, as either the Greeks or Romans were, when they flourished most. Nay, I
durst hold all I am worth, (were the Wager lawful) that if a thousand men which
have never used Arms, (or a greater or lesser number) were taken from the Plow,
or from any Mechanical Employment, out of any Country in the world, and the
like number of English, both newly Armed, equally Officer'd, and were
immediately to fight, that the English would be victorious; which I attribute
chiefly to three things:

The First is, to those Noble Principles of Freedom, under which, by our
Monarchs Laws, they are born and bred up.

Secondly, to their substantial Diet, than which, none of the common sort of
People in the world have so good.

Thirdly, to the Exercises they use on Holy Days, and at Wakes, and Fairs,
especially their Wrestling, which makes them strong, and active.

I mention not a fourth, which the Noble Sir Walter Rawleigh takes cognizance
of, that we have a midling sort of People, viz. the Yeoman, and his Children,
which are not so low as the Peasant, nor so high as the lesser sort of Gentry;
and are in effect an order of men, which generally have composed our better
sort of Foot Soldiers, and which few parts of the world besides England are
acquainted with; I say I mention not these, because I limit what I speak of,
only to the Plowmen, and those of Handicrafts, which usually are below the rank
of the Yeomen, and their sons. And if our Commonest sort be such, what may not
(in a degree of proportion) be inferred, and believed, as to our Yeomanry, our
Gentry, and Nobility? To which I shall only add, that I very seldom saw the
English Soldiers flinch, if their Officers were good; Nor did I ever see
English men when routed, if they flung not away, or lost their Arms, but they
would Rally again, and again, and fight as heartily as ever; which can hardly
with truth be said of many other Nations, if of any; This last particular, was
observed by that great Captain Sir Francis Vere, at the Battle of Newport;
where the English, under his Conduct, by the Appointment of the Prince of
Orange, did endure the heat of that days Action, and, under God, chiefly
obtained the Victory for the States of the United Provinces; but to purchase
it, were often disordered, and routed: yet Sir Francis Vere would still ask,
Had they lost, or flung away their Arms? And being answered, No: He said, Then
I Will warrant you, I Will make them fight again; and did so, so often, till the
Spanish Army was entirely defeated. I beg the Readers pardon, if the Affection
I have for the Truth, and for the Honor of my Countrymen, has led me into
this short digression; out of which I will hasten, to consider, since the
Romans, and Greeks, were no more Warlike than we, and yet Pressed not their
People to the War, why we Press ours; some of the Reasons seem to me to be
these.

First, The Romans needed not to Press, because by their Laws, all from
Seventeen, to Forty five years of Age, were to be Inlisted; so that in effect,
War was, as it were, their Vocation.

Secondly, None was capable of Civil Employment in their Commonwealth, that had
not served Ten years in their Armies; nor any capable to be of the first
Fourteen Military Tribunes, that had not Five years served in the Field; nor of
the last Ten Military Tribunes, that had not served Eleven years in the
Foot-service, or Fifteen years in the Horse-service; which were Incentives that
more Pressed their Peoples Minds, than our Press-masters do the Bodies.

Thirdly, Since War was the only Ladder by which their People could climb to
Civil Authority, or Military Power, they needed not Pressing.

Fourthly, The Art of exactly Fortifying places, was little known, and less
practiced in those times, whereby National Quarrels were decided by Battle, and
one gained, did usually, as the consequence thereof, carry an entire Province
or Kingdom; in the overrunning of which, their Soldiery got ten times more
than their Pay, by the Pillage; which has not only often enriched the
Conquerors, but their Posterities also; besides, being brought up from their
Childhood to Arms, and (...) but alas, how few of them are for Soldiers. But
were all of them for that use, yet the Plaster would be much too narrow for
the Sore; and would be rather a sign of the thing, than the thing itself.

But yet I must say, That His Majesty King Charles the Second, has outdone
therein, not only all his Royal Predecessors, but even all the Greeks and
Romans, forasmuch as concerns the English Soldiery of Ireland; since he has not
only given Lands to the Maimed and Superannuated, but to all the rest, and to
their Posterities for ever: And though the Major part of the Forces which
reduced Ireland, did perform that Service, and Conquered those Lands, under
Usurpers, and during His Majesty's absence; yet He most Royally confirmed, or
more truly, Bestowed the Forfeited Lands, after His Return, on them, and their
Heirs for ever. Nor can the Statutes, and Patents, more firmly entail those
Lands on them, and their Children, than I assure my self, He has entailed, and
will entail Loyalty and Gratitude in their hearts; for they may as soon forget
they have Estates, as Him, from whose Generosity they have received them;
whereby what they are, will still mind them of what they ought to be.

I shall conclude this first Discourse, touching the Choice and Education of
the Soldiery, by a short Review of what the Ancients did therein; what we do;
and offer some particulars to Consideration, what possibly may be fit to be
added.

The Greeks had public Schools, and public Teachers, to instruct their Youth
in the use of Arms, and to breed them to the Sufferances of War, ere they made
it. In imitation whereof, we have our Trayned-Band, and in some Cities our
Artillery Yards, or Grounds.

These teach our Men the use of Arms, and several Figures to Fight in, and so
far it is very good; but then it does not accustom them to Hardship, which is
one of the first, if not the very first Requisite to a good Soldier. But
whatever they do in the Cities, yet I doubt they rarely meet in the Countries;
whereby those places which are likeliest to afford most Soldiers in time of
War, (for the Countries have more People than the Cities) and those that are
generally most inured to Hardship, (for the Peasant labors more, and eats, and
lodges worse, than the Citizen) are the least Trained to Arms.

And therefore if the several Commissioned and Non-Commission'd Officers of
every Troop and Company of the Militia, were strictly ordered on Holy Days, to
exercise those of their Neighborhood which are of their Troop or Company, and
if the private Soldiers failed to come, or the Officer neglected his duty when
they came, if Deputy Lieutenants were empowered to punish such as were faulty
therein, it might probably be of good use, especially if the Counties allowed
some little encouragement to such Officers; or if such of the Soldiery as
failed, were to contribute something to the Officer, who did appear, and teach
those who came.

But above all, if at least twice a year, the several Militia Regiments, were
to Rendezvous, and to Hutt, for four or five days together; and during that
time, were to perform all the Functions of War, as if they were encamped near
an Enemy; it would in all likelihood be of excellent benefit in time of
Rebellion, or Invasion.

In which Campings, I would have them make their Hutts in the form of Streets,
and Piatza's; and in just as little room, as if they were to make a Line about
the Camp; which would teach them what to do, and make them expert therein,
against the need were real.

In which Campings also, I would have all Excess, or Debauchery, both strictly
prohibited, and severely punished, if practiced; for Debauchery in Armies is
the Highway to Ruin, since those obey best, that are most sober.

During these Campings, such time as was not employed in handling Arms,
exercising, marching in several forms of Battle, and Skirmishing, I would have
employed in Jumping, Running, but most of all, in Wrestling, to make their
Bodies the more active, and strong, and to hinder them from all ill
employments: But above all, I would recommend Wrestling; for whoever thinks
himself the strongest, and activest of body, will strive to come closest to his
Enemy; and if he be so, will the sooner overcome him; whereby in fight, none
will doubt those will charge the homest, who find they are strongest, at the
grapple.

Lastly, If to these beforementioned Particulars, there were at such half
yearly Campings little Medals with Ribons, or such other small Rewards, for
every one of those who should be judged best at the use of the Pike, or Musket,
or at Shooting at Marks, or at Running, Jumping, or Wrestling, (to the best at
which last, the Medal should be still of double value, as that Exercise which
ought most to be encouraged) I believe it would so incite every individual
person, that the Generality could not but be highly improved, and the Emulation
those little Rewards could not but engender, would questionless produce
desirable effects.

Besides the great Concourse of the Nobility, Gentry, and unlisted Commonalty,
which Curiosity, or some other Motives would draw to see these Campings, and
Exercisings, would be an additional Incentive to all the Militia to appear, not
only in their best Garbs; but also to be more expert in the several
performances, during their Camping.

I leave it to the judgment of all men, whether the benefit to the whole
Kingdom, would not much outweigh the charge, and trouble; if this method, or
something like it, were constantly observed: In which case, what is here set
down in generals, and roughly, might then be more minutely ordered, and
polished, and many needful things added; For the wit of man cannot in the
Theory find out so much, as in the practice will be discovered.

The Ancients, especially the Romans, had the choice of all their People from
Seventeen, to Forty five years of age.

We, in imitation, have the choice of such whom the Laws exempt not from
Pressing, from Sixteen, to Sixty years of age, out of them to form our
Soldiery; I think youths but Sixteen years of age, are of the youngest to be
led on actual Service, though not to be Trained to Arms, and Hardships: And few
men, when Sixty years old, are fit for the Wars, especially if then they but
begin to be Soldiers; so that methinks the Romans therein, began later, and
ended earlier than we do, with much reason; which therefore I could wish were
altered by us, and that none before he were past Seventeen, and none after he
was Fifty, should ever be Pressed to be Soldiers. I would allow Five years
longer to our men who are to be Soldiers, to continue such, than the Romans
allowed to theirs; because our Climate is not so scorching as theirs, and
therefore the radical moisture which is as it were the sap, and makes the vigor
of our men, lasts longer in our temperate Climate, than in their hotter.
Besides, most men when arrived at Fifty, begin to participate of those
infirmities, which render them unfit for the Actions, and Sufferings of the
Lives of private Soldiers.

The Military Tribunes chose out of every Tribe (every one alternatively) those
who were to compose their Legions. But alas! it is not our Officers which choose
our Soldiers, but our Press-masters generally do it for them; whereby it is no
wonder if often our Regiments and Troops have so many in them, unfit to be
Soldiers; since too commonly these Press-masters, Press those who are abler to
buy themselves off, than able to make fit Soldiers to serve their King and
Country; besides, how often are they actuated to spare the fit for Favor, and
to send the unfit for Revenge, or some other as bad motive.

The Tribunes were likely to choose well, because they chose for themselves;
and if they chose ill, they thereby exposed their Honors, and their Lives.

The Press-masters with us, choose for our Tribunes, or Colonels; and are
likely to choose all, because few do it conscientiously, and most do it out of
sinister Considerations.

The Tribunes, if they chose ill Soldiers, were to lead them.

But the Press-masters, if they choose ill men, are only to be rid of them, and
may gain much by it.

'Twere therefore very highly to be wished, that the Press-masters had some few
and written Rules given them whom to Press; and if they broke them, that they
might be severely punished for it: Amongst which Rules possibly these might be
fit to be expressed, viz. To Press none that were not past Seventeen: To Press
none past Fifty: To Press only the younger, the stronger, the activer sort,
and if possibly not to Press the Married; at least not to Press any of them,
till on Trial, 'twere evident the unmarried were not sufficient to form the
Forces; since the Married are generally too much encumbered to follow the War
with that intentness of mind, which the Profession does require, as appears by
what St Paul says, No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the affairs of
this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier.

The Ancients, and the Romans most particularly, had not only the advantage of
us in the choice of their private Soldiers, but also in the choice of their
Officers; for every higher Order of them, choose the next; and so in Sequence,
the second choose the third Order; and the third, the fourth, till all were
chosen; whereas in the generality, all our inferior Field Officers, and
Commissioned Officers, are put upon our Colonels; whereby perhaps they may have
good Officers, but the Tribunes were certain to have them, if it were not their
own faults. And it is worth marking, how gradually the Romans proceeded therein.
First the People (that is the State) chose the two Consuls, the two Consuls
chose the Four and twenty Military Tribunes to each Army; the Four and twenty
Military Tribunes, chose the Twenty first and second Centurions, that is, their
Captains and Lieutenants: then the Centurions chose their Twenty Vexillarii or
Ensigns, and those, their Twenty Tergiductors; whereby if the Tribunes chose
well, 'twas likely they would also have all the rest well chosen.

I do not find they had inferior Field Officers, such as our Lieutenant
Colonels and Majors, unless the Tribunes out of Function did that Duty: Nor do
I find that they had any Officers in the nature of our Sergeants, and
Corporals: Nor that they had Officers who were immediately to take care of, and
command in the Flanks of their Battalions; which being very deep, ought
doubtless to have been the more taken care of: But to supply this, every Cohort
had two Centurions in the Front, two Tergiductors in the Rear, and two
Vexillarii or Ensigns; whereby having to every Company as it were six
Commissioned Officers, they might appoint two of them for the Flanks, where
they were needed more than in the Front and Rear; for their Files being Four
and twenty deep, a Cohort could be but of five in a Rank.

The Roman Officers had also a greater tie and obligation on their Soldiery,
than we have on ours; for they had the Solemn Oath, or Military Sacrament, of
every private Soldier to be obedient to his Superior Officers. In some
imitation of which, our Soldiers take the Oath of Allegiance, and Supremacy;
but those have References to the King, not to the Officers; which to supply, we
have Articles and Ordinances of War, whereby several Crimes are punishable by
Death, as Abandoning, and Running from their Colors; Mutinous Words, and
Actions; Drawing his Sword against, or Striking his Superior Officer, etc.
These indeed render him liable to Punishment if he disobeys, but there is no
previous obligation on him to obey his Superior. We indeed punish, if Soldiers
do amiss; but we have no solemn Promise, much less Oath, that they will obey
their Superiors in all their Commands, for His Majesty's Service: But they had
previous Oaths of Obedience, and punished subsequently all Failers; whereby
they had double, and better Ties, than we have.

The Romans also excelled us in this important particular, that none could be a
Military Tribune, (which had most favor) who had not actually served in the
Wars five years: And none that had least favor, could be a Tribune, who had not
served eleven years in the Wars amongst the Foot, or Fifteen years amongst the
Horse; whereby none could be a chief Officer, before he had been a long time a
Soldier; as judging him unfit to Command, who had not first learnt to Obey.

Whereas we have often many made Officers, that never were so much as private
Soldiers; and are set to teach others that Art, which they, over whom they are
placed, are too often abler to teach them; which is dangerous to the Sovereign,
and often begets Contempt of the Superior, amongst the Inferior, and is a
Mischief worthy of Redress; at least, that none might be Field Officers, that
had not been before a Captain or Lieutenant; and none a Colonel, that had not
been first a Field Officer, unless where a Person of great Quality and Interest
was made Colonel, whose influence might supply the defect of his unskilfulness;
and in such Cases, great care ought to be had, to fit him with an experienced
Lieutenant Colonel, and Major; For that world is the best, when Places seek
Men, and not when Men seek Places.

The Romans also were very prudent in the distribution of their Tribunes in
their Legions, which they did with so much care, that whereas the first Legion
of a Consular Army had four Tribunes which might have served in the Wars but
five years, yet it had two, which had served eleven, or fifteen years; and the
second Legion had three that had served five years, and three that had served
eleven or fifteen years: and so in course for the remaining two Legions,
whereby they still, as near as might be, distributed equally the most knowing,
and experienced Tribunes, in every Legion.

Whereas I have often seen many Regiments, where most part of the Officers, and
most of the Soldiers, have served as long in the Wars, the one as the other;
that is, neither ever saw the Wars: But I have seen it thrive accordingly.

Lastly, Not to tire the Reader with too many Particulars in this one Head:

The Romans established certain and competent Provision for their Maimed and
Superannuated Soldiers, which we do not; and what they did, invited their
Soldiers to great and daring Actions: But what we omit, deters many of ours
from attempting them.

But then I must say, their Trade was War, and I thank God ours is not; but yet
in proportion to what they did, if we did write after their Copy for so much as
is requisite for us, it might be an Action of more Prudence, than Cost. And
since War is not our Profession, we ought, in my humble opinion, to make use of
the best means to avoid being engaged in it; and the best way to prevent a War,
is, that our Neighbors may see we are in a good condition to make it.

The Arming of the Soldiery.
THE Greeks were certainly at first more usefully Armed than the Romans, both
as to their Infantry and Cavalry: For besides those Arms Offensive and
Defensive, which were common to both, As the Sword, the Darts, the Shields, the
Slings, etc. The Greeks had long Pikes, which I find not the Romans had, and
which are the very best offensive Arms either to Charge, or to Defend, and of
excellent use against Horse. For defensive Arms they had the Target, and the
Shield, and the Back Breast Pott and Tases, etc. Nay, some had their Horses
Armed, which they called Barded. The Roman Cavalry were at first pitifully
Armed for Offense, or Defense, till from the Greeks they learned to use the
Curass, the Shield, and the Javelet. I have often admired they would not also
follow the example of the Greeks, in Arming some of their Foot, with long
Pikes. The ordinary Arms of the Roman Velites were a Murrion, a Rondach, a
Sword, and some Darts; their Archers and Slingers were called Extraordinaries,
and were Auxiliaries.

The Hastati had Targets Four-foot high, Head-pieces, and little Plates of Iron
to cover their Hearts. The Richest of them had entire Curasses, they wore their
Swords hanging on their Right sides, and those Swords were short, broad, two
edged, and well pointed; and every one of them besides had two Darts.

The Principes, and the Triarii, had the like Arms, both Offensive, and
Defensive; only the Triarii, instead of two Darts, had two Javelets.

The Allies of the Romans, as well Foot, as Horse, were alike Armed, and
Disciplined, as the Romans, whereby it is apparent how Use makes all things
easy; for neither the Greeks, nor the Romans, had stronger, or more vigorous
bodies than we; and yet their Foot marched in Armor in hot Climates with large
Targets, heavy Swords, and carried also two Missile Weapons; whereas our
Soldiers think the Pike or the Musket (often without Swords, always without
Armor) to be a Load, which only proceeds from our Relaxing the Military
Discipline; which is not only a Reproach to us, but also a great Prejudice.

I think we are much more usefully Armed, than the Greeks or Romans anciently
were; and, in my poor opinion, we only want for our Infantry the Target, to be
excellently Armed.

The five offensive Arms in use amongst us, are the Sword, the Pike, the
Musket, the Pistol, and the Carrabine. For I look on the Lance, as now wholly
laid by, and I think, with reason; for the Lance does little, unless it be by
the force of the Horses Course, or Carreer, and even then, only the Front is
useful; so that their best order to Fight in, seems to be to charge a Rank at a
time which yet can hardly resist Squadrons of Horse, especially if Riders be in
Armor: But if the Lanceers Fight in Squadrons also, it is much more likely they
should discompose themselves, than hurt those they Fight against; which are
such apparent inconveniences, as have made me admire, that King Henry IV of
France, most justly Surnamed the Great, Alexander Ferneze Prince of Parma, and
Charles of Lorrain Duke of Mayen, three the greatest Captains of the latter
Age; nay, it may be of any Age, would often lament, that Lances were then
throwing aside, as Dav^la in his excellent History of the Civil Wars of France,
does observe, with this addition, That Henry the Great, and all his chief
Commanders, more apprehended those thousand Lanceers, led by Count Egmont, at
the Battle of Jury, than double the number of any of the Leagues of their
Cavalry.

Our Foot Soldiers generally are two thirds Shot, and one third Pikes, which I
have often lamented; for methinks the Pikes should be at least half, especially
in His Majesty's Dominions in which are few strong places, and consequently
Battles, and Fightings in the Field, are more common than Sieges; and, without
dispute, the Pike is the usefullest Weapon for the Foot: and a good Stand of
them, assisted by Shot if the Angles be well guarded, are not easily broken by
Horse and Shot united.

The Swissers, generally, and justly, esteemed excellent Foot, have more Pikes,
than Shot; which, possibly, as much as their Valor, Discipline, and the
strength of their Bodies, has contributed to their Glory.

'Twas to their Pikes they owed that famous Retreat they made, when in the
Hollow of their Battalion, they carried King Charles the Ninth of France, and
almost all that Family Royal, from Meanx to Paris, though 'twere a Champion
Country, though they had no Cavalry to assist them; and though Lewis Prince of
Conde, Gaspar de Coligni the then Admiral of France, Andelott, and the greatest
Horse Commanders of that Age, often Charged them in Front, Rear, and Flanks;
yet with the heads of their Pikes, they forced their way, though all the hopes
of the Hugonot Lords, depended on that days Action.

I had also an Experiment of the goodness of Pikes in the year 1651. when in
the last Battle we had in Ireland, I had the Honor to command the English
Forces against the Irish, and though we Fought in an open Country, and though
we had Routed (after a smart resistance) all the Horse of their Left Wing, and
above a Thousand of their Musketeers, which composed the Left Battalion of
their Foot, yet about Twelve hundred Pikes of the Enemy, without any Shot with
them, Advanced boldly, and Charged our Squadrons of Horse so home, after their
Horse and Shot of that Wing were Routed, that we had more Wounded, and Killed,
in that Charge, than in the whole Fight besides: so that had they Guarded their
Angles, when we Charged them Round, they had done us much more mischief, if not
recovered the day; but by the Angles we broke in, and afterward the resistance
was but small, nor indeed could it be otherwise.

But what need I say more of the usefulness of the Pike, above the Musket, than
that all Persons of Quality who put themselves voluntarily, or otherwise into
the Infantry, carry the Pike; which they would not do, unless it had adjudgedly
the Honor to be the Noblest Weapon, since the bravest choose, and fight with
it: And therefore I must again say, I wish our Companies consisted of fewer
Shot, and of more Pikes; For besides the excellency of that Weapon, it is not
only always in a readiness for Service, but needs no Ammunition to make it do
Execution; both which cannot be said of the Musket, which is often unfixt,
requires always Powder, Bullet, and Match, and in windy or wet weather, often
disappoints the Service, especially if it be the Match-lock, and then to
Fire-lock Muskets.

Maurice Prince of Orange (a Famous Captain) was exceedingly desirous to
introduce the Target among the Infantry; and having, for his own satisfaction,
made many trials of the great usefulness of it, experimentally found, that
Targets, though very flippent ones, have not only resisted the Push of the
Pikes, but also, that half the number of Targetteers, have entered into the
Ranks of double their number of Pikes, without Targets, and have Routed them;
but he being only General to the States of the United Provinces, and not a
Sovereign Monarch, and Absolute, durst not make so great an Alteration, fearing
the Reproach of some evil Success; which, whatever might have been the cause of
the Defeat, would have been attributed to that of Innovation; For States oftener
judge of the Merit of their General, by his Successes, than by his Reasons.

And Henry Duke of Rohan, whom I had the Honor to know in the year 1637. a
little before he dyed of his Wounds received in Alsatia, and who yielded to
none of his Age, in the Military Art, was also exceeding desirous to introduce
the Target amongst the Infantry: He proposed to have the principal Body of the
Infantry to consist of Pikemen, and to each Battalion of Pikes, he would have
had a small separated Party of a Hundred, or an Hundred and twenty Targeteers
in the Flanks, when the Battalions were ready to join, which (to use his own
words) would produce a mavelous effect, in a Day Battle. These Targetters he
would have had composed of the Volunteers, who are generally of the bravest,
and who, unless they made a Body apart, he thinks would be apt enough to beget
Animosities, by disputing where their proper stations should be assigned them.

I think they might also be of very good use, in Assaulting, and Defending of
Breaches, especially if they were of proof against small shot: some of which
sort I have seen, and yet they were not very cumbersom; for they might be used
on the Left Arm, by men of ordinary strength.

I must, before I proceed any further, mind the great carelessness of those, who
furnish Pikes to the Companies out of the Stores, and those Officers who
receive them; For it is but too common amongst us, to have in one Regiment Pikes
of several Lengths, and only armed at the Points with Lozange heads, whereas
sixteen Foot and a half ought to be the general length and standard of all the
Pikes, as it is among the Switzers; which if the Staff be made of feason'd Ash,
is not heavy for any ordinary man, and less heavy to Pikemen, who are usually
the properest, and strongest men in our Companies. If our Pikes were All of
sixteen Foot and a half long, besides the decency of that uniformity, the
advantages will be great; For at sixteen Foot and a half distance, they of the
first Rank, will keep off, or gall the Enemies Horse, and few ordinary
Ammunition Pistols do certain Execution much farther off; the second and third
Rank of the Pikes (being so long) will also effectually serve to keep off the
Enemies Horse, should the first Rank be killed, or disordered; nay, the fourth
and fifth Ranks of the Pikes will not be useless: For allowing but three Foot
distance between every Rank when Battalions front, as the first Rank will keep
the Enemies Horse off, at sixteen Foot and a half; so the second Rank will keep
them off, at thirteen Foot and a half; the third Rank at ten Foot and a half;
the fourth Rank at seven Foot and a half; and the fifth Rank at four Foot and a
half: whereby an Enemies Cavalry will have as it were five Ranks at once to
break, ere they can make their impression, which therefore will be no easy
task to perform, especially the last Ranks of Pikes being ready to supply those
of the first five Ranks, who shall fall by wounds, or death.

The Pikes armed at the Points with Lozange heads, if the cheeks, or sides of
the Pikes are not armed with thin Plates of Iron four Foot deep, are very apt
to be broken off near the Heads, if the Push be vigorous, and the Resistance
considerable: Nor is this all; for unless the Pikes be armed with those thin
Iron Plates, they are easily cut off with sharp Swords, for the Pike,
especially toward the end, is carried tapering, to poise it the better, and
thereby renders it the more flippent for those who use it; so that the
slenderer part of the Pike, if unarmed, is the more liable to be cut off, it
being there nearest the Enemy; whereas if the Pikes were armed with those thin
Plates, and four Foot deep, no cutting Swords (which are always of the
shortest) could destroy the Pikes, since that part of the Staff of the Pike
which is unarmed, would be out of the reach of the Horsemans sharp cutting
Sword: I remember we once carried a Fort by storm, because the Enemies Pikes
had not those Plates, whereby the Heads of them were cut off.

I therefore am very desirous, that all our Pikes may be sixteen Foot and a
half long, the Staves to be of seasoned Ash, which are strong, and light; and
that from the Iron heads of the Pikes, there may be thin Iron Plates for four
Foot deep. Lozange Heads I like well, both because they are sharp to enter, and
when entered, broad to wound with.

I would seriously recommend the Arming of our Pikemen, with Back, Breast,
Pott, and Tases; For since the Pikes ought to make the principal Battalion, and
indeed the solid strength of the Infantry of an Army in a day Battle, I would
have them Armed accordingly; for it is under their Battalion that the Routed
must Rally, and it is by the points of their Weapons, that the most obstructed
passages to Victory must be opened; they are still to be as it were the
Fortress of the Field, and are not like the Horse, and Shot, which move every
way, and follow the Execution after the Enemy is broken; but being still to
advance slowly with the Colors, and under their Forest, to cover all
Misadventures, they ought to be substantially Armed defensively, to answer
those ends effectually.

Some Historians tell us, That when the Emperor Charles the Fifth, (that great
Captain) was to give Battle near Vienna, to Sultan Solomon the Magnificent, the
Christian Emperor had one Stand of Eighty thousand Pikes, many of them carried
by Reformado Officers, and by the Flower of the Christian Nobility, and Gentry;
in which Battalion, under God, he had reposed his greatest confidence; and
which the Turks did so apprehend, that after all the noise of a decisive
Battle, the Mahometans retreated, though they had double the number of the
Christians, and above One hundred and fifty thousand Horse.

It is both a grief, and a shame, to see how few Pikemen, in most of our
ordinary Companies, have Swords by their sides, and the Musketeers seldom any;
when a man looks not like a Soldier, without a Sword; and it is the Sword which
does the chiefest Execution, either in the Battle, or after the Routing of an
Enemy: The Greeks and Romans made it ignominious for a Soldier to lose his
Sword, even in Fight; I wish we would make it the like for a Soldier to go to
Fight without his Sword, or indeed so much as to see a Soldier without his
Sword. I offer to consideration, That all Companies, when first Inlisted, ought
to be completely Armed at the Princes charge; and ever afterward, to be kept
completely Armed at the Soldiers charge, unless in actual Fight his Arms be
broken; in which case, the Kings Arsenals should furnish them. But whatever
Captain of a Company, or inferior Commissioned Officer, allowed his Soldier to
appear on Duty without his complete Arms, or ever to stir without his Sword in
the Streets of his Garrison, or in the Camp, if he punished not the Soldier,
should be punishable for it himself: And if any Soldier broke his Sword, or
other Arms, by his own negligence, or default, the chief Officer of the Company
should not only punish him for it, but forthwith supply him, to be defaulked
out of the Soldiers growing Pay; whereby these three advantages would be
gained, That the Soldiers would be more careful of their Arms; That they would
never be unarmed; And that the King would be at no unnecessary charge in
emptying his Arsenals for them.

As to the Musket, and what is useful to it, I find many things in my poor
judgment worthy consideration and redress:

As first, That all our Muskets be of one Bore, or at most of two sorts of
certain Bores; the bigger for the stronger, the lesser for the weaker Bodies:
For want of this, I have seen much hazard undergone; for generally our Musket
shot is of one certain size, and the Bores of Muskets are of various sizes,
whereby having been once engaged in a Fight, which by reason of the many
Enclosures in which we fought, the Musketeers were to be supplied with more
shot than they carried in their Pouches, and Barrels of Musket Bullets being
opened, few of the shot in them would fit the Muskets, but were a size too
large, whereby we had like to have been worsted; for the Soldiers were forced
to gnaw off much of the Lead, others to cut their Bullets; in which much time
was lost, the Bullets flew a less way, and more uncertainly; and, which was
worse, so many pauses, animated the Enemy, by making him think our Courages
cooled. If there be two sizes of Muskets, and shot, on both ends of the
Barrels, which hold the shot, should be written Lesser, and Bigger, that in the
hurry of a Fight there might be no mistake, but that Bullets be distributed
according to the Bores of the Muskets.

I would also propound, That in all Field Engagements, especially in those
where we intend not to cheapen an Enemy, but to fall on merrily, that the
Musketeers would load their Muskets only with five or six Pistol Bullets, which
will do great Execution, especially Fired near, and then to fall in at Club
Musket; I have Experimented this, and found it attended with great Success.

I would recommend the Fire-lock Musket above the Match-lock Musket, for
several Reasons; some of which I shall mention.

First, It is exceedingly more ready; For with the Fire-lock you have only to
Cock, and you are prepared to Shoot; but with your Match-lock, you have several
motions, the least of which is as long a performing, as but that one of the
other, and oftentimes much more hazardous; besides, if you Fire not the
Match-lock Musket as soon as you have blown your Match, (which often,
especially in Hedge Fights, and in Sieges, you cannot do) you must a second
time blow your Match, or the Ashes it gathers, hinders it from Firing.

Secondly, The Match is very dangerous, either where Bandeleers are used, or
where Soldiers run hastily in Fight to the Budge-barrel, to refill their
Bandeleers; I have often seen sad instances thereof.

Thirdly, Marching in the Nights, to avoid an Enemy, or to surprise one, or to
assault a Fortress, the Matches often discover you, and informs the Enemy where
you are; whereby you suffer much, and he obtains much.

Fourthly, In wet weather, the Pan of the Musket being made wide open for
awhile, the Rain often deads the Powder, and the Match too; and in windy
weather, blows away the Powder, ere the Match can touch the Pan: nay, often in
very high Winds, I have seen the Sparks blown from the Match, Fire the Musket
ere the Soldier meant it; and either thereby lose his Shot, or wound or kill
some one before him. Whereas in the Fire-lock the motion is so sudden, that
what makes the Cock fall on the Hammer, strikes the Fire, and opens the Pan at
once.

Lastly, To omit many other Reasons, the quantity of Match used in an Army,
does much add to the Baggage; and being of a very dry quality, naturally draws
the moisture of the Air, which makes it relax, and consequently less fit,
though carried in close Wagons: but if you march without Wagons, the Match is
the more exposed; and without being dried again in Ovens, is but of half the
use which otherwise it would be of: And which is full as bad, the Skeans you
give the Corporals, and the Links you give the private Soldiers, (of which near
an Enemy, or on the ordinary Guard duty, they must never be unfurnished) if
they Lodge in Hutts or Tents, or if they keep Guard in the open Field, (as most
often it happens) all the Match for instant service is too often rendered
uncertain, or useless; nothing of all which can be said of the Flint, but much
of it to the contrary.

And then the Soldiers generally wearing their Links of Match near the bottom
of the Belt on which their Bandeleers are fastened, in wet weather, generally
spoil the Match they have; and if they are to fight on a sudden, and in the
Rain, you lose the use of your Small Shot, which is sometimes of irreparable
prejudice.

I am also on long experience an Enemy to the use of Bandeleers, but a great
Approver of Boxes of Cartridges; for then, but by biting off the bottom of the
Cartridge, you charge your Musket for service with one Ramming.

I would have these Cartridge Boxes of Tin, as the Carabines use them, because
they are not so apt to break as the Wooden ones are, and do not in wet Weather,
or lying in the Tents, relax.

Besides, I have often seen much prejudice in the use of Bandeleers, which
being worn in the Belts for them, above the Soldiers Coats, are often apt to
take Fire, especially if the Match-lock Musket be used; and when they take
Fire, they commonly wound, and often kill he that wears them, and those near
him: For likely if one Bandeleer take Fire, all the rest do in that Collar;
they often tangle those which use them on Service, when they have Fired, and
are falling off by the Flanks of the Files of the Intervals, to get into the
Rear to Charge again.

To which I shall add, that in secret attempts in the night, their Rattling
often discovers the design, and enables the Enemy to prevent it. And in the day
time, on service, especially if the Weather be windy; their Rattling also, too
frequently hinders the Soldiers from hearing, and consequently obeying the
Officers word of Command, which must be fatal when it happens; whereas the
Cartridge Boxes exempt those who use them from all these dangers and
prejudices; they enable the Soldiers on Service, to Fire more expeditiously;
they are also usually worn about the Waste of the Soldier, the Skirts of whose
Doublet and his Coat, doubly defend them from all Rain that does not pierce
both; and being worn close to his body, the heat thereof keeps the Powder
dryer, and therefore more fit to be fired on service.

Besides all this, whoever loads his Musket with Cartridges, is sure the Bullet
will not drop out, though he takes his aim under breast high, for the paper of
the Cartridge keeps it in; whereas those Soldiers which on service take their
Bullets out of their Mouths, (which is the nimblest way) or out of their
Pouches, which is slow, seldom put any Paper, Tow, or Grass, to ram the Bullet
in; whereby if they fire above breast high, the Bullet passes over the head of
the Enemy; and if they aim low, the Bullet drops out ere the Musket is fired;
and it is to this that I attribute the little Execution I have seen Musketeers
do in time of Fight, though they fired at great Battalions, and those also
reasonable near.

It might also do well, if the Soldiers tied their Links of Match about their
middle, and under their Coats, and Doublets, instead of tying them to their
Bandeleer Belt, or Collar; for by that means, the Match would be kept dryer,
and fitter for service, in time of Action.

As to the Arming of the Cavalry both for Offense and Defense, I am of opinion,
the Arms we use, are as good as any, viz. the Swords, Pistols, and Carabines:
And if in the Front of our Squadrons, we had some Blunderbushes, they might be
of good use in Fight.

I acknowledge I would have every private Trooper have his Sword, or Long Tuck,
his Case of Pistols, and Carabine; and for defense, his Back, Breast and Pott;
at least, I would have the Front and Flanks of every Troop in such Armor: For
besides the Terror it gives to an Enemy in his Doublet, to fight with men of
Iron, and the encouragement it gives our own men; none knows what proof the
Armor is of: And it is most certain, that in Combat, as well as Pursuit, the
Sword does most Execution; and no Armor is less than Sword proof: I therefore
earnestly wish, that the Officers, the Troopers, and the Pikemen, were bound
under severe Penalties, to fight in Armor, and constantly to march in Armor;
which piece of Discipline, if it were revived by strict Commands, and if broken
punished Exemplarily, I am confident the advantages would be considerable; Nor
do I much value what our young Gallants say, that in their Doublets they will
Charge as far as any in their Armor; since to that I answer: First, it may
spring as much from Laziness, as Courage: But secondly, a wise Commander ought
to have more care of his Soldiers safeties, than they will have of their own;
and ought not to let his men expose themselves, but where there is need; and
then to use the best means he can for their safety, as well as their success;
since the business is not who dares go to be killed, but who dares venture his
Life on the best terms to obtain the Victory; and if men will go on boldly
without Armor, it is likelier they will Charge the bravelier with Armor; since
their Bodies by it, have the greater defense; and by accustoming themselves to
wear Iron, it will become habitual to them.

If I might follow my own opinion, I would have every Regiment of Horse consist
of seven Troops, six whereof should be Armed with Back, Breast and Pott; and
for offense, should have Swords or Tucks, with Pistols and Carabines; and the
seventh Troop should be of Firelocks, or Dragoons, whose duty should be to
guard the Quarter of the Regiment; to secure Passes with Celerity; to force
Passes possessed by the Enemy; to assist the Horse when they fight in enclosed
Countries; and in Battles, to alight; and marching up in the outermost Flank of
the Regiment, should in two Ranks, the first kneeling, the second standing, a
little before the Squadrons Charged, Fire upon the Enemy, their Guns laden
with Pistol Bullets, which I have sometimes practiced, and found it attended
with great success; every tenth man while the rest were on such service, was to
hold the Horses of those who were thus employed; and if the Enemy were Routed,
they were all to mount again, and to follow the execution: But if the Enemy
Routed us, they were to shelter themselves behind the next Squadrons of our
Horse which were entire, or the next Battalion of our Foot; and when Rallied,
to serve as they should be commanded by the chief Officer of that Squadron, or
Battalion, under the countenance of which, they should Rally.

I know the French, Spaniards, and other Nations, have had distinct Troops of
Carabines; but, in my poor opinion, Carabines are best in the Troopers hands
who are Armed, and have Pistols; especially if every Regiment of Horse has one
Troop of Firelocks, or Dragoons; and I have ground to believe, that Dragoons
thus annexed to the Horse, are much better than they are, when Regimented
entire, and by themselves:

First, Because they are constantly with the Horse, and being in effect a part
of their Body, are always the more careful of them, the more ready to serve
with them, and the more concerned for them.

Secondly, Being under the Command of the Field Officers, and Captains of
Horse, they are more obedient to them, than if they belonged to other Colonels,
and were only a commanded Party to answer a present need.

Thirdly, The Horse Commande^s, when the Dragoons belong to their own
Regiments, are more careful of them, and will not needlessly harass them by
extraordinary and unequal duty; which when they have their assistance but on
emergent occasions I have often seen them do.

Fourthly, The Horse Officers knowing all their Dragoons by name, and they
knowing particularly all the Horse Officers, they are the more likely to fight
cheerfully for them, or not to escape unpunished if they be remiss; for every
one being known, none can escape by ignorance; the contrary to which is often
experimented in commanded Parties, when the Officers are unknown to the
Soldiers, and the Soldiers to the Officers.

Lastly, To omit many other particulars, some have observed, that as the
Dragoons are commonly the briskest, and daringst of the private Soldiers, so
they are also the least sober; and it is likelier to wean them from that fault,
when they are but a seventh part of the Regiments, than when they are an entire
Regiment, and all Birds of one Feather: And the Troopers being generally a more
civilized, orderly People, than the Dragoons; it is probable that the major part
by much of the Regiment, should win the minor by good example; than that the
minor by much, should seduce the major part.

To conclude this Head of my Essay, I will only add, It is not sufficient to
make good Rules, unless the Prince or General see them punctually obeyed, or
severely punished, if broken. For besides the evil which attends the omitting
of what is good, the contempt of Authority is of fatal consequence in all
Humane Affairs, and most of all in Military; where, though what is commanded
might have been indifferent it self, yet it ceases to be so, when it is
commanded; and if a Soldier of himself may break one Rule of the Generals
unpunished, he may believe thereby, that he may as well break any, nay, all the
rest; for the stamp of Authority is alike on all; of which when a private
person, or many private men make themselves the Judges, they bid defiance to
all Discipline; without which no Society can subsist, and Military ones the
least of any: In one word, it were much better that good Rules were not made,
than if made, that they should not be observed, and the breakers of them 'scape
unpunished.

The Disciplining of the Soldiery.
I Shall not under this Head amuse my self to speak of the Handling of Arms;
nor of the several Postures and Motions taught the Soldiers; nor of the diverse
ways of Exercising of a Troop, or Company; since we have in our own Language
so many printed Books on that subject. And I am also the less curious in doing
it, because though there be many fine things taught in those particulars, which
are graceful to the sight, and make Soldiers the more ready; yet when we come
in earnest to fight, few of them are practiced, but to keep their Ranks even
and close, their Files right; to fire nimbly, and but breast high; to charge
boldly with the Pikes, and through with the Horse; to be watchful of the word
of Command from the Officer; exactly obedient to it, to keep silence; And when
the Parties are numerous enough to compose Battalions, and Squadrons, to
observe in going to the Charge the just wideness of the Intervals for the
Reserves, or second Line to relieve the first Line: But if there must be any
Error therein, to be sure the Interval ground be rather enlarged, than
straightened. For it is better the Reserves should have too much room to march up
to the Front, than too little, since the latter will render them almost useless.

But before I come to Treat of that part of Disciplining the Soldiery, which
consists in drawing them up into Battalions, and Squadrons, which I intend to
discourse of when I come to Treat of Battles; I shall crave leave to offer some
Considerations on what we generally observe, and seldom or never alter whatever
the occasion requires. And that is, the drawing up our Shot, and Pike, six
deep; and our Horse, three deep.

And this I should not presume to do, had not I been emboldened to it by some
Experiments of my own, which God did bless with success: For when I found my
self over-winged by the Enemy, they drawing up their Foot six deep, and their
Horse three deep; I judged it best for me to Fight my Foot four deep, and my
Horse two deep; whereby I added one third of more hands to the Front, and
Breadth, of my Battalions, and Squadrons. For I was fully satisfied, that it
was likelier I should be worsted by the Enemy, if he fell into my Flanks and
Rear, holding me also to equal Play in the Front, than if four Ranks of my Foot
should be broken, or two Ranks of my Horse, that the third Rank of the Horse,
and the fifth and sixth Ranks of my Foot, should recover all again; for I had
often seen Battalions and Squadrons defeated, by being overwinged: But I never
saw the last Rank of the Horse, and the two last Ranks of the Foot, restore the
Field, when the four first Ranks of the Foot, and the two first Ranks of the
Horse were Routed. For commonly if the two first Ranks of the Horse are Routed,
they themselves (for they still are broken inward) Rout the third Rank; and
though the like cannot truly be said of the Foot in all points, yet in a great
measure it usually follows.

But I must confess, that he who makes such an alteration in Military
Discipline, (unless he be a Sovereign Prince, or have sufficient Orders to do
it) ought to resolve, his success only must Apologize for it; that is, to be
victorious, or be killed.

I should therefore humbly desire, that fighting no deeper than four for the
Foot, and two for the Horse, where the ground is fit, might well be considered;
and then let true Reason give the Rule.

For my own part, I will ingeniously acknowledge, that after having as
thoroughly weighed all the Arguments for and against it, as my weak judgment
could suggest to me, I would, without hesitation, (if it were left to my own
Election) fight my Foot and Horse no deeper than four, and two, in any case
where the ground would admit me to extend my Battalions and Squadrons to the
full. For if I fight against equal Numbers, and equally good Soldiers to my
own, it is more likely falling into their Flanks, and as much into their Rear
also, as I overwing them the depth of a File in each Flank, that I shall Rout
them; then it is, that before I perform that, they shall have pierced through
my four Ranks, since Rank to Rank of equally good Soldiers, and equal in
Number, will more probably hold longer play one with the other, than Soldiers
equally good, can defend themselves at once, if briskly charged in Front,
Flanks, and Rear; and since the Flanks and Rear of Foot them selves, fight with
great disadvantage against those who Charge them there all at once; but when
Horse are Charged in the Flanks, and in the Rear, it is next of kin to a
miracle, if they 'scape being broken: For the Troopers in the Ranks when they
go to Charge, are as close as the Riders knees can endure it; and therefore
it is impossible for the Flanks to do any thing, or the last Rank to face about,
and consequently they must have their backs exposed to the Shot, and Swords of
their Enemy. The Foot indeed will easily face about; but then if the depth of
Files be the advantage, I have it who Charge every where four deep, and they
every way defend, but three deep at the most.

If this way of fighting will afford me solid, and great advantages, against an
Enemy equal to me in the goodness and number of his Soldiers; I do not think it
can be denied, but if I fight against fewer, or worse men than mine, but
greater, and more certain benefits will result from it.

The chief Objection to this way of fighting that I know of, is, as to the
Musketeers, who being but four deep, and advancing firing, the first Rank
cannot have loaded their Muskets again, by that time the fourth Rank has done
firing; so that there will be an intermission of shooting. To that I answer,
Let the Musketeers Charge their Muskets with such Cartridges as I have
mentioned, and the first Rank will be as soon ready if you are but four deep,
as the first Rank will be if you are six deep, loading with Bandeleers,
especially if I use the Fire-lock, and the Enemy the Match-lock. Besides, you
will still have a Rank to fire till you fall in, if you begin to fire but at a
short distance; which I would do to choose, if I were six deep. Lastly, were
both these denied, which yet I must say I have on Experiment found to be true,
and a demonstration is the strongest proof. It is not enough to say, one method
has such Objections to it, which the other has not; but all Objections to
both methods are to be examined; and that Rule is to be observed, which on the
whole matter has the least: For how few things in the world would be
entertained as best, if only such were so, against which, no Objection could be
made.

The first of the Ancients which I have read of, who found it much more
advantageous when the ground allowed it, rather to extend the Ranks, than
deepen the Files, was that great Captain Cyrus, in his famous Battle against
Cressus, King of Lydia; for Cyrus finding himself over numbered, took off half
the depth of his Files, and added them to his Front, whereby he won the Victory
by overwinging Cressus.

As the drawing up the Infantry but four deep, and the Cavalry but two deep,
where the ground will allow it, has great advantages in Fight, over those who
draw up the Foot six deep, and the Horse three deep, so it has in marching; for
the shallower the Files are in the several Divisions, the shorter the Army or
Regiment must be in their long march; which is a great ease to the Soldiers in
and toward the Rear of the Army, or Regiment: For I have often seen, but am
not Philosopher enough to give the reason of it, that let but 1000 men march in
their long march even in a bare Champion Country; and though the Van move very
slowly, yet the Rear must trot to keep the same distance they were at, at their
first beginning to march; and if it be thus but in 1000 men, what must it be in
20, or 30000 men.

Besides, the less long your Army is in their marching order, the sooner the
Rear of it will be come up, to incamp, or to go to Quarters, and the Baggage
and Train also; nor is it less beneficial, if an Army during its march has the
Head, or the Rear of it assaulted, or both at once; to have the Division come
more expeditiously to the Fight, which it has, by making the Ranks of the
Division broader, and the Files shallower.

The ordinary Discipline we observe in drawing up a Foot Regiment of ten
Companies in Battalia, (which it is well if they make Nine hundred effective Men
in Rank and File) is either in one Battalion, (which is seldom practiced, but
when the Army is very great) or in two or three Battalions, which are the more
usual ways, and I think the more rational. For the greater your Battalions are
of Foot, or Squadrons of Horse, the more unwieldy they are; and not only the
likelier to be Disordered, but the harder to be Rallied into their due form
again; whereas when Battalions, or Squadrons, are of a competent number, those
inconveniences are avoided; and yet if need require, two may join and make one
big one; but still the same Officers to command each Battalion, as if they were
divided, though really they are united; whereby they keep the activeness of
small Battalions, and when they please, the strength of great ones by their
union. And men are readilier brought into order after being broken, or
discomposed, when a chief Commander assisted by his inferior Commissioned
Officers, do act separately among a few, than when but one, though
proportionately assisted, acts singly in chief over many.

A Regiment of Horse also which usually consists of six Troops, is formed into
two Squadrons, each of three Troops; or into three Squadrons, each of two
Troops; I am for the forming it generally into the most Squadrons, for the same
Reasons I mentioned before: Besides, great Battalions of Foot are more
allowable, than great Squadrons of Horse; not only because men on Foot take up
less room to turn in, than men on Horseback do; but also because men only, are
better commanded than men and horses can be; especially in the hurry of a
Fight, where the shouts of the Soldiers, the noise of the Shooting, and the
Drums, and the fluttering of the Colors, make often the boldest Horses of
private Troopers disorderly enough; and likewise because the Foot are the solid
steady Body of the Army, especially the Pikes, and are not to follow the
Execution, which is the proper duty of the Horse; and therefore the Foot may
consist of the larger Battalions.

To which I shall add, that a Regiment of Five hundred Horse, consisting of six
Troops, having three Troops united into one Squadron, will make upwards of
Eighty one private Troopers in every Rank, when the Horse are drawn up three
deep; and if in two Troops in a Squadron, three deep will make 55 in a Rank:
And I have seen old Troopers find it difficult enough to march in one Squadron
a small space of ground in exact order, Forty abreast, though the ground be
plain; but if it be any ways encumbered, or uneven, it is more hard to do it.
And then if your Horse be drawn up but two deep, each Squadron, though but of
one Troop, will be Forty one in a Rank, which is broad enough; for the broader
the Rank is, the more difficult it is to march it orderly; so that I am more
desirous to form the Horse of an Army into many and less Squadrons, than into
few, and great ones; for the Reasons before expressed.

I had in this place begun to set down the several sorts of Discipline which
are practiced in drawing up a Regiment of Foot in one, two, or three
Battalions, where the Colors should fly, how many divisions of Pikes and Shot
there ought to be, and where to be drawn up, and of how many Files each should
consist of, (according to our Discipline of having our Foot consist one third
of Pikes, and two thirds of Shot) where are the proper places of the Field
Officers, and Commissioned Officers, according to the several Forms of
Battalions the Regiment is to be drawn up in, and many other Particularities of
this Head; But since there are Printed Books also in English on this Subject, I
shall refer the curious, and the unknowing therein, to those Books, and only
apply my self to such things as I have not seen, or heard, has hitherto been
treated of in our Language; and I also do this the rather, because under the
Head of the Essay which shall treat of fighting a Battle, I shall discourse of
forming Battalions and Squadrons more particularly.

And though possibly I might without any impropriety under the title of
Disciplining, insert all the several Functions in War. Yet I shall divide them
into many distinct Heads, for the ease of the Reader; who commonly is better
pleased to peruse many short Discourses, than one very long one; and every one,
having a distinct title, is more readily turned unto, and found out.

The Ordering of Garrisons.
HAving already discoursed of the Choosing and Educating of the Soldiery, of
the Arming, and of the Disciplining of them, I shall now write of the
Regulating of Garrisons, which seems to me to be the next Head in course to be
Treated of.

The Well-ordering of them, is the hopefullest way to preserve them; and the
preservation of them, is the preservation of a Kingdom.

How many Armies have been ruined, or broken, before Garrisons resolutely
defended, and according to the exact Rules of the Military Art? And how many
Garrisons have been lost, or surprised, for want of due care in those entrusted
to keep them, whereby whole Countries have been subdued as the consequence of
one neglect? especially if the Garrison taken, be either the chief Arsenal of
the Country, or lie on some Navigable River, or Seaport, whereby the entrance
into a Kingdom, is facilitated to an Enemy; and into which he durst not have
adventured, while he left at his back so important a place.

I shall therefore on this Head, set down

First, The usual practice in appointing and distributing the Guards.

Secondly, The custom in going the Grand Round.

Thirdly, The common manner of giving the Word.

For the ordinary course in all three, I suppose (submitting it still to better
judgments) may be unsafe, and very hazardous.

Therefore where I have had the Honor to command in Chief, I have altered the
usual Form, and I believe with good reason, else I am sure I would not have
done it.

But I am certain the Methods I have observed therein, have still succeeded
well; and by the other Methods, I have known great Losses have followed.

The usual way is, that the Regiments, or Companies, or Parties of Soldiers,
which are next to mount the Guard, and to relieve those on Duty, being drawn up
at the Parade, the chief Officer who is to command the Watch, or the Town
Major, distributes the Companies, or Soldiers, to the Main-Guard, the Ports,
and Bie-Guards, as he thinks fit, which I would not allow for these following
Reasons.

If an Officer who commands the Watch, or the Town Major, be false, corrupted,
or corruptable, you thereby expose the Garrison to be lost, and those in it,
destroyed;

Since leaving it to him to appoint all the Guards, he may send those of his
Confederacy to such Corpse Deguards as may let in the Enemy, or join with
Conspirators within the Walls.

And though it is generally presumed, that an Officer fit to command the Watch,
or a Town Major, will not be a Traitor, yet many experiences have evidenced the
contrary; and in War especially, we ought not to rely on what an inferior
Officer will not do, but on what he cannot do.

Therefore I would never leave that Trust to a subordinate Officer, but expect
and require the Governor to discharge it in person; yet if sickness, or other
invincible impediment hindered him from doing it himself, I would then have him
appoint the Guards to be drawn by Lots; and this as well when an Enemy is not
near, as when he is.

For if only on the Vicinity of the Enemy you do it, you let the Inhabitants
and Soldiery of the place too evidently see, you suspect your own Garrison are
not all right, which may be of ill consequence; but if you practice it always,
That will pass for Discipline, which otherwise will be judged suspicion.

Besides, if this method be the best in case of danger, it will be also the
best constantly; for in time of War, especially in Garrisons where there are
many Inhabitants, who can know when danger and treachery is at hand; and
therefore that Rule which is best when it is near, is best always.

Therefore I esteem the way I propose is the most eligible, because it is the
safest; for unless the Governor himself be false, (in which case what can
preserve a Garrison) or unless the Lot drawn, places the Conspirators in those
very Guards and Posts where they would choose to be, (which would prove as rare
Accidents indeed) the Fortress will be freed from the fatal effects of internal
Conspirations.

A second thing which I object against, is, that usually at the Parade, the
Quarter Masters, and Sergeants, receive the Word in a Ring, from the Governor,
Captain of the Watch, or the Town Major, and so being whispered from ear to
ear, returns to him who gives it; whereby if any mistake be in the Word, it is
rectified before it is distributed; which as to the modus is good, but as to
the time of distributing and giving of the Word, is dangerous; for commonly the
Word is given at the Parade, when the Relievers come to relieve those on Duty,
which usually is in the daytime, and before the Ports of the Garrison are shut,
whereby any Quartermaster, Sergeant, or superior Officer, may communicate it
to the Enemy abroad, or to Conspirators within; which may be of sad consequence.

For prevention of which, I would never give the Watchword, till just as the
Tap-too is gone about: And when it Beats, all the Quarter Masters and Sergeants
should from the Governor receive the Word, and immediately distribute it. It is
also too usual in great Garrisons to have the Word given in writing for a Week
to come, to the Officer who is Nightly to distribute it; which I am utterly
against: For should he be false, or negligent, or let it accidentally fall out
of his Pocket; or should he be overlooked when he reads it; or should he have
any false Servant about him who might by Night steal it out of his Pocket,
Copy, and then put it up again, it might more than hazard all; so that in my
poor opinion, the Word should only be known and given out every Night, just
when it ought to be distributed, for that is safe, the other way very hazardous.

A third thing which I humbly offer to be mended, is the use in going the Grand
Round, which as it is generally practiced, is what I have often lamented, and
admire that Garrisons have not frequently been betrayed thereby.

The custom is, that a Field Officer, if the Garrison be numerous, or at least a
Commissioned Officer, takes a Guard of Soldiers with him, and so attended, goes
to the Grand Round at any hour he will, after Tap-too; when he comes to any
Port, or Bie-Guard, the Sentinel of it challenges him, he answers, the Grand
Round; the Centry then calls the chief Officer on that Guard, who comes out,
and draws out his Guard; the Officer that goes the Grand Round, receives the
Word from the Officer of that Guard, and sees if the Guard be full and
vigilant; but from all Rounds, except the Grand Round, the Officer of the Guard
does not give the Word, but receives it.

This being the usal Form, were it not but too easy a thing for any
Conspirators in the Garrison, especially if a Commission Officer in it, were of
the number, to get three or four Files of Men with him, and go as the Grand
Round, before the true Grand Round does go, whereby those Conspirators will not
only learn the Word, but also see how strong and vigilant all the Guards are of
the Garrison, (except the Main Guard) and if they find any weak, or negligent,
especially in the Ports, or on the Bastions, they may surprise, cut them off,
and let in the Enemy with whom they are in consort.

To prevent which mischief, I did still observe these two Rules where I was
Governor; when I gave the Watchword, I also named the Officer which that night
I had ordered to go the Grand Round, which was carried to all the Officers of
the Garrison, whereby if any Traitor took upon him to go the Grand Round, every
Guard might know he was a Counterfeit, and by securing, or killing him, prevent
the mischief; and because in very great Garrisons it might so happen, that every
Officer was not known at first to all the Officers of it, and also that the
Officer who I gave out in orders should go the Grand Round, might by some
Accident be disabled to do it.

I gave a particular Word for the Grand Round, and ordered when ever the Grand
Round went, and was challenged by any Guard, the Officer of that Guard, should
not give him the Word, nor admit him with the Soldiers that accompanied him
within his Guard, until he had first given the Guard Officer the Word of the
Grand Round, which every night was given out with the Watchword; and the Grand
Round Word being first given to the Officer of the Guard, by the Grand Round
Officer, then the Guard Officer gave him the Watchword, and not before.

Hereby no body could walk the Grand Round deceitfully, for without the Grand
Round Word, he could not be received as the Grand Round, nor come within any
Guard, nor receive the Watchword from any Officer of the Guard.

The three chief ends of the Grand Round are,

First, That some prime Officer, might see if the Guards and Sentinels of them
be posted, and set out, as appointed.

Secondly, If they are vigilant in their duty, and the number of the Guards
full; for which reason, the Officer who goes the Grand Round, ought to know of
how many Officers, Non-Commission'd Officers, and private Soldiers, every
individual Guard is to consist; That if he finds any wanting, he may acquaint
the Governor with it, that the Faulty may be punished; and if any numbers on
any Guard be wanting of what they ought to be, immediately to supply them from
the Main Guard.

Thirdly, That no Guard knowing when that prime Officer will go his Grand
Round, all the Guards may be the more vigilant, and full; for I have known when
Grand Rounds have gone early in the night, or at a set hour, the Guards would
be watchful, and full, till the Grand Round had gone, and then Officers would
go off themselves, and connive at some of the Soldiers doing the like; which
evidenced they more feared to be punished by their Governor, than to be
surprised by their Enemy; but unless they doing exactly their duty, proceeds
from an apprehension of both, it is a great fault; and if not always severely
punished, may too probably be the loss of the Garrison.

Having thus offered to consideration these three particulars, and propounded
the Remedy to them, I shall now proceed to those general Rules which seem
indispensibly requisite to be observed in all well regulated Garrisons. One
standing Maxim is, that the several Guards which are to do the constant Duty,
be always so advisedly, and cautiously posted, and distributed; and the
Sentinels of every Guard, so set out round the whole Garrison, that it shall be
impossible, if the Guards and Sentinels do their Duty, for an Enemy from
without, or Conspirators within, to attack you without timely notice; in doing
whereof, much will depend upon the discretion of the Governor, and his
subalterne Officers. In Calm, and Moonshine nights, I would set out my
Sentinels thinner, and at a greater distance; but in dark and tempestuous
nights, I would set them thicker, and have double Centries; for in wet and
windy nights, a Sentinels Musket on his discovery of an Enemy, may not go off;
and in that case, if there be but a fingle Centry, he will run off, and give
the Alarm; whereby if the Enemy plants a scaling Ladder by reason of the
Sentinels absence, he may uninterruptedly do it: whereas if there be double
Sentinels, and both their Muskets should fail of firing, one of them may run
off to the Guard, call for, and send Help, and without noise have in a
readiness the Guard to fall unexpectedly on the Assaulters, while the Sentinel
that stays, may hinder a scaling Ladder to be fixed on the Parropet, or Town
Wall; for the Ladder being long, and the height from the bottom of the Graft,
to the top of the Parropet considerable; one, at that height, will with his
hand turn off a Ladder more easily, than as many as can come to handle a Ladder
at the bottom, can raise it to the top.

I knew a very important Garrison, between France and Italy, entered by the
Enemy in a windy, dark, and stormy night, there being but one Sentinel in a
place, whose Musket failing, he ran off to cry, Arm, Arm, whereby the Enemy
clapped up their Ladder where the Centry had stood, and entered, before any came
to oppose them; but they were beaten out at last, almost miraculously.

When the Guards and Centries day and night are well posted, and disposed of
about the outward circumference of the whole Garrison; the next care ought to
be, to look well to all within; and to be the more circumspect if you have the
least reason to doubt the Inhabitants are false to you; Therefore the Governor
ought to have Patroles constantly moving all night, and Guards in all Piazza's,
or open places where Conspirators may imbody, and place Centries in every
street, and good Guards on his Magazines, or Arsenals, which ought always to
be kept in several places, lest by Casualty, or Treachery, one of them should
take fire, the Garrison might remain unfurnished for necessaries for its
defense, and thereby become exposed. Nor is it amiss for a Governor, if he
suspects Conspiracy amongst the Inhabitants, seemingly to use with harshness
one, or more faithful Officers, who may thereby, by secretly consorting with
ill affected Inhabitants, insinuate themselves into their Cabals, turn them
from dangerous designs, and discover privately and frequently all they do to
the Governor; and if he has ground to suspect the Fidelity of any of his own
Companies, it is requisite that he should have secretly in every Troop, and
Company, two of it at least, who for good Rewards, would be covertly his
Intelligencers; and for making them the more usefully such, he must allow them
to talk at the highest with the discontented at their private meetings, or on
their Guards. But when he has gained two or more in every Company, he ought not
to let any one of them know, who are his other Intelligencers, for many good
Reasons; some of which are, that it augments a diligent Spies care, when he
believes he only is relied upon for Advertisements; by comparing what they
severally inform the Governor of, he may the clearlier know if their
intelligence be true, whereas if they act in conjunction, they may frame
Informations to get the greater Rewards; which if but one does, the other will
detect it; when they are in concert they will be often whispering, and thereby
either discover what they are, or give the rest of the Soldiers jealousy,
which will render them the less useful; these Intelligencers the Governor must
often use in public, roughlier than any other Soldiers, that the rest of their
Comrades may be the less doubtful of them.

The often sending of Rounds, and Counter-Rounds, to visit the Guards, and
Sentinels, must never be omitted; and a vigilant Governor ought to go them
frequently himself, and all Officers are to be strictly required by him, to
give constant account to him, from time to time, of whatever they observe in
the Garrison; that accordingly he may take his measures on such Informations.

He ought also frequently in person to visit thoroughly his Arcenal and Magazine
of Victuals, both which he must always keep plentifully, and well furnished,
and in good order.

In the first he must see the Arms well fixed, and kept dry, as also the
Carriages of the Ordnance which are not planted, and exposed to the weather,
must once in six months be new pitched, or painted with oil Colors, whereby a
little charge may still preserve them.

Every Barrel of Powder ought once a month at least, to be turned topsie turvy
in the Cask; for if it be not, all the Salt-Peeter will work to the bottom, and
leave the upper part of the Powder in the Cask weak and clotty; the Powder also
ought to be Aired once a year in the Sun, and such Barrels as need it, ought to
be refreshed and reanimated.

The Match must be kept in great dry Fats, and on boarded Floors, lest it
relax, and become useless; and where any moisture may have gotten to it, it
must be baked in Ovens to recover it.

The Magazine of Victuals, which as the Arsenal for Arms ought to be kept in
two distinct places to prevent accidents, or treachery; must carefully and
often be visited by the Governor in person who is not to rely therein, upon
the honesty and care of the best Commissaries; the Wheat in them must be laid
thin, and often turned, else it will heat, and be loathed by the Soldiery, who
when on most danger and duty, (as in time of a Siege) ought not to have their
Staff of Life nauseous unto them.

Biscuit, Butter, Cheese, and Oatmeal, if carefully looked unto, would be better
relished, and keep longer than most Flesh or Fish salted, and are commonly in
Sieges better liked by the Soldiery; for they carry their Bread, Butter and
Cheese with them to their Guards, those being dressed to their hands without
their labor to cook it, or to get fire to do it; and make them less thirsty by
much, than powdered, or dried Flesh, or Fish. The Oatmeal also boiled in their
Quarters, is a great refreshment to them, and very grateful, whether they be
sick or well.

As a Governor ought always to have his Magazines plentifully furnished, so he
ought to take great care that before any sort of Provisions in them decay, to
sell them off, and buy fresh; but still to have as much of the fresh brought
in, before the decaying ones are taken out of the Storehouses; for else an
Enemy who has a design on the Garrison, may employ a Correspondent in it, to buy
off the decaying Provisions, and promise a supply of fresh ones; but when he
has gotten the old, he may fail of bringing in the new, which may be the loss
of the place; wherefore the Governor ought still to make the change by little
and little, to prevent that fraud and ruin.

He ought also to take constant care that none of his Garrison be insolent, or
so much as disrespectful to the Civil Magistrates, or Inhabitants; for if those
which are employed to protect them, become their Tyrants, it makes them in
Sieges, or Dangers, apt to conspire to change their Masters; at least it makes
them unready to assist, or supply the Garrison, since the service of Fear is
always paid with reluctance, but that of Love with cheerfulness. And every one
that lives at ease in a Garrison, makes it his delight, as well as it his
interest, to contribute what he can to preserve it.

The Sacred Scripture teaches us, That a City which is divided, cannot stand.

A Governor need not be at much, or constant trouble, to bring this one
essential thing to pass; for two or three smart Examples imposed on the Faulty,
will deter the rest from committing the like offenses; for the Soldiery seldom
repeat those Crimes, which they know their chief Commander does distaste, and
will certainly punish.

And as on the one side, the Military Power must be respectful to the Civil, so
the Civil Authority ought to be kind to the Soldiery; it is very rare where the
former is constantly practiced, that the latter is omitted; but it is rare
indeed where the Garrison is churlish, to find the Magistrates obliging.

The Inhabitants of Towns are commonly a sort of People, who are gained by the
good usage of those who have the power to treat them ill; but are soon lost to
those, who being paid to protect them, do notwithstanding abuse them: The
harmony between the Gown, and the Sword, is absolutely necessary; and may with
facility be attained, by the good conduct and discretion of the chiefs of both
Parties.

I have had the Honor to be the Governor of several Garrisons, and by punishing
irremittably the least rudeness of the Soldiery, to the Inhabitants, I never
desired any thing of these, for those, that was denied me.

Another chief care of a Governor, is, often to visit the Works, and Outworks
of a Garrison, and speedily to repair the least decays in them; for delays
therein, are unsafe to the Garrison, and chargeable to the Prince; since what at
first would mend a breach substantially, will in time be of great expense to do
it; since decays in Fortifications, are like Interest money, they eat into the
Purse day and night, till the Principle be paid; and it may be too late to mend
Fortifications, when an Enemy comes to attack them.

He ought also to cause the Guard-houses and Centry-houses to be kept in good
repair, and cleanly, always making those who are Relieved, to deliver them up
such to the Relievers.

On every Guard, I would still have a competent proportion of Powder, Match,
and Bullet, under Lock, and Key, at such a distance from the Fire in the Guard
house, as may not endanger the Powder.

And the Relieved Officer, from time to time, should, before he quits the
Guard, show the Relieving Officer that the Ammunition that he received when he
mounted the Guard, is not prejudiced or diminished, and then give him up the
Key of it, that he may practice the like Rule toward the Officer who is next
to succeed him.

The lodging in this manner of a Barrel of Powder, or more, with Match, and
Ball proportionable, in every Guard, is very requisite; for in case of any
sudden danger, it will be too late to send for a supply to the Arcenals; and if
all the Guards send thither at once, it may be unsafe; whereas leaving a
quantity on every Guard as is before set down, it is there ready on the place
when it is needful, and cannot be spoiled, or imbezled, but it must be known by
whom; and the Officer who commands the Guard, if such a miscarriage happens,
ought to be answerable for it out of his own Pay, with such further punishments
for his neglect, or worse, as a Court Marshal shall think fit to judge, or
inflict.

The Centry-houses I mention, ought to be placed at every point of a Bastion;
at the shoulders of every Bastion, and equal and competent distances along the
Curtain, and where there are any Cavaliers on the height of them, because of
their commanding prospect; I know many are against Centry-houses, alleging,
that the Sentinels in them being dry, and warm, are the apter to sleep, and the
unlikelier to hear any noise, three sides of the four of the house, being
usually closed. But on the other hand, in wet, stormy, or very sharp nights,
unless Soldiers have some shelter, they too usually fall sick; besides, I would
never allow a seat in a Centry-house, and it is not probable that a man will
fall asleep standing upright; especially, when he knows if he be found asleep
by the Round, or those who Relieve him he is to dye for it Nor would I have the
three sides of the Centry-house shut up, as is usual; but wooden Windows to the
three sides, whereby the Centry need but to have one, or at most, two of those
windows shut, so as he may the easier hear any noise; nor ought he to keep in
it, but on exceeding sharp, or wet weather; for as a Governor is to exact all
necessary duties from his Soldiers, so he should not require needless ones;
especially such as will endanger their healths, and consequently their lives.

A Governor ought of course, weekly at least, to hold Court Marshals in his
Garrison; whereby the Soldiers are more detered from committing offenses,
knowing how soon and certainly they must be punished if they do. I would allow
every Company of the Garrison annually one Barrel of Powder, with Match and Ball
proportionable; and every Troop one Barrel of Pistol Powder, and the like of
Ball, for their Guards exercising and Solemnities; and they should have no
more, unless commanded on service: for if they are not stinted in such
allowance, they will be still craving, and prodigal.

The often exercising of the Soldiers of a Garrison in the Fields, under the
Works, or in Piazza's, (if large enough) is very requisite; and when they are
drawn on duty, out of the Works, those in the Works must be doubly diligent:
Nor is it amiss on the Guards at night, and in the day, for the Officers on
those Guards, to exercise those Soldiers there, and teach them more readily to
handle their Arms, especially if any among them be new men.

However such exercising on Guards, keeps them waking, and is instructive, and
also deters Conspirators from hoping to surprise those, who are both always
awake and improving their time the better to serve their Prince. It is one
great part of the duty of a vigilant Governor in case any Fire happen in his
Garrison, or any great Tumult arise among the people, immediately to shut up all
the Ports of the Garrison, to draw all the Soldiers of it into Arms, and with
expedition to distribute them to the most advantageous places, as Piazza's,
Marketplaces, the meeting of several streets, etc. and on no terms to let any
of the Garrison Soldiers quit their Colors, and lay down their Arms to quench
the Fire, without express orders for it; since if those Rules be not punctually
observed, an Enemy who has a design upon the place, may set some Houses on
Fire, or raise Tumults, to engage the Garrison to suppress both; and while they
are confusedly doing it, he may with the more facility cut them off: But when
the Ports are shut, and well manned, the Guards on Duty, all the Garrison in
Arms, and most advantageously distributed, and none to stir from their stations
without express order from the Governor, or the chief Officers of them; his
hopes to prevail by such attempts will be so small, as he will hardly make any,
or if he do, probably be disappointed.

It is the Duty of a Governor also to have an Hospital in his Government with
competent Officers, Attendants, and other conveniences for the sick and
wounded, as a Physician, an Apothecary, a Chyrurgion, with his Mates, a Cook,
and Under-Cook, Women, Attendants, and Laundresses; for cleanliness does almost
as much contribute to health, as the skill and medicaments of the Artists.

There ought also to be a conscientious careful Overseer of the whole Hospital,
who must be very watchful that all employed in it, discharge sufficiently their
Duties of their respective Functions; and who is to give the Governor constant
notice of their several behaviors, that the diligent may be encouraged, and
the remiss punished and removed, with new and fit ones chosen in their places.

For besides the just charity of such Care, who can expect the Soldiery shall
frankly hazard themselves, if due provision be not made for the wounded and
sick, so that it is as much the Interest, as the Duty of a Governor, to provide
such an Hospital for his Garrison; he must also take care in time of Plague, or
infectious Diseases, that the Soldiers have separate Places, and Accommodations
and Assistances requisite.

A Town Major in a large Garrison is very useful and necessary, for he is in
effect the second eyes of the Governor; he must see the Ports shut and open
every night and mornning, bringing the Keys to the Governor every night, and
receive them from him every morning, and not leave them on the Main Guard, as
is the too usual custom. Before the opening of the Gates, he is to send through
the Wicket some trusty Soldiers, with an Officer, to visit all places near the
Ports where an Enemy may be concealed; and after being fully satisfied there is
none, then to open the Gates, and not before, since many Garrisons have been
surprised for want of this necessary Precaution.

The Town Major is also both day and night to visit the Guards and Sentinels;
to be prying into all Companies and Places from whence Danger may probably
arise, and to inform the Governor diligently of all that passes. He is likewise
to mind the well quartering of the Soldiers when their Quarters are distributed
by the Civil Magistrates; to see the Guards be duly furnished with Fire and
Candle; and when any of the Soldiers are sick or wounded, to have them carried
to the Hospital or Pesthouse, for which end he must daily visit those places,
and report to the Governor what he finds amiss; for the Officers of those
Houses will be the more careful, being under such strict and frequent
inspection.

He is likewise to cause the Guard houses and Centry-houses to be kept clean,
and in good Repair; and where any breaches or decays are in the
Fortifications, or Outworks, to give the Governor timely notice, and to have
them speedily and effectually repaired.

He is also to see the Gibbets, and Wooden Horse, for the punishment of the
Soldiers, erected and kept fit for the execution, when any by a Court Marshal
are adjudged, and have a Guard on the place during the time of execution.

He must take most particular care where the Graft of the Fortification is a
Mote, every great Frost to have the Ice well broken each night, the neglect
whereof has lost many important Garrisons.

One other indispensible Duty of his, is, to give the Governor constant and
true notice of all strangers which come to the Garrison by Land, or Water; what
their qualities are, what their number is, and their Inns or private Houses
where they lodge from time to time. For which end, both the Governor and chief
Magistrate must under a strict penalty, require every Housekeeper every night,
immediately after the Ports are locked, to send constantly to the Town Major, a
particular Account of every stranger who lodges in the Garrison, in whose Houses
respectively they do it, with their Christian and Sirnames, how long they
intend to continue in the Garrison, what Arms they Travel with; and if any
number of persons arrive of whom a grounded suspicion may be entertained, then
the Town Major is to appoint some persons whom he may fully trust, to insinuate
themselves into their company if they can; at least to observe diligently their
deportment, and who comes to them, and to whom they send; that by examining
their carriage, and those they converse with, the Governor being duly informed
by the Town Major, may act accordingly for the safety of the place.

In the best regulated Garrisons where any arrive who are not thoroughly known to
be Friends, if they Travel with Firearms, they are made to leave them at the
Gate they enter at, receiving a Ticket for them from the Officer there, who is
to re-deliver them, when the strangers go out of the Garrison; or when they are
well known, bring them to the Owners at the Inns where they lie.

A careful Governor ought not, unless upon very urgent occasions indeed, and
having first secured himself against all probabilities of a surprise, to open
his Gates after they are once shut, till the usual hour of opening them; but if
any Packets come from the Prince, the General, or any superior Officers, or of
important intelligence, he is to receive them by Cords, to which the Packet may
be tied, and for which end, a Post is to be planted ot the outside of the
Graft, to which a Cord is to be fastened, that reaches to the Gate, by which
Cord, a Line being also at the end of the said Post, the Packet may be drawn
into the Garrison.

Over every Port of the Garrison, there ought constantly to be a Sentinel, and
near him two Bells, the one much bigger than the other; on the larger Bell, he
is from time to time to strike one stroke for every Horseman he shall see
coming to that Gate, and on the lesser Bell one stroke for every man on Foot he
sees coming to that Gate, whereby the Guard of that Port being advertised
constantly of the numbers of Men on Horseback, or on Foot which are coming, may
be the more in readiness according to the numbers that are arriving; and may
shut the Gates, if they be so numerous as to give suspicion.

In great and considerable Garrisons which are ordered as they ought to be, I
have seen on the Bridge which goes over the Graft, three Draw-Bridges, most
have two, that when a Wagon or Cart comes, and has passed the first
Drawbridge, those who have the Guard of that Bridge, draw it up, and stop the
Cart or Wagon, till they have thoroughly searched whether there be any Men,
Arms, or Ammunition in it, and while that is doing, the Drawbridge next the
Gate is drawn up; but if only Merchandise be found in them, then they let them
pass.

Two Rules are still to be observed in this particular.

The first is, That when several Carts come loaded to a Gate, the Guard admits
but one at a time to pass upon the Bridge, or through the Gate, all the rest
being to be stopped on the outside of the Graft, till the first be searched, and
have passed over the Bridge and through the Gate into the street; then the rest
are to pass, one by one, in like manner.

The second is, That whoever commands the Guard in the Gate of a Garrison, must
on no pretense whatever admit a Cart, or Wayn, or Passengers, to stop upon a
Drawbridge, or in the Port, or under the Percullis of it; for want of this
care, Amiens was surpised by Porto-Carrero, who had so well adjusted his
design, that under the place where the Percullis was to fall, he stopped his
loaded Cart, and by an Artifice let the Horses go on which till then had drawn
it; whereby when the Percullis was let fall, the loaded Cart kept it supported
on it self, by which means his Soldiers got in, having before sent some of them
clothed like Peasants, who, as if it had been by accident, dropped in the
Guard-place a Bag of Nuts and Apples, which while the Soldiers of it were
scrambling for, Porto Carrero's disguised men killed them at their pleasure,
and being suddenly and briskly seconded by his Horse and Foot, which lay ready
for that end, Amiens was surpised, and cost King Henry the Fourth of France,
justly surnamed the Great, much time, treasure and blood, to recover it again.

The like care also must be taken in the thorough examining and searching all
Ships and Vessels which come within the walls of Garrisons; for want of that
care, Breda was surpised in our memories.

I think it very advisable on the flanks of every Bastion, to have the Cannon
of it, which is next the Curtain, still laden with Chain-shot, and so pointed,
as when it is fired, the Chain-shot may cut off all the Ladders, which on an
intended surprised by Scallado, may be fastened with iron Crooks to the top of
the Parropet of the Curtain.

The City of Geneva was once preserved by this Caution, for it will be too
late, to point Cannon justly in the night, when the Enemies Ladders are once
placed; therefore I would have it done before there be need, and that will be
useful when there is.

Wherever Ordnance are planted in a Garrison, there must still be a Sentinel
upon every piece, whose duty is to let none, except the Officers of the
Garrison, and the Ordnance, to come so near it, as to touch it; For want of this
care, Cannons have been often spiked and clogged, and Garrisons thereby have
been surprised; nay, I have known, by the pouring in of a certain corroding
Liquor, either at the Touchhole, or at the Muzle of the Cannon, if her Britch
be sunk; a Cannon so eaten into, that when she came to be fired, she split, and
killed some of those whom she should have defended against the Enemy.

I learnt how to make this corroding Liquor from an expert Artist, but esteem
it unfit to make the Receipt of it public.

I have seen in some Garrisons, Plates of Iron fastened with Padlocks, both to
cover the Muzles and Touch-holes of Cannons, which possibly were to preserve
their Ordnance from the effects of that devouring water.

Those who have the charge of the Ordnance of a Garrison, ought often with their
Worm, to draw out the Loading of a Cannon, both to put in new if the Powder in
the Cartruce be wet, or if the shot or bags of Bullets be stolen out; for if
any intend you foul Play, though they steal out the Loading of the Ordnance,
yet they will fill the bottom of the Cilinder of it, with something that shall
be to the height of the Loading; and therefore the trial by the Rammer only,
may be fallacious; but by drawing out the Charge, you cannot be deceived; I
knew a Garrison surprised by such an Art of the Enemy, and such a Negligence of
our own.

In great Garrisons I have seen Guards kept constantly from the opening to the
shutting of the Gates, at the further end of the Bridge over the Graft, which
is much the safest way, if the Garrison be numerous enough to admit of it; for
this Out-Guard examined all Comers and Goers, before they came to that Bridge,
whereby much of the danger of a Surprisal was avoided.

The having double Vaulted Arsenals, especially for preserving the Powder
against accidental or designed Fires, or the execution by the shells of
Mortar-pieces, are very requisite; and if possibly, to have Mills for making
Gunpowder within the Garrison; since nothing better does keep an Enemy far off,
than freely shooting against him; and the best furnished Arsenals will be too
soon exhausted, if all be spent constantly upon the main stock, and that be not
recruited from within.

These being some of the most essential things for the Well-ordering of
Garrisons, I shall defer the enumerating of the rest, till I come to that
Chapter which treats of Sieges.

The Marching of an Army.
IN the Marching of an Army, there are many important Particulars worthy to be
thoroughly known, and diligently observed:

Whether I marched in a Friends, or Enemies Country; Whether I believed the
Enemy near, or far off, I would still observe the like order, and have the same
care; for a General may be mistaken in his Intelligence, or Intelligencers;
nay, may think those are Friends, which want but an advantageous opportunity to
declare themselves Foes; and therefore all imaginable caution ought to be
observed in all times and places, because War is a Profession of so ticklish a
Nature, that it is rare for any chief Commander to be capable of erring twice in
any essentials, and therefore he ought to be the more vigilant not to do it
once. But were there nothing else as a Motive to it, but the keeping up exactly
the Military Discipline, yet for that Reason singly, I would constantly do it.

These following Particulars I would therefore recommend to consideration and
practice, having my self constantly, since I knew any thing of the Profession,
punctually observed them, and found the good of doing it.

All the Regiments should in course take their turns, to be in the Van, Rear,
and other parts of the Body of the Army; For where there is equality of Duty,
there must be also universal satisfaction therein; the Generals Regiment the
first day are still to have the Van of all, so daily every Regiment to have its
turn according to its Priority, being a General Officers; or Antiquity, being a
Colonels.

The Regiments of Horse and Foot that are at Night to have the Guard of the
Camp, or Quarter, is still allowed to have the Van.

First, Since they are to have the Duty at Night, they ought to have the place
of greatest ease in the days march, which doubtless the Van is.

Secondly, Being to watch at Night, they ought to be the earliest on the ground
where the Army is to Camp, o^ Quarter, the better to view it, and for the
placing of their Sentinels, and Guards; and for the chief Officer to order
where his Patrouils and Parties which scowre the Country, may most usefully
move for the safety of the whole.

Thirdly, Such of the Van as are not employed in those Functions, having first
of all (which must be still indispensibly done) set out their Out-Centinels in
those places from whence they may clearliest and farthest discover their
several Guards, (for these are the eyes as it were of the Camp) are to draw up
into Squadrons and Battalions ready to fight, if need require it, till the
whole Army be encamped or quartered; and upon no consideration whatever, to
exempt the Regiments of the Van, Horse and Foot, from that Duty; since the
hopefullest time for an Enemy to fall into a Camp, especially not entrenched,
(as ours alas seldom, or rather indeed never are) is just as the Camp is
beginning to settle; For men then are commonly weary, or busied in pitching
their Tents, or making their Hutts if they have not Tents, or in getting Fuel,
dressing their Meat, providing of Forage, looking after their Baggage, and a
hundred other little, but necessary employments to the Economy of Soldiers;
and therefore this nick of time being busily employed by all who have not the
Guard, those who have it, must be in their turns the more vigilant for all the
rest.

Fourthly, Those who have the Van, ought to be the earliest on the ground to
Camp or Quarter in, because if there be any Woods, Mountains, or other covert
places, at any reasonable distance from the ground to Camp in, they ought to
have those places thoroughly searched ere it be dark, for then it may be too
late to do it; I have known sad Defeats given to Forces for want of these
essential Circumspections.

I will not trouble the Reader with many other Reasons for it, since it is a
thing made evident enough by what has been already said, if it be not so of it
self.

If it be possible, I would every morning before the Army marches, draw it up
in Battalia; if that will take up too much time, or the ground permits it not,
I would draw up as much of the Army as I could into gross Bodies, or rather
than fail into many lesser, as the place and time would allow me, the more to
accustom the Soldiers to march in Body, and also to be the more ready to resist
an Enemy should he attempt me; for the best opportunity of doing it next to
that of an Armies lodging, is to do it as it dislodges.

Out of the Van Regiments of Horse and Foot, I would still draw out a Forlorn
Hope of Horse and Foot, who under careful Officers should march a good distance
before the Van, and should carefully search, and discover all covert places,
fit to conceal an Enemy, whether right forward, or on either Flank, and send
speedy notice of what they discover to the General, and other general Officers,
that they may give timely orders thereon.

It is in my own poor opinion very fit a new Word should be given to all the
Commissioned, and Non-Commissioned Officers, and a Field mark to the private
Soldiers, every morning just as the Army is ready to march; for if there be no
need of both, it does no harm; if there be, it does much good, especially if an
Army, or any part of it, be suddenly attacked during its march; for on such
sudden occasions, it may be too late to do either; and then the Field Word
being given to all the Commissioned and Non-Commissioned Officers, it may by
them, in an insant, if there be occasion, be communicated to the private
Soldiers.

I know it is usual, that the Regiments of Horse and Foot which are to have the
Guard at Night, have the Van of the Horse, and of the Foot, during the days
march. But I offer it to consideration, whether that practice may not with
Reason be altered; I have sometimes done it, and found good effects by it. For
I have made the Horse and Foot which were to have the Guard the succeeding
Night, lead the Van of the Army all the days march, and not as is the usual
custom, given those Horse which were to have the Guard at Night, the Van of the
Horse; and those Foot which were to have the Guard with them, the Van of the
Foot; but made both the Horse and Foot which were to have the Guard, march in
one Body in the Van of all the rest of the Army; for I could not see any one
inconvenience by it, but I found it had many advantages, especially if the Army
were numerous, or the Country through which we marched was enclosed, or full
of Passes; since if the Army were great, and the ways narrow, or full of bad
steps, it would usually take up two miles distance from the Van of the Horse,
to the Van of the Foot, whereby if the Regiment or Regiments of Foot which were
to have the Guard at Night, marched but in the Van of the Foot, they would be
long ere they came to the ground where they were that Night to do the Duty; and
consequently, might probably fail of those advantages, which by early coming
they would have had.

In the next place, if the Country have narrow ways, or many Passes, all the
Horse which march in the Van of the Army, if assaulted by the Enemies Foot,
might be too much exposed, while the Foot are coming up from the Van of the
Foot, to relieve them; whereas if the Regiments of Horse and Foot which are to
have the Guard, march together in the Van of all, the Foot are as it were at
hand, to shelter the Horse of the Van.

Lastly, there may be some Bridge, Cause-wayes, or Passes to be secured, for
the better marching of the Army, which possibly the Enemy when he finds which
way you move, may attempt to seize upon; and though your Horse should get
thither before them, yet if you have not Foot or Dragoons to justify it, the
Enemy will quickly beat you from it, especially if he has Ordnance.

Probably also your march may lie through Woods, or Copses, or Moorish Grounds,
where the Van of the Horse may suffer much, unless the Foot be with them; and
because the Horse are useless in Woods, Copses, and deep Moorish Grounds, if
your Enemy understands his work, he will in such places fall on your Horse with
his Foot, and do it with safety to his Men, and certainty of success, unless
you have Foot ready to hold his Foot play, till the rest of the Army comes up.

When ever I marched with Horse and Foot thorough Woods, Copses, or deep
Moorish Grounds, I still sent out wings of shot to the right and left hand,
above a Musket shot from the Road, in which I marched my Horse, the better to
shelter them.

These are some of the many advantages which follow from having the Horse and
Foot which are to be on the Guard at night, to march all the day in a Body in
the Van of all; but as to the inconveniences of doing it, I leave it to those
to set them down, who have found, or shall find them out, for I am therein to
seek.

The having of many good Guides, and to distribute them well, and on their
informations diligently compared, to resolve on the way to march, are very
requisite things, especially if you march to attack an Enemy in the night; I
say, many good Guides, and well distributed; for want of both which, I have
known some great designs not only fail, but those who were to attempt them, run
great hazard, and suffer the loss of many Men: For if you have but one Guide,
or two Guides at most, that are taken up in the Country, they may be
corrupted, or give you the slip, unless you be very careful; and if they be the
first, or do the last, not only you lose your design, but may also lose your
selves; therefore I would always if I could, never have less than three Guides,
one with the Forlorn, one in the Van of the Army, and one with the General, who
may have many things to ask him, and to be informed of by him, during the
march, which it might well be impossible for him to have inquired into, till he
saw the Country through which he marches; but if you have but two Guides, or
but one, and that you are not on certain grounds secure of his, or their
honesty, you must be more careful to keep him safe, lest if he or they should
escape, the prejudice and danger be great.

I earnestly recommended the ordering the daily marches of any Army, in such
manner, as always to come early to the place you will Camp, or Quarter in; but
in a most especial manner indeed, if the Enemy be near you, or that you march
in a Country that belongs to the Enemy, or is better inclined to him than to
you, or is at best, a doubtful Country; for so many mischiefs and
inconveniences have happened, and may happen thereby, that nothing but downright
and mere necessity, should ever make me do otherwise. I shall enumerate a few,
that by the Pattern one may judge of the Piece. Your Horse generally are by
late coming to Quarters, unprovided of Forage, and one days march with the
succeeding nights Fasting and Duty, does cast them down, more than six days
ease, and good Feeding, will raise them again. If they ramble out of the Camp
to seek it, it is ten to one, it being in the dark, they fail of it; and if any
Enemy be near, twenty to one he fails not to cut them off. Your Men generally
will want firing, both for the dressing of their meat, and for the Guards; the
hindmost and straglers having no Guides, usually lose their way; and if the
Country be false, or the Enemy near, themselves also. The confusion will be
great in every Regiments finding, and taking down his Baggage in the night; but
if you have not Tents, and must Hutt, or lie open, it is more than odds, you do
the latter. The danger of overthrowing the Cannon or Wagons in the dark, which
may also happen in such places, as it may stop the whole march of that part of
the Army which is hindermost, as I have known it sometimes do, and thereby
expose both the Van and the Rear to be cut off, by being divided, and in the
dark. Lastly, not any longer to attempt to make that evident, which is in it
self but too plain; if, when you are encamped, or quartered, and are in the
night assaulted by your Enemy on all parts, though having well viewed the
ground, and disposed of your men in case of a real Attack, it be difficult and
uneasy enough to make a fitting defense; judge what it must be, when to the
brisk Attack on all sides from an Enemy without, is added, the confusion and
disorder within the Camp. And if your Enemy understands his business, he will
never fail of making his attempt that night in which you come late, and
consequently tired and disordered, into your Camp, especially when it has no
Line about it.

To prevent therefore this fatal mischief of coming late to Quarter, I would
practice three things indispensibly.

The first is, to be moving very early.

The second is, to send the Carpenters of the Train, and most of the Pioneers
with the Van, to mend Bridges that need it; to support and prop such, as
without those helps shall be judged insufficient to bear the Wagons,
Ammuninition, and Cannon. And when there are any bad steps for the Horse, or
Train, to mend them against the Army comes up. And when the ways are narrow,
to leave those ways, if it be possible, only for the Cannon and Baggage, and
to make several large gaps to the right and left hand of the Highwayes, for the
Troops to march in the Fields.

Thirdly, whenever the ground allows it, to march in Battalia; and if all the
Army cannot, yet at least that the Horse and Foot march in as large Squadrons
and Battalions as the Country will admit; which will not only hasten your
march by shortning the length of your Army, but also habituate your Soldiers to
march orderly in Bodies, against there is need. Yet if all these Precautions do
not accelerate your intended days march, as that you apparently see you cannot
come early enough to your intended place to Camp or Quarter in, (for many such
Accidents may happen) then I would much rather Camp short of the station I
intended, in the first convenient Ground I found, for Fire, Water, and Fo^age,
(which three must still be minded) than expose my Men to all the fatal
mischiefs and inconveniences of a late Incamping, or Quartering.

If I am to Camp or Quarter at night in an Enemies Country, or a doubtful one,
or that an Enemy be near, I would strictly observe these two following
particulars.

First, That none should know the Ground I intend to Camp, or Quarter in at
night, but the chief Officers.

Secondly, That if my Guide or Guides be not of my Army, or Men thoroughly known
to me, and trusted by me; I would let him or them, speak with none, after I
concluded they might guess at the way I intended to march; and consequently
near what place I intended to Camp, or Quarter in, and to have them in safe
custody all the march.

I would allow no Soldiers, during the march, to straggle, much less to stay
behind, unless on mere necessity, and by his Officers leave; and this I would
firmly observe, whether I marched through a Friend, or Enemies Country, not
only to keep up that excellent part of Military Discipline, but also to
preserve my Men from receiving or doing the Country any harm; since Soldiers
but too generally are apt to do amiss, when they have the power to do it,
especially if not under the eye of their Officers. And I have known Countries
which being ill used by the Soldiers of their own Party, but well by those of
the Enemy, have therefore been Friends to their Foes, and Enemies to their
Friends, who in effect made themselves their Enemies, for the People of the
Country judge chiefly by their senses.

As the Van has a Forlorn of Horse and Foot, so the Rear should have a
Rear-guard of Horse and Foot, to be composed out of such as were the precedent
night on duty, and I would still send out small Parties of Horse on the wings
to discover: By this method the Van, Rear, and Flanks, cannot be attacked,
without having timely notice to put themselves into order to resist an Enemy.

As to the Baggage, I know it is too usually practiced for the convenience of
the Regiments, to have the Baggage of every Regiment, march in the Rear of the
Regiment, which I think very unfit, especially if an Army marches in an
enclosed Country, or where there are Woods, Copses, Moorish Grounds, Rivers,
Bridges, or Passes; since the Baggage so placed, must hinder the Regiments from
coming up expeditious to oppose the Enemy, and second such as may be assaulted
in the Van, or Rear, whereby the ruin of the Army may probably ensue.

Julius Caesar when he marched, especially in an Enemies Country that was
enclosed, or cumbersom to move in, by reason of Woods, Copses, Bridges, etc.
made all his Legions march in a Body, and in the Rear of them disposed of his
Baggage, leaving only for their Guard some new raised Men.

This did well, where he was sure the Enemy could only attempt him in the Van,
but not knowing where he will make his impression; yet being certain he is
likeliest to make it, where he will find least resistance, and where he may do
most mischief, in my opinion it is best to have the Baggage, as also the Cannon,
and Ammunition, march in the Center of the Foot, where they are likeliest to be
safe from all attempts; and if the Attack be in the Van, or Rear, or both, half
the Army will be free from the encumbrances of the Carriages, and will be ready
to make head where the need requires.

The Romans were so exact in the order of their marches, as that every Morning
at the first sounding of the Trumpet, every one took down his Tent, and began
to make up his Baggage; at the second sounding, every one loaded his Baggage;
and at the third sounding, the Legions moved out of their Quarters, and put
themselves in the form and order they were that day to march in: But none were
to take down their Tents, till the Consul and Military Tribunes had first took
down theirs; whether for the greater respect, or because their Tents and
Baggage being larger than the rest, they should be the first at work, and
thereby have their Baggage as ready to march at the third sound of the Trumpet,
as the private Soldiers: For Commanders who give Rules to all the rest, ought
to be the most exact themselves in observing them; since if they break their
own orders, they encourage others to lose their reverence to them; and Example
operates more than Precepts; for most men see better than they understand; as
when among Clergymen, vicious Livers, are good Preachers, many think they
themselves do not believe what they seem to inculcate, since they practice
contrary to what they teach.

Therefore it seems to me exceeding requisite, that whatever Rules are made in
an Army by a General, he, and his servants, ought most punctually to observe
them; for else with what justice can he punish in another for the breach of the
same orders which he himself does violate? But when the Soldiery finds the
General keeps strictly the Rules he gives, they do the more inviolably observe
them also; for they conclude, since he will not therein indulge to himself, he
will not do it to others. And they implicitly believe such orders are good and
necessary, because he that gave, is so punctual an observer of them.

In imitation of the Roman Discipline when the Army or Forces were to march, I
observed these following Rules, where I had the Honor to command in Chief.
Soon after the Reveill was beaten, I caused all the Troopers and Wagoners, or
Men that tended the Baggage, to take up their Horses and Oxen, and to make
ready to load. At the sounding to saddle, all began to take down their Tents,
and to load. At the sounding to Horse, all the Troopers did mount, and the Foot
Soldiers draw into Arms under their Colors. When the Trumpets sounded to the
Standard, all the Soldiery marched out of the Ground they Quartered, or Camped
on, into the Field or Fields appointed to draw up in, and there were formed
into as many and large Squadrons and Battalions as the time and ground would
admit, still those Forces of Horse and Foot having the Right which were to have
the Van all day, and the Guard at night, all the Ordnance, Wagons and Baggage
being drawn up on one side by themselves, ready to fall into the center of the
Foot, as the Army or Forces marched off. Those which had had the Guard the
preceding night being drawn up in Battalia, till the Army fell into their
marching order, and till the Ground was cleared; and then they brought up the
Rear all that day, and commanded out a Rear-guard of Horse and Foot during that
days march, who were still to bring up all sick or lame Soldiers who could not
keep pace with the Body. And where any was unable to go, to carry him behind a
Trooper till he came to the Camp, and then to deliver him to his Captain; also
to seize upon and secure all straglers, and to give them to the Provost
Marshal, that they might be punished.

If I marched through a Country which had narrow Cause-wayes, Bridges, Rivers
or Passes, I made those Forces which were on those Cause-wayes, Bridges, and
Passes, double the quickness of their march, till they were gotten out, or over
them; and then immediately draw up on the right or left hand, as the Ground
would permit, till all the rest were got over, in case I suspected the Enemy
was near, or watched my motion.

If I did not apprehend an Enemy, then I made only every Regiment of Horse and
Foot draw up when they had passed over those straights, till the entire
Regiment were got over, and then to continue their march; the like I practiced
over any fordable Rivers. But still when the stream was rapid, or above
knee-deep, I made the strongest Horse, by turns, in Files stand firm in the
River on the upper and lower sides of the Ford, that the Foot might pass the
safelier between them, the upper Files breaking much the rapidness of the
stream; and the lower catching up those Foot Soldiers who might be cast down by
the violence of the Current, by which means many Foot Soldiers Lives have been
saved.

I did also order the Horse in the Van of all, when they had gotten over the
Ford, to send out small Parties to discover, while the rest of the Army were
marching over the Fords, or Bridges; and if the Country were enclosed, or
hilly, to be the more diligent and expeditious in such searchings and
discovery: For an Enemy cannot wish for a greater advantage, than to fall upon
an Army which is separated by a Ford, Bridge, or such narrow passage, since
then they are his at a cheap price, therefore great and constant circumspection
must be observed in all such cases, and all the Forces, as fast as they get
over, must be in a posture to fight, in formed Squadrons and Battalions, while
the rest are getting over.

It ought also to be the constant care in a chief Commander, especially
marching through an Enemies Country, or when an Enemy is near, often to make
short halts, that the Army may not march disorderly, and that it may be as
short in its long march as possible; for it is better to make short and sure
days marches, than long ones and hazardous.

It Is impossible to give one certain and standing Rule, for the most
advantageous and safe way of marching an Army; for the form must vary according
to the Country you march in, and the Enemy you have to do with. If I suspect he
means to assault me during my march in my Front, Rear or Flanks, I must
fortify those several parts accordingly. If he be an Enemy not strong enough
to give me Battle, and will only by his Horse and Dragoons possess the Passes
and Bridges, and Fords, to obstruct and retard my march, I would then have some
Ordnance, with their Necessaries, march with the Foot which are in the Van of
all, the better and sooner to drive him from his Defenses; and I would march my
Army in two or three several Bodies diverse ways, which the French call
Columes, but we, and I think more properly, Lines; yet still no farther distant
the one from the other, than to be ready speedily to unite, if the need
require; and at evening, all to Camp in one Field, or quarter it conveniently,
whereby the whole would move the more expeditiously, safely, and at ease; and
the Enemy would be the less encouraged to defend a Bridge, Ford, or narrow
Pass, against one of the three Lines; since while he is doing that, one, or
both the others, may encompass him, and cut off his retreat.

There are several other Cases which must be provided against, as the
emergencies happen, by the care, knowledge, and foresight of the Commander in
chief; for which no positive Rules can be set down, but the Orders must be
given on the place, and proportionably to the Ground, the Enemy, and the
Occasion.

In an Enemies or doubtful Country especially, I would still have a general
Officer, with the Quartermaster general attended upon by the Quartermasters of
the respective Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse, and Train to be on the
ground to Camp on at night, some convenient space of time before the Van of the
Army comes up, both to view the Ground thoroughly, to take all the advantages of
it, and to appoint the several places for the Guards, for the general Officers,
the Regiments, and Train to incamp in; that against the Army comes up, every
one may know where to pitch his Tent: for which end, the several Quartermasters
should near the first Avenue of the Camp, attend, and be ready to show their
men respectively as they come up, where the Ground is, and how much is allowed
them to lodge in; that all may go readily, and without confusion, to their
several stations; and that there may be no dispute, those should be staked or
marked out, else too often quarrels or animosities do arise on those occasions.

And if an Enemy be near, I would have the several Regiments draw up within the
Camp, or near it, till the Rear be ready to enter into it, to be the fitter to
resist if assaulted, or to relieve the Rear if fallen upon; and only admit some
of every Regiment to employ themselves in pitching the Tents of the rest, and
the other requisite actions, whereby all may be in a forwardness to lodge, when
safely they may do it.

The Roman Discipline in this particular was thus: When their Army approached
near the place where they were to encamp, the Tribunes and Centurions appointed
for that work, advanced before all the rest, diligently to view and consider
the situation of the place; and having chosen the Ground, in the first place
the Consuls or Generals quarter of the Camp was marked with a white Flag or
Streamer, and the Boundaries of it were at the same time set out. Then the
several quarters of the Tribunes were also appointed, and then those of the
several Legions, all with distinct Flags or Streamers of several Colors, only
the Tribunes were red. Then every Legion as well of the Allies, as of the
Romans, had their portion of Ground assigned and marked out for drawing the
Line about the Camp, which was forthwith done, many hands making light work;
and all were expert in it, by constant practice: for they never altered the
measures, nor the form of their Camps, being never allowed to Camp in the
Fields, but in Camps entrenched, though it were but for one nights quarter, so
safe and excellent was their Military Discipline, which, in my humble opinion,
the closer we keep our selves unto, in most things, the greater advantage and
security we shall thereby enjoy.

I shall close up this Section, by only adding to it, That an Army but of 10000
Foot, though they march 10 in a Rank; and of 1000 Horse, though they march 5 in
a Rank, having as slender Baggage as Men can march with, and having but a Train
of 10 Cannon, with an Equipage to them for shooting but a hundred shot round,
takes up in their long march, near 28000 foot in length, which is five measured
Miles, and three fifths of a Mile; so that so small an Army taking up in length
near half a days march, you thereby see how exceeding necessary it is for an
Army that is to march, to be moving early, and to march as often as they can in
Battalia, or in great formed Squadrons and Battalions, and in three Lines, or
two, if possible, to shorten the length of your Army, and to draw up often as
soon, as they are got over Causewayes, Fords, Bridges, Rivers, etc. lest if
attaqued during their march, the Enemy cut them off by parts, the distance from
Van to Rear being so great, though your Army be so small.

Lastly, If you make long marches, especially in enclosed Countries, or full of
Passes, judge how probable it is, if you have a knowing active Enemy, that you
may be defeated, unless you be very vigilant, and have constantly small Parties
abroad to discover at a good distance, and to give timely notice, that
accordingly you may be ready to oppose him; and therefore to march in several
Lines by several ways, yet still, as I said before, near enough to join, or
relieve one another, seems very requisite; as also where there is but one way
over narrow Passes, if possible, by your Train Carpenters, and Pioneers, to
make more.

I mention nothing how to defend your selves, if attacked, in a Pass, or
narrow, or moorish ways, though much, and many things may be said on that
Subject; because I take it to be the duty of a good Commander, to avoid by his
foresight and care, the possibility of being engaged in so great a difficulty;
for if it be run into, it is hard, if possible, well to extricate ones self out
of it; and were all that which has been experimented in those fatal cases, set
down, yet still the remedy will chiefly depend on the quality of the place, and
of the Enemy you have to deal with, and on that essential part of a chief
Commander, which is called, Presence of Mind, which must actuate him according
to the ground, the Enemy possesses, or he himself is so unhappily engaged in.
Only this in general is undoubtedly true, in such an affair, that quickness and
courage in designing and acting, are essential; but still the best way is not
to fall into such Traps, which are easilier avoided, than got out of, when you
are in.

Of Camping an Army within a Line or Intrenchment.
THere are three sorts of Camps,

The Temporary Camp, which is for a Night, or some short space.

The Standing Camp, whereby Countries are kept in subjection, which have been
Conquered, or in which Armies are lodged for some time, either to avoid being
necessitated to Fight, till they saw a fitting time, or for some other great
design.

And the Besieging Camp,

Of which latter I intend to discourse in that Chapter which concerns Sieges,
it seeming to be best reserved till then. And now only to speak of such a Camp
with a Line or Intrenchment about it, as is of extent and capacity sufficient
to lodge an Army within it, both for the accommodation of your own Soldiers,
and resisting the Enemy, if he assaults you.

The Camping of an Army within a Line or Intrenchment, is attended with so many
solid Advantages, and the neglect of it accompanied with so many Dangers and
Inconveniences, that by as much as the Roman Discipline, which constantly
obliged their Armies to lodge though but for one Night in entrenched Camps, is to
be praised; by so much the neglect of it ought to be avoided: I shall enumerate
some of the most material Benefits, which are inseparable from the doing it; in
which, by the Rule of Contraries, the Mischiefs of omitting it, may be the
clearlier and more convincingly inferred.

First, Such an Intrenchment of an Army keeps it safe, and frees it from those
Dangers which it is always exposed unto, by Quartering in open Towns and
Villages, where if your Enemy be awake, he will every Night endanger the
carrying or beating up of some quarter of it, which by its being lodged in a
Body, and within a Line, it is exempted from, since to assault an Army so
Retrenched, is so daring an Act, and so dangerous, that we hear of few who
undertake it, and of much fewer who are successful in it.

Secondly, It eases the Army from keeping many and great Guards, since a few
serves the turn for All, when all are at hand, in case of the Enemies attempt;
whereas if they are Quartered, Dispersed in Villages, and without a Line, every
Quarter must do almost as great, and as hard Duty for its own security, as if
the Army were well encamped would suffice for the whole. But above all, it
eases and secures the Cavalry, which if Quartered in open places, must be
mounted the most part of every Night.

Thirdly, Your Army is better than within a strong Town; for there you are
mingled with Inhabitants, (some of which are too likely to be Spies for your
Enemy) but usually are Corrupters of that excellent Discipline of which
Sobriety is a chief Ingredient; both which great Evils are not only avoided in
Camps, but from them also you may go secretly, and with what numbers of
Soldiers you please, on all great designs, and leave your Train, Baggage, and
Sickmen, etc. secure, during your absence.

Fourthly, In an Entrenched Camp, none can compel you to Fight but when you
please, and Woe be to that Army which by an Enemy is made to Fight against its
Will.

Lastly, (to omit many other material Advantages) an Entrenched Camp, by reason
of the open Air, the healthiness of its situation, which always must be
minded, and the cleanness which may, and ought to be kept in it, is exceedingly
less subject to Infection and Sickness, than Villages are, insomuch that some
great Captains have concluded, an Army will be likelier preserved, and kept
sound and untainted three months in a well seated and regulated Camp, than
three weeks in the ordinary Villages and Country Towns.

All which seems to prove, that one of the most necessary and beneficial parts
of the Military Art, is to know how to Incamp well, and constantly to practice
it Nor could I ever hear of any Objection against it, which did not relish
chiefly of Laziness; for such as disuse it, take for their pretense, the
over-harassing of the Soldiers, and consequently often casting them thereby
into sicknesses; when, on the contrary, Idleness does oftener produce the last,
and the former, by practice, will soon be overcome; for no men's bodies are
usually so sound, and continue long so, as the daily Laborers.

For as to the charge of buying Pickaxes, Shovels, Spades, and Wheelbarrows,
etc. and the Horses, or Oxen, Carts, or Wagons to carry them in, it is
insignificant if weighed with the real advantages an Army derives from the good
employing of them; and as to the Labor, it ought to be without wages, since
none do it, but those who find their own safety, and ease of Duty by it; And
since we make the Soldiers carry their Arms for their Defense, and their
Knapsacks for their Food, which all do willingly, because it is rational, and
they are accustomed to it; so it being as reasonable that men should sleep
safe, and keep fewer and less Guards with security; if what conduced thereunto
were made habitual to them, they would as contentedly undergo it. If one should
say that the Roman private Soldiers were better than ours are, and fitter for
War, we should take it as an Affront; and yet it is evident, that in this
laborious, and advantageous part of War, they excelled us; we should either not
deny it by our words, or contradict it by our actions. At least if we would do
no more, I could wish we did but so much, as when ever we Camp, though but for
a night, we would at the Angles of those great Enclosures we lodge in, raise
little Bastions, or Flankers of Earth, and Sod; And where the sides of such
Enclosures were longer than a Musket would carry point blank, make little
Ravelins or Redoubts to clear them, it would be a great safety to the Camp, and
would ease the Duty of the Guards, who would not need to be so many, or so
strong; And if you came to Camp in an open place, only but raise little
Bastions, or small Redoubts round the Ground you Camp on in a Musket shot the
one from the other; And instead of a Line, draw Carts, Wagons, and Carriages
between the several Redoubts, (leaving Avenues) which is done in a little time,
and with much ease; for those Redoubts need not be above Parapet-high, and the
Grafts of them no broader nor deeper than the Earth raised out of them will
suffice to fill between your Sod-work, which faces and lines the Redoubts; nor
need they be larger within, than will serve to contain 60 men apiece; but if
you Incamp for some time, 'twill be worth the pains of making a Graft, and a
Line, and enlarging and heightning your Flankers.

These little Labors would be exceeding useful and safe, and would so accustom
the Soldiers to work for their own safety and ease, that in time of necessity,
they would be the fitter and abler to undergo, and answer it.

I do not find that the Greeks ever tied themselves to make the Line about
their Camps equal or regular, but drew them according to the benefit and
advantages of the ground. The Romans seldom or never varied the form and figure
of their Camp, but always made their Rampards higher, and the Graft broader,
and deeper, according to the apprehension they had of the Enemy.

I think it is not amiss here to set down the form of a Roman Camp, for there
are many particulars in it worthy the imitation, and some things which our late
Experience has with much Reason altered, and amended.

The Line and Rampard, which consisted of four equal sides, was equally
distributed to be raised by the two Roman Legions, and to the two Legions of
their Allies, who without intermission perfected it, which was their first
work; and it is probable when they Camped but for one Night in a place, and
feared not to be Attacked, they made the Line but low, and the Graft but broad
and deep enough to fill Earth enough between the facing and lining of it; I
observe they did not use Sods commonly, if at all, for those Works; but they
drove double Rows of Stakes of a sufficient thickness and length into the
Earth, leaving so much of the length above ground, as the height of their Work
was to be of; then wattled them like our Hurdles, and raised them by degrees,
as they filled them with the Earth rising out of the Graft. This way was
expeditious enough if they Encamped still in places, where they were certain to
find those Materials; And where they wanted them, I suppose they made use of
Sods to face and line their Ram pards with, as the Moderns do: But their way of
Stakingand Wattling, having many Iron Crows, or other like Tools to make Holes
for their Stakes, (if the Materials were ready) was more quick than ours; for
our way requires much time both to pare the Sods, and to ram the earth and the
tails of the Sods, sufficiently; and without both, the Work is very apt to
belly, and then to slide, which also it will very often do, if the earth have
not time to settle, and that cannot be allowed when Men come to the place of
Camping but for one Night; whereas when the Rampard is faced and lined with
strong Stakes, and good Wattles, the Work cannot slide, till either the Stakes,
or Wattles rott, and that they will not do in many months; neither is there
need, to ram the earth, for it being firmly shut up, on both sides, it will
settle of it self, without endangering the sliding of the Rampard; and it is in
this manner that we do in sandy and gravelly Grounds, secure our Lines of
Circumvallations, which proves it is firmer than Sod work can be.

Between the inside of the Rampard, and the outside of the outwardmost Tents,
there was an open place or street of 200 feet in breadth, which was continued
all along the four equal sides of the Camp, and this was the place to draw up
the Soldiers in, who were to defend the Line, and for their Cavalry to scour
it, which in my poor opinion was too narrow to answer both services; and if it
were only to draw up the Foot in, they lost the benefit of their Horse, which
experience has taught us, in such occasions, is of singular use; for whatever
Foot scale, or storm a Line, must enter it in great confusion and disorder, and
can very hardly indeed resist small Squadrons of Horse, who are ready to
receive them, and charge them all along the inside of the Line.

The four Orders of their Infantry, the Velites, the Hastati, the Principes,
and the Triarii, under the names only of the three latter, (for they divided
and mingled the Velites among them) were thus ordered, ten Cohorts of the
Hastati, which at sixscore in a Cohort made 1200 Men, had 480 Velites joined
with them, and made one Body of 1680 Men.

The like number of Velites were joined to ten Cohorts, of the Principes.

But in regard the Cohorts of the Triarii consisted but of sixty Men each; ten
Cohorts of those made but 600 Men, and therefore the Velites joined to them
were but 240, both which made a Body but of 840 Men.

The Romans allowed ten Foot of Ground square, to lodge two Foot Soldiers with
their necessaries, so that 100 Foot in breadth, and 1000 in length, was
sufficient to lodge 2000 Foot Soldiers, whereby ten Cohorts of the Hastati,
when the Velites were joined to them, (which made but 1680 Men in all) were
lodged at large in that compass, and had enough to spare for their Baggage.

The like quantity of Ground served to lodge ten Cohorts, of Principes when
their Velites were joined to them.

But only half as much Ground was allowed to ten Cohorts of the Triarii, and to
the Velites joined to them, because they were half less in number.

To the Cavalry, they allowed for every 30 Horse 100 feet of Ground square, and
for 100 Turmae 100 Foot in breadth, and 1000 Foot in length.

To the Allies they allowed the like proportion of Ground to Camp in, which
they allowed to the Roman Legions.

But because the Consul had always a fifth part of the Foot of the Legions of
the Allies, and one third part of their Horse for his Guard, they lessened the
allowance of Ground where the Allies Encamped, and added as much elsewhere in
the place where the Guards were Quartered.

The Lodgment of the Cavalry, and Infantry only, was separated by five streets,
every one of 50 Foot in breadth, at 1050 in length; which streets were divided
by a cross street in the midst, which they called Quintania.

At the head of this Lodgment of the Cavalry and Infantry, there was a large
street of 100 Foot in breadth, which went quite cross the whole Camp, beyond
which street was the Lodgment of the 12 Tribunes, opposite to the two Roman
Legions; but opposite to the two Legions of the Allies, was the Lodgment of
their 12 Prefects, but the Lodgment of the 12 Tribunes was in the middle, and
those of the 12 Prefects of the Allies, were on the right and left hand of the
Tribunes.

To every one of these 24 Lodgments, was allowed 50 Foot of Ground square,
which with the Intervals between each Lodgment, took up the breadth of the
whole Camp to the street of 200 Foot wide, which went round next the Inside the
Line of the Camp.

Beyond the Tents of the Tribunes and Prefects, was another street of about 50
Foot broad, and beyond it was the Consuls Lodgment, which had allowed for it
200 Foot square, and was called the Pretorian; which was still in the midst of
that Line, and had on the right and left hand two great spaces of Ground; the
one for the Questor, who was the Treasurer; the other for the Market, on all
sides whereof, but on that side where the Tribunes and Prefects lodged, were
the Lodgments of the 400 Horse, and the 1630 Foot which the Consuls drew out of
the Legions of the Allies, and were as it were their Guard; with Room for the
Volunteers, and Lodgments for some extraordinary Horse and Foot which might
repair to the Camp: all which composed a perfect square, and beyond which
square, was the 200 Foot street, which went along the four sides of the Camp.
And this was a standing Rule among the Romans, that their Infantry was always
lodged the nearest to every side of the Line, or Intrenchment of the Camp, as
those which were still to defend it, and shelter the Cavalry, which always were
placed in the midst of the Lodgments.

When a Consular Army consisted of more than four Legions, they were lodged
still in the same Order, but then the figure of the Camp was a long square in
proportion to the additional Forces which were to be contained in it; and when
both the Consular Armies were united, they took up the ground of two such
perfect squares.

Every side of the Camp had but one Gate; that which was next to the Consuls
Lodgment, was called Pretorian, extraordinary; the other three were called
Principal, Quintania, and Decumen; but where they were placed, I find not. Nor
in what place of the Camp was lodged, nor how much ground was allowed, the two
Lieutenants of the Consul, (one for each Roman Legion) nor for the Prefect of
the Camp, (who was the chief for administering Justice) nor for their Victuals,
Arms, Clothes, and Engines of War, or their Carriages.

But it is probable that the Gates were in the midst of every side of the Line;
that the Lieutenants were quartered near the Consul; that the Questor had the
larger scope of ground allowed him, because under his care, was the Money, the
Victuals, the Arms, the Clothes, and the Military Engines.

But this we find, that the Tents of the Romans, to the time of Julius Caesar,
were all made of the Skins of Beasts.

There seem to be two considerable defects in the Roman Camping.

The first is, what was observed already, that the distance between the
outwardmost streets of Hutts, and the Rampard, or Line, was not broad enough
for the Horse, and Foot, which were to defend and scour it, especially the
Files of their Foot being so exceeding deep.

The second is, that their Marketplace could be but small, being within the
Intrenchment of the Camp, which was also very incommodious, if not dangerous;
and might with much more advantage and safety have been kept without the Camp,
in some open place near it, and under the command of it, whereby none of the
Country who brought their Goods to be sold, needed to enter into the Camp to
spy, or set it on fire, or to surprise it; and keeping the Market out of the
Camp, the Camp would thereby have been kept the cleaner, and less crowded, and
consequently more wholesome.

Besides, so many Soldiers as were quartered in the Camp, of a Consular Army,
could hardly, if possible, buy in a day, what the Market afforded, because the
place it was kept in was so small, and the few streets to it, so narrow.

Sextus Julius Frontinius in his 4th Book of Stratagems, says, That till the
Romans had vanquished Pyrrhus King of the Epirots, they never used a Line about
their Camp, but lay in the open Fields; but having found that Princes Army
entrenched, they liked it so well, as that ever afterward they practiced it
themselves.

The modern way of Camping, which I have seen, within a Line, or Intrenchment,
is as follows.

By Retrenchments, I do not only mean the Line cast up about the whole Circuit
of the Camp, but also all sort of Works by which the Camp is environed, and
shut up, as Redoubts, Bastions, Ravelins, Forts, Tennailes, Hornworks,
Crownworks, and all other sorts, which flank and defend the Outside of the
Line, and such of them as are closed, the Infide of the Line, as Forts and
Redoubts do.

The Ordinary Line cast up, to inviron a Temporary Camp, is about six Foot
high, and three Foot broad at the top, which is in effect but a Parapett, or
Breast-work.

1. The Basis or Breadth of the bottom from the Outside of the Out-Sod, to the
Inside of the Inward-Sod, about seven Foot. 2. The sloping, battering, or Talud
Exterior, about two Foot and an half. 3. Of the Inside but one Foot. 4. The
Exterior height of the Line five Foot. 5. The Interior height of it six Foot.
6. The Breadth of the Foot Bank, or Banquet, three Foot. 7. The Height of it,
one Foot and an half. 8. The Breadth of the Ditch, or Graft, eight Foot. 9. The
Battering, or Talud Exterior and Interior of the Ditch, four Foot. 10. The
Depth of the Graft, five Foot. 11. The Breadth of the bottom of the Graft, four
Foot. 12. The Lisiere, or distance between the first Outwardmost Sod, and the
Brink of the Graft, two Foot.
These are the Ordinary Dimensions of the Line and Ditch of a Camp entrenched;
but if the necessity require it, the one may be raised higher and of greater
thickness, and the other made deeper and broader, accordingly.

It Is to be observed as a standing Rule, That at the distance of every
Musket Shot point blank, a Flanker must be made, either a Redoubt or a Ravelin,
or Bastion, etc. and at every Angle where the Line turns, a Bastion or Fort,
they being the fittest Works to secure the said Angle, and to command the Lines
on both sides. And those Flanker Works are commonly more high, and thick, and
the Ditch of them more broad, and deep, than the Lines are; for they are the
defense of those Lines, since without them, when the Enemy came to the Ditch,
they could not be offended considerably.

The raising of this Line, and these Flankers, is to be equally distributed
between the Regiments of Foot which are not in Guard; for those which are to
Watch, and Fight for all the rest, till they come up; and the Horse Regiments
are exempted usually from these Works, being to provide Forage for their
Horses, and to Scout, but they are to make their own Hutts themselves, to fetch
in Forage, and to scour the Country. The Work therefore of Intrenching the
Camp, is to be equally divided among all the Foot Regiments, every Regiment
taking according to its number of Men, his equal proportion of the whole; every
Division of each Regiment relieving by turns, the other Divisions of it. As if
a Regiment consist of 1200 effective Private Soldiers, 600 must be at Work for
one hour, and the other 600 must at the hours end relieve them; and so by
Spells, till the Work be done, which must never be given off till it be
finished.

Every 100 Soldiers ought to have one Commissioned Officer, one Sergeant, and
one Corporal, to supervise those 100 Soldiers, and see that they lose no time,
nor do their Work carelessly. Some must be employed to cut Sods; others to carry
them to the Work, either in Wheel, or Handbarrows; some must be appointed to
lay them, others to ram them, and cut, or pare them with a broad Spade; some
must break up the Earth of the Ditch, others with Shovels must cast it up
within the Sod Work; always filling the Earth between the Sod, as fast as the
Sod Work rises; and some must cut, and bring Frith to mingle with the Earth,
which is cast up betwixt the exterior and interior facing of Sods, which will
hinder the Earth from sliding.

Some Generals allow half the Regiments which are off the Guard, to be making
the Hutts for themselves, and for those which Work at the Line, that thereby
when they have done the Line, they may have their Hutts ready to rest in; and
that their Comrades may provide for them, their Straw, and their Suppers.

This may well be allowed in two Cases:

The first, where the Army is so numerous, and well provided, that half the
Soldiers of it may suddenly complete the Line.

Secondly, where you are certain no Enemy can assault you, while your Line is a
making.

But where you are not certain of both these, especially of the latter, all
other Advantages must yield to that of the general Safety.

Whatever Utensils, as Spades, Shovels, Pickaxes, Wheelbarrows, Handbarrows,
etc. are the Kings, and only lent to the Soldiers to make the Works; the
Commissary of those Stores is to give them by tail, to the Commissioned
Officer, who first supervises the Soldiers who are to Work, who is to give his
receipt for them, as the Officer who relieves him in that Duty, must do the
like to him who is relieved; and the Officer of the last relief of all, is to
go with the Soldiers who are to carry them, and deliver them up by tail to the
Commissary, who is thereupon to deliver up the first Officers receipt, which
the last Officer is to send or carry to him that night; else the Kings Utensils
would be imbezel'd to his damage, and that of the service.

As to the Hutting and Camping of the Regiments, when the Line is finished,
these Rules may be observed.

All along the four sides of the Line, I would still leave the space of 300
Foot, for the drawing up the Soldiers which are to defend the Line, in case it
be attacqued, and for small Parties of Horse to scour it, in case it be entered.

A Foot Company is to be lodged as follows, supposing it to consist of 100 Men;
which will also serve for a general Rule for the Lodgment of one Regiment, or
20 Regiments, if the Army to be Camp'd consist of so many.

The Ground to lodge 100 Men in, within an Entrenched Camp, is 300 Foot in
length, and 24 Foot in breadth; out of which 300 Foot in length, 40 Foot in
length, and 24 in breadth, is taken for the Lodgment of the Captain, between
which Lodgment, and the first of the Soldiers Hutts or Tents, a void space is
left, of 20 Foot in length, and the breadth is to be the very same of the whole
Companies when they have Hutted, viz. 24 Foot.

From this void space of 20 Foot, the Soldiers begin their Street, or Line of
Hutts in manner following:

There is left for them 200 Foot in length entire, and 24 in breadth; the 24 in
breadth is to be divided into three equal parts; the middlemost, is to be the
Lane, in the two outward two thirds; the two Files of Hutts are to be made, and
the Lane of 8 Foot is to be left between them; and no Man must dare to enlarge
or lessen his Hutt above 8 Foot from Out to Out, lest he thereby subvert the
whole Order of Camping; the length of every Hutt is to be at most 7 Foot, and 3
are to be in one Hutt.

I lay Encamped several years, and all in Tents; the Troopers and Foot Soldiers
had Trench-Tents, not so large as these sort of Hutts, yet I allowed every six
Foot Soldiers but one Trench-Tent, and every three Troopers but one
Trench-Tent, (because of their Saddles and Furniture) and with this allowance,
they were satisfied.

Behind the last Hutts of these two Files of Hutts, there is a void space of 20
Foot in length, and the breadth is that of the Lane, and the two Files of Hutts
beyond which said void place, the Suttlers, and Victuallers, have their Hutts,
which are 10 Foot long; and their Hutts for their Drink, and for their dressing
their Meat, is also 10 Foot long; and this void space of 20 Foot between the
Soldiers last Hutts, and the Hutts of the Victuallers and Suttlers, is left,
because by continual dressing Meat for the Soldiers, the Hutts of the
Victuallers are apt to take Fire, and this vacuity, in case they do take Fire,
is convenient for People to quench it, before it can take hold of the Soldiers
Hutts; in none of which, on any pretense, Fire is to be allowed.

So the whole 300 Foot in length for the Lodgment of one Company, is thus
employed.

40 Foot for the Captains Lodgment. 20 For the Street between it, and the
foremost Hutts of the Soldiers. 200 Foot for the Soldiers Hutts. 20 For the
void space between their Hutts, and the Victuallers Hutts. 10 Foot for the
Victuallers Hutts, and 10 Foot for the Kitchins and Cellars of the Victuallers
and Suttlers.
In all 300 Foot in length.

The Doors of the Soldiers Hutts do all open into the Lane, and the Right Hand
File of the Hutts, open just opposite to the Left Hand File of the Hutts.

Only the foremost Hutt of each File of the Hutts have their Doors to open
toward the 20 Foot Street between them and the Captains Lodgment; of which two
Hutts, one is for the Lieutenant, and the other for the Ensign.

And the two last Hutts of the File of Hutts, have their Doors to open toward
the 20 Foot Street between them, and the Victuallers and Suttlers, in which two
Hutts the two Sergeants are lodged

And the Victuallers and Suttlers Hutts are open toward the Hutts of the
Soldiers, that the Soldiers may come to them in a direct Line.

This may be the Lodgment of an entire Company of 100 Men, with their Officers,
and Suttlers, and Victuallers. But if a Foot Company consist of 150 Soldiers,
then the Lodgment of that Company shall consist of the three Files of Hutts;
and if it consist of 200 Soldiers, then it shall have four Files of Hutts, and
three Lanes, and so more or less, as the Company is in number. But every Hutt,
and every I ane, is to continue the same for its Dimension; and only the
breadth of the ground for the Lodgment of it, is enlarged, but never the length
of 300 Foot altered; else it would unavoidably disorder the Lanes or Streets of
the whole Camp, which will be regular, while the length of every Lodgment is
equal; so that a Company which consists of 150 Men, has 16 Foot in breadth
added to it, 8 Foot for the File of Hutts, and 8 Foot for the Lane; but the
breadth of the Captains Lodgment in the Front, and the Suttlers and Victuallers
in the Rear, are still to be as broad as the whole breadth of the Hutts and
Lanes, to make the long square of the whole Lodgment equal in the Lines, and in
the Sides of it.

This is to be also observed, that between every five or six Hutts, a space of
about three Foot is to be left, to hinder the Fire, if by any Accident it
should take in any of their Hutts, which commonly are thatched; but the
Victuallers Hutts ought always to be covered with Sods, or the Hydes or Skins
of the Beasts they kill, which are not so liable to take Fire.

In ancient Times they used Tents instead of Hutts, for then the way of making
War was in the Field, and Armies were daily in motion; and in such cases,
Straw, Rushes, or Flags, to cover, and Wood to make Stakes and Roofs were not
always at hand, nor to frame the Roofs easy; but now that for the most part
War is made in the Besieging of strong places, or in standing Camps, both
Officers and Soldiers use to Hutt, which is more warm, and more lasting than
Tents; however, in the pitching of Tents, where they are used, the like Order
may be observed, as is set down for Hutts.

I shall now proceed to show how a Foot Regiment is to be Lodged, in an
Entrenched Camp.

If a Regiment consist of 20, 18, 15, 12, 10, or 6 Companies, the Regiment is
to be divided into two equal parts, and every Company of it is to be Lodged as
the Company of 100, or 150, or 200 are; (as is newly before set down) and if
there be an odd Company, let it be Lodged in the Files of Hutts of the
Right Hand Division; if the Companies be unequal in number, it matters not for
the length of 300 Foot being constantly observed, the breadth only varies
according to the greatness or smallness of the Company; but the long square
must still be observed, for the preserving the Regularity of the Camping
throughout the whole Army.

When the Regiment is divided into two parts, there must be constantly allowed
300 Foot in length for the Lodgment of the entire Regiment, but as to the
breadth of the Lodgment, it varies according to the quantity of the Companies;
always keeping this standing Rule, as is before expressed, (viz.) that 200 Foot
in length of the said 300, is to be kept entire for the Hutts of the
Lieutenant, Ensign, Sergeants, and private Soldiers with their Corporals, and
every Company of 100 Men is to have 24 Foot in breadth for their two Files of
Hutts, and the Lane between them of eight Foot wide.

The rest of the 300 Foot, viz. 100 Foot is to be thus divided, 40 Foot for the
Lodgment of the Colonel, and each of the Captains (which takes up the whole
breadth of the Lodgment of the Regiment) 20 Foot for the Street between their
Lodgment and the Hutts in File, 20 Foot for the Street between the lower end of
the Soldiers Hutts, and the Victuallers, 10 Foot for the length of the
Victuallers Hutts, and the other 10 Foot for the Victuallers Kitchins and
Cellars, which extend the whole breadth of the entire Lodgment of the Regiment.

Between the two Divisions of the Regiment, there is to be left a space of
Ground of 68 Foot in breadth, throughout the whole 200 Foot in length, and 16
Foot more for two Lanes of 8 Foot broad, each Lane for a passage between the
two inwardmost Files of Hutts, of each of the two Divisions of the Regiment;
whereby an entire Regiment consisting of 10 Companies, each Company 100,
together with the Lodgments of the Commissioned Officers, Staff-Officers,
Non-Commission'd Officers, Suttlers, Victuallers, and for their Baggage, shall
contain 300 Foot in length, and 388 Foot in breadth; that is, reckoning the
length from the front of the Colonels and Captains Lodgments, to the Rear of
the Victuallers and Suttlers Hutts, and the breath is the wideness of all the
spaces between the said length, else it would be incongruous to say the length
was 300 Foot, and the breadth 388 Foot; which therefore I thus explain, that
the Critics may not except against the expression: for the length in such
Incampings of a Regiment, is to be taken from the depth of the Files of the
Hutts; and so from the Lodgment of one Company of 100 Men which has 300 Foot in
length, and but 24 in breadth, the depth of the File of Hutts is still called
the length of the Lodgment, though by the addition of the other nine Companies
of the Regiment, the breadth is more than the length of the Lodgment. Besides,
the length being still a Standard for the whole Lodgment, that the Lanes or
Streets of it may be kept regular, and the breadth accidental and variant, it
having regard to the numbers of the Companies; that space which is from the
front of the Officers Lodgment, to the Rear of the Victuallers Kitchins, is
still called the length of the whole Lodgment, whatever the breadth may be.

This length and breadth then so explained of the entire Lodgment of a Regiment
of 1000 Men divided into 10 Companies, may be distributed as follows:

The front of the Lodgment of the whole Regiment is to be taken up with the
Lodgment of the Colonel, and that of the 10 Captains; the Colonel is to be in
the middle, and five Captains Lodgments on the right hand, and five on the left
hand, (reckoning the Captain Lieutenants for one of the Captains) the Lodgment
of every Captain is to be 40 Foot in length, and 24 Foot in breadth; the
Colonels, in regard of his Dignity and greatest Baggage, is to have 68 Foot in
breadth, yet but 40 in length; thereby to keep the Street between the said
Officers Lodgments, and the first of the Files of the Hutts equally broad;
between every Captains Lodgment, as also between their Lodgments, and the
Colonels, is to be left a Lane of 8 Foot wide, which continues during the 40
Foot of the length of every of the said Lodgments.

The Colonels Lodgment, and every particular Lodgment of each Captain, is
environed with an Intrenchment five foot high, the Graff four foot deep, and
four foot broad, within which is the Captains Hutt, the Hutt for his Stable,
and the Hutt for his Kitchen, and the remaining void places of his Lodgment are
for his Hay, Wood, etc. the like for the Colonels Lodgment according to its
dimensions.

The Front therefore of the Colonels, and 10 Captains Lodgments, with the Lane
of 8 foot wide between each Lodgment, takes up in breadth 388 foot: that is,

The Colonel in the midst 68 foot, the five Captains on each hand of his
Lodgment, that is, ten times 24 foot, in all 240 foot; then the five Lanes of 8
foot wide each of them, that is, five times 8 foot on the right hand of the
Colonels Lodgment, and five times 8 foot on the left hand of it, in all 80
foot; so that 68 foot, and ten times 24 foot, and ten times 8 foot, make in all
the 388 before mentioned, which is the entire breadth of the Lodgments of such
a Regiment.

Every Captain is to have his Lodgment in the front of his Company, which with
the two Files of Hutts, and the 8 foot Lane between them, makes 24 foot in
breadth, which is the breadth of every Captains Lodgment.

The beforementioned space of 68 foot wide, and 200 foot long, which is to be
left between the two beforementioned Divisions of the Regiment, is to be thus
employed: (viz.)

One hundred foot in length thereof is to be divided for the further
accommodation of the Lieutenant Colonel, and the Major, who being persons of
greater quality, and consequently having more Retinue than the Captains, and
yet being in the front of the Regiments Lodgment, allowed no more ground than
the Captains, are to be supplied with more in proportion to their need out of
the said 100 foot in length, and 68 foot in breadth, of the space of ground
between the said two Divisions of the Regiment, and the residue of the said 100
foot in length, and 68 in breadth, is for the Chaplain, the Marshal, the
Chyrurgion, and other Staff-Officers of the Regiment; but the remaining 100
foot in length, and 68 foot in breadth of the said space between the two
Divisions of the Regiment, is to be for the Wagons, Carts, etc. of the Colonel
and his Officers.

The ground 200 foot long on each side of the two Divisions of the Regiment, is
to be employed for the two Files of Hutts, and the Lane 8 foot wide between,
which is for every of the 10 Companies, each of which is but to have 24 foot in
breadth, for their two Files of Hutts, and the said Lane, and but 200 foot deep.

The two Streets between the Soldiers Hutts, and the Captains Lodgment in the
front, and the Soldiers Hutts, and the Victuallers Hutts in the Rear, are each
to be 20 foot wide in the Clear, and their length is the whole breadth of the
Lodgment of the Regiment, viz. 388 foot.

Behind the last of these two Streets, are the Suttlers and Victuallers Hutts,
Cellars and Kitchins, both which take up 20 foot of the length of the 300 foot,
including the two foot space between their Hutts, and their Kitchins, and
Cellars.

Every Company is to have the Door or Opening of every Hutt toward the Lane,
which is common to the said two Files of Hutts.

In the Street 20 foot wide, which is between the Colonels and Captains
Lodgments, and the front Hutts of the Soldiers, are usually erected three
Poles, or long Stakes of the figure of a Door-case or Gallows, against which
the Pikes of the Company are to be set on both sides; for the Hutts of the
Ensigns and private Soldiers which trail Pikes, are not long enough to contain
them; these are usually placed 5 or 6 foot within the Street over against the
opening of the Lane between the Hutts.

There are also four Stakes, or small Posts, with a Rail between every two
Stakes, which are to lay the Soldiers Muskets upon; the square made by those
four Posts is about 6 foot long, 4 foot broad, and 3 foot high; but if the
weather be wet, the Soldiers keep their Muskets in their Hutts. These squares
to lay their Muskets on, are on each side of the Door-cases where their Pikes
are placed, and are 5 or 6 foot within the Street, but are over against the
front Hutts, as the Pikes are over against the mouth of the 8 foot Lane; the
Colors whether furled, or flying, are pitched in an even Line, between where
the Pikes and Muskets are rested.

The Ichnographie of a Company, and then of a Regiment of 600 Men, and so for
larger or smaller Regiments so lodged, is in the following figure Number 1, and
for the clearer understanding thereof the Scenographie of it is in the figure
Number 3.

And because Troops of Horse, and Regiments of Horse, are often lodged in
Entrenched Camps, I have thought fit to set down how the Officers of a Troop of
100 Horsemen, and the Troopers of it, and of a Regiment of those Troops, each
of 100 Horse are to be lodged, which will show how larger Horse Regiments are
to be Encamped.

The Ichnographie of a Regt of six Companys Consisting every one 100 men, in
their Lodgments fig first
ABON the Lodgemt of the entire Regemt. of 600 men. A g b C one of ye Capns.
Lodgmts. a d b (...) the files of hutts for ye Capns Company with. the Street
between them X the 20 foot broad Street between the Captns. Lodgemts and the
first files of the hutts of the Soldrs Y the 20 foot Street between the Soldrs.
hutts and the Suttlers B D i k the 20 foot for the Victuallers and Suttlers
hutts and Kitchins Z the Colenells Lodgemts Z Z the Intervall between the 2
divisions of the Regimt. in which. first 100 foot thereof which. fronts towar^ the
Colonlls. Lodgemt is the Lt Colonll. addiconall Lodgemt with. the staff officers
of the Regt. and the last 100 foot thereof for the Carriages and baggage of the
Regimt.

Place this foll: go



the Scenographie of a Regiment of foot Consistin^ of Six Companies every one
of 100 men. fig: 2
Place this foll: go



This in the first place is a standing Rule, that the Cavalry in Entrenched
Camps is never to be mingled with the Infantry, but are to have their Lodgments
distinct, else many incommodities would too probably happen.

Therefore for the Lodgment of a Troop of 100 Horse, I would observe this Rule.

The length of the Lodgment of it should be still 300 foot, as that of the foot
is; but the Troop should have in breadth 70 foot, whereas the Company had but
24 foot, within which space of 300 foot long, and 70 broad, the Captain,
Lieutenant, Cornet, Quartermaster, the three Corporals, the two Trumpets, and
all the Troopers, with their Horses, Forage, and Victuallers, are to rest
contented.

This quantity of ground is to be divided as follows:

In the Front of the said long Square shall be the Lodgment of the Captain,
which shall take up 40 foot of the length of the 300 foot, and 70 foot in
breadth, which is to be the whole breadth of the entire Troops Lodgment.

Twenty foot more of the 300 foot in length, shall be allowed for the Street
between the Captains Lodgment, and the first Hutts and Stalls of the Troopers,
and of their Horses, 200 foot more out of the length of the 300 foot, shall be
wholly for the Troopers Hutts, and their Horses, Stalls, or Stables. There are
to be (as in the Lodging of the Foot) no more than two Files of Hutts for the
Men, and two Files of Stalls for the Horses.

The Street between the Files of Hutts for the Troopers, is to be 20 foot wide,
and 200 foot long.

At the end of which 200 foot, is to be left 20 foot more out of the said 300
foot length, for a Street from the Rear of the Hutts, to the Victuallers Hutts
and Cellars, which Street is to be 70 foot in length, being the breadth of the
whole Troops Lodgments, the remaining 20 foot of the said 300 in length, is to
be for the Victuallers, and Suttlers Hutts, Kitchins, and Cellars, as it is in
the Lodgment of a Regiment of Foot.

The 20 foot Street 200 foot long, being taken out of the 70 foot wideness of
the whole Lodgment for the Troopers, the 25 foot wideness of each side of the
Street, is to be disposed as follows:

Ten foot of the breadth of the 25 foot on each hand of the Troopers Street,
and 4 foot of the length of it is for every Troopers Hutt, which lodges 100
Troopers in the two Files of Hutts on both sides the Street of 20 foot wide.

The Lieutenant and Cornet of the Troop are to lodge in the Front of the two
Files of Hutts, which are to lodge the Troopers, the Quartermasters and the
Corporals are in the Rear of the said two Files of Hutts, which fronts against
the Suttlers and Victuallers Hutts.

Five foot more of the said 25 in breadth, is to be for a Lane on each side the
whole length of the 200 foot, between the Troopers Hutts, and the Horses
Stalls; and the remaining 10 foot, in breadth of each side, is to be for the
Horses Hutts or Stalls, every Horse having, as his Rider, 4 foot of the said
length, and 10 foot of the said breadth; the Troopers accommodation is larger,
because of his Armor and Furniture.

The Hutts for the Horses are to be left open behind, and before, and only shut
up on the two sides, but covered over head to defend them from the rain, great
cold, and great heat.

Every Horses head is to stand toward his Riders Hutt, that he may the better
and the oftener have his eye on his Horse.

They make little Mangers of Canvas for their Horse to eat their Hay, Chopped
Straw, and Oats in, which are supported by 4 little stakes at the 4 corners.

Between every 5 or 6 Hutts of the Troopers File, they usually leave a space of
4 or 5 foot, for the Troopers to pass from their Street, to their Horses Hutts.

This may be the manner of Lodging a Troop in an Entrenched Camp.

And then the like measures and methods may be observed for the Lodgment of a
Regiment of Horse consisting of three Troops, or more, as has been mentioned
for a Regiment of ten Companies, or more, or less, which for brevity I will not
enumerate, but set down in the Map Figure (2) the Ichnographie of a Troop of
100, and

The Ichnographie of a (...) of Three Troops in their Lodgmts. every one
Consis^ ^f 100 Troopers with their horses fig: 3d.
ABEF the whole Contents of the Regimt. of horse of 3 troops Containing in all
300 men a (...) b i the 2 files of hutts and 2 files of Stalls for horses for
one troop (...)th. the Street between them X the Captains Lodgement Y the
Street between the Captains Lodgemts. and the files of the troopers hutts and
the Stalls for their horses Z the Street between the files of the troopers
hutts and the Victualers and Suttlers hutts and Sellars B C t n the Suttlers 20
foot for their hutts kitchins and Sellars

Place this foll: 92



The Scenographie of a Regement of Horse (...) of three Troops, every one of
100. fig: ye 4th.
Place this foll: ^2



Regiment of 300 Horse; and in the Map Figure (4) the Scenographie of it, for
the rendering it more easily intelligible and practicable; only on the right
hand of the Regiment, I show in the Scenographie Map, how the Horses Stalls are
to be before the Horses are in them.

To which I shall only add, that whereas the space between the 2 Divisions of a
Regiment of Foot, is but 68 Foot, I would have it for a Regiment of Horse of
600, double as wide, that is, 136 foot; within which breadth, and 200 foot
long, 100 foot toward the front of the Lodgment, (as in the Foot Regiment)
shall be employed for the better accommodation of the Field-Officers, and
Staff-Officers of the Regiment; and the other 100 foot long toward the Rear,
for the Carriages, etc. of the Regiment: and by making the said space between
the said two Divisions, 136 foot wide, you will by consequence make the
Colonels Lodgment, which is between the Lodgments of the six Captains, 136 foot
wide, but still but 40 foot long, wherein his own Hutt, his Kitchen, Stable,
and other needful accommodations, may be the better placed.

The Lodgment of a Regiment of 300 Horse consisting of three Troops, takes up
in length 300 foot, and in breadth 408 foot of ground, the Scenographie of such
a Regiments Camping I only present, because the Page could well contain no
more. But in a Regiment of six Troops, every one of 100, I would leave the
Interval before mentioned between the two Divisions for the Reasons before set
down, and the like Rule may be observed proportionately for larger Regiments of
Horse.

And lastly, still it is to be observed, that whereas the present Computation is
but for a Troop, and for a Foot Company each of 100 Men, if they be 150, or 200
to each, the breadth must be enlarged accordingly, (but never the length) and
where a Troop or Company is 150, there must be two Streets, and three Files of
Hutts; and where it is 200, three Streets, and four Files of Hutts, and the
like for the Stalls of Horses.

The before mentioned methods were usually and a long time observed by those
Generals who regularly encamped their Regiments and Armies. But as in all other
Arts, so in War, Alterations are made sometimes, (I wish I could say always)
to the improving of it effectively. But sometimes the Capriciousness of a
General, otherwhile the Affectation of having the Honor to him and his Nation
of altering old Forms, produces those Changes which only should be the effect
of clear Ratiocination on Experiments.

I will therefore show what Change has been made, in the Incamping of Regiments
within these 60 last years, and then the alleged Reasons for the doing of it.

The 300 foot in length still remained as a Standard in all Incampings of a
Troop, Company, Regiment of Horse, or Regiment of Foot, for the Lodgment the
breadth varied according to the numbers which were to be lodged, but the 50
foot wideness for the Streets, and distance between gross Lodgment and gross
Lodgment, has been often altered, and sometimes all, or many of the Streets,
enlarged to 100 foot, but seldom, if ever, has exceeded.

The old way of Lodgment was, as I have set down.

The new way is thus: The Colonels Lodgment is 80 foot in length in the
forepart of the Interval, between the two Divisions of the Regiment, the hinder
part of that Interval being 100 foot in length, is for the Wagons, and other
Carriages of the Regiment, 180 foot of the 300 foot in length is all that is
allowed for the Hutts of the Soldiers, from the Rear of which Hutts, was 20
foot of a Street left, and then in the whole breadth of the Lodgment is the
Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, and Captains Lodgment of the Regiment, beyond
which was 40 foot left for another Street, beyond which was the 20 foot for the
Victuallers, and Suttlers Hutts, Kitchins and Cellars; in the Front of the
Lodgment, as the Door-cases, and Squares to place the Pikes, and Muskets of the
Soldiers, between which, the Colors were to be placed, either flying or
furled; and nothing else was between the Front of the Files of the Soldiers
Hutts, but the 300 foot vacuity to the Line which environed the whole Camp. I
know that the usual breadth of that vacuity, properly called the Alarm place,
is but 206 foot wide, whereof 6 foot for the Parapet; but I should recommend
the breadth to be 300 foot (for the labor is not much more in the whole
Circumvallation) the Alarm place then would be larger, for all needs both for
the Horse and the Foot, the Camp the more Airy; and the more spacious the
Alarm place is, the unlikelier to be Miry; but where any part is Miry, it
ought to be well gravel'd or pitched with stone as Streets are; in the Front
Hutts, the Lieutenant and Ensign were lodged; in the Rear Hutts, the Sergeants
and Corporals; the Lodgment of the Chaplain, the Quartermaster, and the
Chyrurgion of the Regiment, were in the Interval of the 68 foot between the two
Divisions of the Field Officers, and Captains Lodgments, and are equal in
length, and depth to them; only they had but 68 foot wideness of that Interval
for their three Lodgments, the Provost Martial of the Regiment had his Lodgment
in the 68 foot Interval between the two Divisions of the Hutts of the Suttlers
and Victuallers, in an equal Line with them, as is demonstrated in the Figure
Number 5, which is the Ichnographie of such Incamping, with the Alphabetical
Table of Reference thereto belonging.

The Reasons of this Change are:

I. The Soldiers upon any present necessity, could not so expeditiously draw
out into the Alarm place, because of the narrowness of the passages between
the Colonels, Field Officers, and Captains Lodgments.

II. Because not only the Colors, Pikes and Muskets were somewhat covered from
the sight by the Field Officers and Captains Lodgment, which by this method are
fully exposed to the view, and make a handsome and formidable show, but also
they are readier to be handled by the Soldiers, and they to draw up in a moment
to defend the Line.

III. To prevent, or immediately to punish the insolence of the Soldiers upon
the Suttlers, and the Suttlers imposing ill Food, or hard Rates on the Victuals
and Drink they set to the Soldiers, which it was believed would be more
hopefully hindered, or more expeditiously redrest, when the Field Officers and
Captains Lodgments, were between the Soldiers Hutts and the Victuallers, than
when only the Sergeants and Corporals were nearest to do it.

IV. The 40 foot wide Street between the Field Officers and Captains Lodgments,
and the Hutts of the Victuallers, was judged most convenient, because a 20 foot
Street, the whole wideness of the Regiments Lodgment, was thought too narrow
for the great resort of Wagons, Carts and Carriages which were daily brought to
furnish the Suttlers and Victuallers, and in which Street the Soldiers usually
stood which were to buy their necessaries of them. In the observing this newer
way of Incamping, these four Inconveniences seem to attend it.

1. The Lieutenant Colonel and the Major have thereby no further Accommodation
as to their Lodgment, than the Captains, though their Baggage and Equipage is
usually greater; unless the number of their Companies do make 2 or 3 Files of
Hutts requisite for the Soldiers, in which case only the breadth of the Field
Officers Lodgments was proportionately enlarged.

fig: (...)th.


A the Colonlls Lodgemt 68 foot broad and 80 foot long
B the St Colonlls Lodgemt 40 foot broad and 40 foot long
C the Majors Lodgemt 40 foot broad and 40 foot long
D the Provost Marshalls Lodgemt 20 foot long and 24 foot broad
E the Captains Lodgemts 40 foot long and 24 foot broad
F the Cherurgeons Lodgemt 40 foot long and 24 foot broad
G the Quarterm and Lodgemt 40 foot long and 17 foot broad
H the Chaplains Lodgemt 40 foot long and 17 foot broad


I the ^acuity for the Carriage etc 100 foot long and 68 foot wide
K the Suttlers and Pictuallers hutts 20 foot long and wide
according to the Company they belong to
L the Street between the Offics Lodgemts and the Suttlers and
Victuallers 40 foot wide
M the Street between the Officers Lodgems and the
files of hutts 20 foot wide
n the files of hutts for ye Soldiers 180 foot long 8 foot wide
o the Lanes between the (...) hutts 8 foot wide
from p to q are the places for ye pikes and muskets
the Square ones whereof are for ye musket
Place this foll. 96
2. All the Field Officers, except the Colonel, and all the Captains, are
almost in the very Rear of the Lodgment, and consequently farthest from the
Line and Alarm place, where they ought to be the very first.

3. There is no Breast-work between the Line of Circumvallation, and the very
Colors and Arms of the Regiment, so that should the Line by surprise be entered
by the Enemy, he may the more easily act his ends.

4. Twenty foot in the length of the 200 for the private Soldiers Hutts, is cut
off, which may streighten them too much.

Whereas in the old manner of Incamping, there seems to be these Advantages.

First, The Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and all the Captains, are at
the head of the Lodgment, and nearest the Alarm place, and the Line, where
they ought in time of need to be the very first; as well to give the requisite
Orders to the Guards in Function, as to act in their own persons; and also the
more to hasten the Soldiers to them, which they are the more apt to do, when
they know their chief Officers are on the place to take notice who is most
diligent; and to dispose of them to the best advantage of the service, as fast
as ever they come.

Secondly, The Field Officers and Captains are nearer the Colonel, to receive
and obey his Orders, in time of sudden need.

Thirdly, The Accommodation for the Lieutenant Colonel and Major is certainly
larger, though their Companies in number should be but equal to the Captains.

Fourthly, The private Soldiers, Corporals and Ensigns, and Lieutenants, have
20 foot more in length for their Hutts.

Fifthly, The Regiments Lodgment is open in the Front of it, which also being
next the Alarm place, where all Men generally walk and pass their time, the
Colors and Arms of the Regiment are the more exposed to prejudice, and
imbezling.

Sixthly, The whole Lodgment of the Regiment is shut up by the old way of
Incamping, and the Lodgment of the Colonel, Field Officers, and Captains, being
every one environed with a Breast-work, it makes, as it were, a Retrenchment
within the Line of Circumvallation, and renders it the more defensible, as also
it more certainly covers and secures the Colors, Pikes, and Muskets, by their
having the Colonels, Field Officers and Captains Lodgment, between them and the
Alarm place; for none can come but within the Regiments entrenched Lodgment,
to imbezel or prejudice them.

As to the narrow passages between the Field Officers and Captains Lodgment
next the Alarm place, it needs be no narrower than the Lane between the Files
of the Soldiers Hutts, and if they will pass the one, they may as well pass the
other, nay, better do it; for the utmost length of those narrow passages, is
but 24, and the utmost length of the Lane is 180 foot.

I have thus showed the Forms of the ancienter and newer way of Incamping a
Regiment, and what advantages and disadvantages seem to attend them, and so
leave it to the judgment of those who shall command in chief, to elect which
form (all things considered) they most approve.

Before I conclude what is to be observed in the Incamping of a Regiment, I
shall set down these two following particulars.

1. When that Regiment is to be quartered in one Division, which has also often
been done, (especially when Incampings are but for a very little time) the more
to shorten the work of Intrenching the whole Army, the usual manner of the
Lodgment of the Companies of it, is thus: The Colonels Company is quartered on
the right hand, the Lieutenant Colonels on the left, the Majors next the
Colonels, the eldest Captains next to him, and so all the rest of the Captains
by their Seniorities in order, from the right hand.

2. If the Regiment be quartered in two Divisions, which is the usual practice,
then the Lieutenant Colonels Company quarters on the right hand of the second
Division, and the Sergeant Majors Company on the left hand of the first
Division; the eldest Captains next the Colonels, the second on the left hand of
the second Division, the third next the eldest, the fourth next the Lieutenant
Colonels, the fifth next the third, the sixth next the fourth in the second
Division, and so all the rest of the Captains according to this order.

This is the usual method, but in the Ichnographie in the newer way of
Incamping a Regiment, I have placed the Lieutenant Colonel and his Companies
Lodgment, to close the right flank of the right hand Division, and the Majors,
to close the left flank of the left hand Division; whereby the Colonel is in
the Center of the Lodgment, the Lieutenant Colonel on the right flank of the
Regiment, and the Major on the left; which seems to be the best form of
distributing the Lodgments of the three Field Officers, and in my poor opinion,
will sooner and better answer the service on a sudden; for by the new Form of
Incamping, all the Field Officers, and Captains of the Regiment, being lodged
in the Rear of the Lodgment, are consequently farthest from the Alarm place,
and Line of Circumvallation; and can hasten to it with their Soldiers, but
through Lanes 8 Foot broad, where but 3 Men at most can pass abreast; and
therefore I offer to consideration the Lodgment of the Lieutenant Colonels and
Majors with their Companies, to be on the right and left flanks of the
Regiment; for all gross Lodgments are to be divided the one from the other, by
Streets at least 50 Foot wide; through which Street on either flank of the
Regiments Lodgments, the two Field Officers of it, may readily march their Men
up to the Alarm place about 18 abreast, when as by their own and their
Companies being lodged the usual way (the Lieutenant Colonel on the right hand
of the second Division, and the Major on the left hand of the first) they and
their Companies have but 8 Foot passage to that place of action; where it is to
be wished, they were still the very first, and well followed.

But since this is not according to the practiced Form, I only propound it to
consideration with some of the Reasons which makes me do it.

Having thus showed the several ways of Incamping a Regiment, I shall now
proceed to show how an Army may be Encamped within a Line or Intrenchment, with
the several gross Lodgments for the General, the General Officers, Train of
Artillery, Carriages, the Regiments of Horse and Foot, and all other gross
Lodgments and Requisites belonging to an Army.

Only I would first recommend to Consideration, That the Lodgment for the
Powder, Fireworks, and other combustible things, be at one of the Angles next
the Alarm places; because two parts of four of that Ground, is not near other
Lodgments, and in which, if Fire should take by accident, or design, (unless
the Wind blows maliciously) they may the better avoid the danger of it.

I would still have the Powder, and Fireworks, in the General of the
Artilleries own Lodgment, and in a Redoubt apart covered with Hair-cloth, or
Sod; where his own eye, and the immediate care of his own Officers may prevent,
or remedy much mischief.

I would also recommend that the Lodgments for the Cannon, and Wagons of the
Train, might be next to one of the sides of the Alarm place, that the bringing
them in, and drawing them out, on any occasion, may be with less encumbrance to
the rest of the Camp; which will follow, if the 300 foot wideness of the Alarm
place, and not the 50 foot streets, be made the passage to their Lodgments.
When the Ground for Incamping is pitched upon, the usual way to put the doing
of it in practice, is, That the Quartermaster General, and the Officers
belonging to him, or who are to receive their Orders from him, together with
the Engineer General, and his Assistants, do forthwith meet, and on fine
Pasteboard draw several parallel Lines by a small Scale, at 300 foot distance,
(for that is the standing measure of the length of every gross Lodgment) and
then besides the said 300 foot parallel Lines, to draw other parallel Lines of
50 or 100 foot asunder for the streets, between the first Line of the gross
Lodgments, and the second Line of them; and so in sequence till they have
Lodgment Lines, and street Lines for all the Army to be Encamped; then
calculating what breadth every Lodgment is to consist of, according to the
exact numbers of every Regiment, both as to the quantity of the Companies and
Troops; and as to the true number of every Troop and Company, to divide the
said parallel Lines at 300 foot distance, into the due breadth of every
Regiments Lodgment respectively, and so of all other gross Lodgments; and to
write in the square for the Lodgment, the name of the gross Lodgment, or of the
Regiments, with the number of feet allowed in breadth to every Lodgment, and an
Alphabetical Letter in it, to which reference is to be made. This being done,
to cut off of the Pasteboard every Lodgment, and then to turn them to and fro,
until you have adjusted them on a large sheet of Paper, into a long Square,
with the Streets between every Line of the Lodgments, which are to be at least
50 foot wide, the whole breadth of the Armies Incamping, and then the other
Streets of the like wideness, where it may be between every gross Lodgment, and
gross Lodgment, the length of the Armies Incamping, and observing these
following Rules:

First, That the four Outsides of the whole Incamping which are next to the
Alarm places, be in even Lines; for else your Alarm places would not be 300
or 206 foot wide (as you like best) in the clear; which must regularly be
observed, both for the decency, and the usefulness.

Secondly, That from the proper front of the whole Incamping, there be but one
Line of Lodgments between the Alarm place, and the Generals own Lodgment.

Thirdly, That from the Alarm place next the front of the Generals own
Lodgment, even till you come at it, there be a Piazza, or space of 400 foot
wide, and on each side of his own Lodgment a Street of 200 foot wide, the whole
length of his Lodgment, for the more State and Honor, and for the Officers and
others to walk in, who resort unto him for business, or out of respect and
duty; and for his Guards to draw up in, in case of danger from the Enemy, or
tumult within the Camp.

Fourthly, The Lodgments for the General Officers, and for Strangers and
Volunteers of Quality, are usually to be in the same Line of the Generals own
Lodgment, and on the right and left hand of it, that they may be the nearer on
all sudden occasions to be advised with, and to receive his Orders; but the
General of the Artilleries Lodgment to be at one of the Angles of the whole
Incamping, which is probably farthest from, and the unlikeliest to be attacked
by the Enemy, for the Reasons before expressed.

Lastly, whereas the unequal Numbers of Regiments, and the various breadth of
other gross Lodgments renders it impossible to make the entire Camping of the
Army on the four sides of it, an exact long Square, if the breadth of every
Street between gross Lodgment, and gross Lodgment, be kept to 50 foot,
therefore they may be enlarged or shortened to a breadth sufficient to answer
the making of the four outsides of the general incamping in right Lines, which
last must never be omitted.

These are the usual Rules, and in this manner are adjusted your several
Pasteboard gross Lodgments, with the Piazza, and all their Streets, on a sheet
of large Paper; to which with some Mouth Glue, they may be fastened, so that
you may be certain if it be exactly done in the Tent or Chamber, it will be
exactly done in the Field; due care being taken.

But though the way of preparing the Camping of an Army, on Pasteboard, and
drawing parallel Lines for gross Lodgments, and for Streets, is the most usual,
and generally practiced, yet I must own, I have found it so very tedious, and
uncertain, that it put me upon finding out another, which whether it be in it
self more expeditious, and exact, or whether my being biased toward a method
I lighted upon, and have often practiced, made me more approve of it I will not
determine, but shall submit it to those whose judgments I more value than my
own.

And first I shall say that what rendered the Pasteboard method tedious, and
intricate, was, that since the Standard of the parallel Lines for Streets, was
50 foot in wideness, as well between gross and gross Lodgment, as between Line
and Line of Lodgments, I found it, after many trials, unpracticable, and was
forced to make many Calculations. For it is impossible where almost every gross
Lodgment differs in the breadth, if the Street between every gross Lodgment be
50 foot, that ever you can keep your second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth
Line of Lodgment (if your Incamping must consist of so many Lines) equal in
extent with the first; which still must be done, else your long square in the
whole Incamping cannot be kept, nor consequently, the exact breadth of the four
alarm places, on the four sides which are round the Camp; which would be both
uniform and very incommodious.

And if the Streets between gross and gross Lodgment, be more, or less, than 50
foot wide (which it is impossible to avoid) then your paralled Street Lines of
50 foot wideness, are useless; and you must calculate the wideness of the
Streets between most gross and gross Lodgments, and fling away your Pasteboard
parallel Street Lines.

This is what on trial will be found true, and it made me for my own ease
endeavor to find out a better method; which to my satisfaction I did, and I
shall set it down, as follows.

Suppose I am to incamp within a Line, an Army which consists of 17 Regiments
of Foot, every one of them of different numbers, but make in all 25400 men; and
of seven Regiments of Horse, every one of them of different numbers, but make
in all 4900 Horse; and that I have besides 12 other gross Lodgments to be
within my general Incamping viz. the Generals, three other General Officers,
the General of the Ordnances, the Strangers, the Piazza before the Generals own
Lodgment, the Sick, the Magazine, the Marketplace, the Train, and the Wagons
and Carriages.

The Ichnographie of which is in the ensuing Map Figure VI.

The first thing I do, is to calculate the breadth of every one of all these 36
gross Lodgments, viz. the 24 Regiments, and the 12 Lodgments, that are not for
Regiments, but General Officers, etc. every one of which Lodgments I mark with
Alphabetical Letters, to which I have reference; and to every Regiments
Lodgment I set down with it the number of Troops and Companies, how many
Soldiers every one consists of, and what is the exact breadth of every such
Lodgment, for the length is still 300 foot.

Secondly, Having sum'd up all their breadths, I allow (by way of estimate) 50
foot wideness for every Street between every gross and gross Lodgment; and 50
foot wideness for every Street between every Line of Lodgments, or 100 foot
wideness for the Street, between every Line of Lodgments; (as I would do, if my
Army be great, and my Camp be intended for a long time:) If my whole Incamping
be to consist of six Lines of Lodgments, then there must be five Streets the
whole breadth of the Incamping of 50 or 100 foot wide; all which wideness of
Streets, between gross and gross Lodgment, and between Line and Line of
Lodgments, I add to the breadth of the 36 gross Lodgments, which I sum up all
together, and divide by six; which is the number of Lines of Lodgments I intend
to make; and the Quotient shows me the breadth of every Line of Lodgments.

As for Example.
I find the breadth of all the Lodgments for my 17 Regiments of Foot, and 7
Regiments of Horse, to take up 12142 Foot.

I find my 12 other gross Lodgments (reckoning the Piazza for one) takes up in
breadth 4850 foot, my five Streets between Line and Line of Lodgments, take up
at 50 foot to each Street, 250 foot; and my 36 Streets between my 36 gross
Lodgments at 50 foot breadth for each Street, takes 1800 foot; all these sum'd
together, makes 19042 foot; which being divided by six, the Quotient is 3173,
which may be the breadth of every of my six Lines of Lodgments; but in regard I
leave 200 foot Street on each side of the Generals own Lodgment, and a wide
Street between the next Generals Officers Lodgment on the right and left hand
of the Generals, and a very wide Street on each side of the Magazine, where all
the Army are to attend in course, to take out their Provisions, (as is evident
in the said Map) I make still my first Line of Lodgment less in extent by some
feet, than it need to be, because I may thereby make the Streets in the other
Line of Lodgments wider between some gross and gross Lodgment, which otherwise
I could not well do; for the breadth of the first Line of Lodgments, gives the
Rule to the five subsequent Lines, which must be exactly of the like extent
with it.

Therefore though I might make every Line 3173 foot in extent, yet for the
foregoing Reasons I make the said first Line of less extent.

I begin the first of my six Lines of Lodgments on the proper front of the
whole Incamping, which usually is that which fronts toward the Enemies
Country, or where he is likeliest to attack you; and I begin that Line, First
from the midst of it with the Piazza, which is still to be 400 foot in breadth,
and to be before the Generals own Lodgment, which I always place in the second
Line of Lodgments; I then lodge on the right hand of the said Piazza, the
Regiment of Foot R. (which may be the Generals Regiment of Guards) and contains
16 Foot Companies, every one of 150 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 724 foot.
Then on the left hand of the said Piazza, I lodge the Regiment of Foot P. which
contains 14 Companies, every one of 150 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 644
foot. Then I leave a Street on the right hand of Regiment R. of 50 foot wide,
and on the left hand of the Regiment P. of 50 foot wide, and on the right of
the 50 foot Street, and on the right of Regiment R. I lodge the Foot Regiment
O. which consists of 13 Companies, every one of 150 men, and takes up in
breadth 604 foot; and on the left, of the left hand Street of 50 foot, I lodge
the Regiment of Foot Q. which contains 15 Companies, each of 150 Soldiers, and
takes up in breadth 684 foot; so that the Piazza of 400 foot in the Center, the
Regiments R. and O. on the right hand with the Street of 50 foot between them,
and the Regiment P. and Q. on the left hand of the Piazza, with the 50 Foot
Street between them, make up in breadth for the first Line of Lodgments 3156
foot, which being 17 foot less in extent, than it might be I six upon; and
neither more or less feet must be in every of the remaining five Lines of
Lodgments.

The second Line of Lodgments, as all others, I begin in the middle of it, for
by doing so, and then fixing Lodgments on the right and left hand of the said
middle Lodgment, I know what is left for the two outwardmost Lodgments of that
Line, which else I should not be able exactly to do; and when I know that, I
accordingly proportion the Regiments that are the outwardmost of the Line and
the Streets breadth next to them.

As for Example.
I begin the second Line of Lodgments with the Generals own, which is in the
midst of it, and is 600 foot in breadth, (for the length of 300 foot for every
Lodgment whatever is still the same) then I allow always 200 foot Street on
each side of the Generals own Lodgment, which with the 400 foot Piazza before
it, makes room for his Guards to draw up, and for all Comers and Goers to walk
in, till they are dispatched, which is for use as well as state. On the right
hand of the Generals Lodgment, and of the Street 200 foot wide, I place the
Lodgment of the first General Officer B. B. which I allow to be 400 foot in
breadth, and on the left side of the Generals Lodgment, and the Street 200 foot
wide, I place the second General Officers Lodgment C. C. for which I allow 300
foot in breadth; then on the right of the Lodgment B. B I leave a Street 90
foot wide, and on the right of that 90 foot Street, I place another General
Officers Lodgment marked D. D. of 300 foot in breadth; and on the left of the
Lodgment C. C I leave a Street 90 foot wide, and on the left of that Street, I
place the Lodgment E. E. of 300 foot wideness, for Strangers, and Volunteers of
quality; the two Streets 90 foot wide apiece between B B. and D. D. and C. C.
and E. E. being between three General Officers Lodgments, and that of the
Strangers of quality is for honor to them, and for the larger space for the
attendance of those who belong unto them, or come for business, or respect, to
wait on them.

I then find the Generals own Lodgment 600 foot, the two Streets of 200 foot in
breadth on each side of it 400 foot, the four other Lodgments for three General
Officers, and the Strangers, with the 90 foot Street between the two first
General Officers Lodgments, amount in all in extent to 2480 foot, so that I
have but 676 foot for the Lodgment of two Foot Regiments (which must be always
at the ends of every Line of Lodgments,) and for the Streets between Lodgment
D. D. on the right hand, and E. E. on the left hand, I therefore place the Foot
Regiment A. consisting of eight Companies, every one of 100 men, which takes up
in breadth 276 foot on the right of the Lodgment D. D. and the Foot Regiment B.
consisting of nine Companies, every one of 100 Soldiers, which takes up in
breadth 300 foot on the left hand of the Lodgment E. E. and I find I have 100
foot left besides; which I divide into two Streets, each of 50 foot wide, and
all those seven Lodgments, with the six Streets between them, make up in all in
wideness, 3156 foot, which is the just breadth of the front Line of Lodgments,
and shuts up my second Line of Lodgments, at both ends whereof I have a Foot
Regiment lodged, which always on ht to be in every Line of Lodgments, except in
that of the General of the Ordnance, and where the Wagons are placed; for the
two ends of every Line of Lodgments being next the Alarm place, must still
have Foot lodged there, to be at hand to defend the Line and Fortifications
which shuts up, and flanks the whole Incamping.

I begin my third Line as the first and second from the midst, or center of it;
first I lodge there the Regiment of Horse Z. which consists of 10 Troops, every
one of 100 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 808 foot; on the right of Regiment
Z. I leave a Street of 50 foot wide, and on the right of that Street I place
the Regiment of Horse Y. which consists of nine Troops, every one of 100
Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 738 foot; then on the left hand of Regiment
Z, I leave also a Street of 50 foot wide, and on the left of that Street I
lodge the Regiment of Horse X. which consists of eight Troops, every one of 100
Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 668 foot. I then find that the three
Regiments of Horse Z. Y. X. with the Street 50 foot wide between the Regiment
Z. and Regiment Y. and between Regiment Z. and Regiment X. with the Street 50
foot wide between them, takes up in breadth 2314 foot; whereby I have left to
complete that third Line of Lodgments but 842 foot, within which I must lodge
two Foot Regiments, with their Streets between Regiment Y. on the right, and
Regiment X. on the left, I do therefore on the right hand end of the third Line
of Lodgments, place the Foot Regiment D. consisting of 11 Companies, every one
of 100 Foot Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 348 foot; and on the left hand
end of the Line, the Foot Regiment E. consisting of 12 Companies, every one of
100 Soldiers, which takes up in breadth 372 foot; and I find 122 foot left,
which I divide into two Streets, each of 61 foot wideness, and all these five
Lodgments with the four Streets between, are 3156 foot wide, which is the due
extent of the third Line.

I then proceed to the fourth Line of Lodgments, and begin at, or near the
midst or center of it, when I cannot exactly do it there, with the Lodgment L.
L. which is the place for the Market, and contains 400 foot in wideness, I then
leave a Street 50 foot wide on the right of L. L. and place the Regiment of
Horse W. which consists of seven Troops, every one of 100 Soldiers, and takes
up in breadth 598 foot; then I leave a Street of 50 foot wide on the left of L.
L. and place on the left of that Street, the Regiment of Horse V. which
consists of six Troops, every one of 100 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 528
foot. Then I place in the right of the Regiment of Horse W. the Regiment of
Foot N. which consists of 12 Companies, every one of 150 Soldiers, and takes up
in breadth 564 foot, with a Street of 46 foot wide between the Regiment of Foot
N. and the Regiment of Horse W. which shuts up the right end of the fourth Line
of Lodgments, and then on the left of the Horse Regiment V. I leave a Street of
50 foot wide, and place the Lodgment G. G. which is 300 foot wide, for the
sick; when this is done, I find I have left to close the left end of the said
fourth Line of Lodgment, but 570 foot, I therefore lodge at the left end of
that fourth Line the Foot Regiment M. which consists of 11 Companies, every one
of 150 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 524 foot, and so rests 46 foot for the
wideness of the Street between Lodgment G. G. and Foot Regiment M. all which
six Lodgments with the five Streets between them, takes up in breadth 3156
foot, which is exactly the due breadth of the fourth Line of Lodgments.

I then proceed to the 5th Line of Lodgments, and begin about the middle, where
I cannot exactly do it at the middle with the Lodgment K. K. which is the
Magazine for the Victuals, and contains in breadth 500 foot, on the right I
leave a street 136 foot wide, and on the right of that street, I place the
Regiment of Horse S. which consists of four Troops, every one of which is 100
Soldiers, the breadth whereof is 388 foot; and on the left of the Lodgment K.
K. I leave a street of 136 foot wide, and on the left of that street I place
the Horse Regiment T. consisting of five Troops, every one of 100 Soldiers, and
contains in breadth 458 foot; so that all my Cavalry I place in the midst of
the General Incamping, that the Infantry may be still lodged nearest the Alarm
places, and Works; then on the right of the Regiment I leave a street of 50
foot wide, and on the right of that street I place the Foot Regiment I; which
consists of eight Companies, every one of 150 Soldiers, and takes in breadth
404 Foot; all which four Lodgments with the three streets between them, I find
takes up in breadth 2072 Foot, whereby I have left to my fifth Line of
Lodgments but 1084 Foot, and therefore proportion the two remaining Gross
Lodgments, with the streets between them, accordingly. To complete that Line of
Lodgments, I leave therefore on the right of the Regiment I. a 50 Foot street,
and at the right of it I place the Lodgment I. I. which is for the Wagons and
Carriages, which takes up 500 Foot in breadth, and shuts up the right end of my
5th Line of Lodgments, where I choose to place the Carriages, because it is next
the Alarm place, that those bulky Carriages may never come within the 50 Foot
streets, lest it might incommodate all the Lodgments in them.

Then on the left of the Regiment T. I leave a street of 50 Foot wide, and on
the left of it I lodge the Regiment of Foot L, which consists of 10 Companies,
every one of 150 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 484 Foot, which shuts up the
left end of my 5th Line of Lodgments, all which six Gross Lodgments placed in
it, with the five streets between, takes up in breadth 3156 Foot, which is the
exact breadth of that Line.

I then proceed to my sixth, and last Line of Lodgments, in which I must place
the seven remaining Gross Lodgments, of my 36 Lodgments, and I begin in the
midst of it, by placing the Foot Regiment H. which consists of 15 Companies,
every one of 100 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 444 Foot; on the right of
the Regiment H. I leave a street 50 Foot wide, and on the right of that street
I lodge the Foot Regiment K. consisting of nine Companies, every one of 150
Soldiers, which takes up in breadth 444 Foot, and on the left of Regiment H. I
leave a street of 50 Foot wide, and on the left of that street I lodge the
Regiment of Foot G. which consists of 14 Companies, every one of 100 Soldiers,
and takes in breadth 420 Foot; then on the right of the Regiment K. I leave a
street of 49 Foot wide, and on the right thereof I place the Lodgment H. H.
which is for the Artillery, and contains in breadth 400 Foot; then in the left
of the Regiment G. I leave a street 49 Foot wide, and on the left of it I place
the Foot Regiment F. which consists of 13 Companies, every one of 100 Soldiers,
which takes in breadth 396 Foot; all which five Lodgments, with the four
streets between them, take up 2302 Foot in breadth; so that there remains but
854 Foot, to complete the 6th Line of Lodgments, and I have two Gross Lodgments
to place in it with the streets, between them one of those Gross Lodgments, is
the General of the Ordnances F. F. which takes in breadth 450 Foot; with which
I close the left end of my 6th Line, for the Reasons formerly mentioned; and
the other Gross Lodgment is the Foot Regiment C. which consists of 10
Companies, every one of 100 Soldiers, and takes up in breadth 324 Foot; so that
I have but 80 Foot left for the two streets between Lodgment H. H. and F. F.
and Lodgment F. and C. which therefore I divide equally into two Forty Foot
wide streets; all which seven Lodgments, with the six streets between them,
take up in breadth 3156 Foot, which is the exact breadth that my 6th and last
Line of Lodgments ought to consist of; so that your entire Camping of an Army
which has 36 such Gross Lodgments, and contains 25400 Foot, 4900 Horse, with
all the Lodgments for the General, General Officers Train, Wagons, Piazza, for
Strangers, for the Sick, for the Magazine, and for the Marketplace, takes up
in breadth 3156 Foot, and in depth 2050 Foot. As I place a Lodgment in any Line
of Lodgments, I strike it out of the List of Lodgments, that thereby I may see
what is placed, and what is to be placed; else it would bring things into
disorder.

When I have resolved what the Extent of the first Line of Lodgments shall be
(which must be always less wide, than it might be (for the Reasons
beforementioned) then I see how many Gross Lodgments may be in every Line of
Lodgments, and how much in all is left for the streets between Gross and Gross
Lodgment, and proportion the breadth of my streets accordingly; but I never
have any such street less than 40 Foot wide. All this I draw up first without a
Scale, but set down the breadth of every Lodgment in the Lodgment, and the
breadth of every street between Lodgment and Lodgment; and when I have thus
roughly done all my Lines of Lodgments and their streets, and find every Line
of Lodgments punctually answer the breadth of the first Line of Lodgments, then
I do it exactly by a Scale, which is finished in an hour, and then cutting them
out in Pasteboard, or Paper-Royal, I write in the square of every Lodgment,
what Lodgments are in every Line of Lodgments, what wideness of streets is
between every Lodgment in every Line, and what Lodgment or Vacuity on the
right, and left hand, is next to every Lodgment, in every Line of Lodgments;
and then by Mouth-Glew, or Pasting, I fix them in a sheet of Paper, which makes
the Map or Figure of the whole Incamping; and may forthwith be unpasted, or
unglew'd by the Quartermaster General, and distributed accordingly; or which is
much better, he may keep the said Map, and give to every Lodgment in Paper the
quantity of Feet in breadth that it is to have, in what Line of Lodgments it is
to be in, and in what part of it; who, or what is on the right, and left hand
of it, and the wideness of the street on each hand of it, whereby when every
Lodgment is thus particularly set down, there can hardly be any Error in the
laying it out, unless by gross Negligence, or Wilfulness; either of which must
never 'scape unpunished in those who are guilty of it.

This is one of the ways I usually practice.

Another way is thus, which I think is briefer, and as certain

I cast up the whole breadth of all the Lodgments and Streets as before, and
divide it by six, because I resolve to have six Lines of Lodgments; then I
resolve my first Line of Lodgments shall be of less Extent than it may be, for
the Reasons before set down.

Then I find I may place the Piazza of 400 Foot wide, and the four largest
Regiments of Foot R. O. P. Q. in the Front Line, which four Regiments with the
Piazza I find take up in Extent but 3056 Foot, and then I have but 100 Foot
left, which I divide into two Streets of 50 Foot each, between Regiment R. and
O. on the right of the Piazza; and between P. and Q. on the left hand of it,
and all those five Lodgments, with the two Streets, take up in Extent 3156
Foot; which being 17 Foot less than I might make the first Line of Lodgments to
consist of, I fix on it and write it down.

In the second Line of Lodgment, where I always place the Generals Lodgment in
the Center, (that the Piazza on the first Line, may be before it) and the other
three General Officers, and the Strangers, and unregimented Volunteers of
Quality, and two Regiments of Foot, one to close each end of that Line, I find
those seven Lodgments take up in breadth 2476 Foot, viz. Lodgment A. A. 600
Foot, Lodgment B. B. 400 Foot, Lodgment C. C. 300 Foot, Lodgment D. D. 300
Foot, Lodgment E. E. 300 Foot, Lodgment of the Foot Regiment A. 276 Foot,
Lodgment of the Foot Regiment B. 300 Foot; And then I have left to complete my
second Line of Lodgments but 680 Foot, which are for the six Streets, between
the said seven Lodgments; I therefore give thereof 200 Foot Street on each side
of the Generals Lodgment, and 50 Foot Street between the four other Lodgments,
all which making but 600 Foot, I add to the Streets between the two Lodgments
of the next chief General Officers on the right hand of the Generals Street of
200 Foot, 40 Foot, and on the left hand of the General Officers and the
Strangers Lodgments, next the 200 Foot Street of the Generals own Lodgment, 40
Foot more, which makes those two Streets 90 Foot wide each, and compleats the
Extent of my second Line of Lodgments 3156 Foot.

I find the three Regiments of Horse Z. Y. X in the third Line of Lodgments,
and the Foot Regiment D. to close it at the right end, and the Foot Regiment E.
to close it at the left end, take up, in breadth, 2934 Foot, viz. Regiment of
Horse Z. 808 Foot; Regiment of Horse Y. 738 Foot; Regiment of Horse X. 668
Foot; Regiment of Foot D. 348 Foot; Regiment of Foot E. 372 Foot; so that there
remains but 222 Foot for the four Streets between the said five Lodgments,
which at 50 Foot to a Street is but 200 Foot; therefore I add the 22 Foot
remaining to the Street between the Regiment of Horse Y. and the Regiment of
Foot D. and between the Regiment of Horse X. and the Regiment of Foot E. which
two Streets being 61 Foot wide each of them, makes my third Line of Lodgment
also exactly 3156 Foot in Extent.

I find in my 4th Line of Lodgments I must place six Gross Lodgments, and
therefore choose those to consist of the Lodgments for the Regiments of Horse
V. and W. and between them near the midst of the Line, the Marketplace L. L.
for the equal coming to it from all parts, (always observing where the number
of Lodgments, in a Line are even, to begin as near the midst of it as I can;
since I cannot in such case begin at the very midst, which I may still do where
the Number of Lodgments are odd:) the second Lodgment on the left from the
Marketplace, is G. G. for the Sick; I then close my 4th Line at the right end,
with the Foot Regiment N. and at the left end with the Foot Regiment M. all
which Lodgments take up in breadth 2914 Foot, viz. Regiment of Foot M. 524
Foot; Lodgment for the Sick G. G. 300 Foot; Lodgment for the Regiment of Horse
V. 528 Foot; Marketplace 400 Foot; Lodgment for the Regiment of Horse W. 598
Foot, and Lodgment for the Regiment of Foot N. 564 Foot; so that I have left
for the five Streets between the said six Lodgments, but 242 Foot, which I
divide thus; 50 Foot to every of the three innermost Streets, and but 46 Foot
to the two outwardmost Streets: all which makes up the exact Number of 3156
Foot, which is the due Extent of the 4th Line of Lodgments.

I find then that I have 13 Gross Lodgments to be placed in my remaining 5th
and 6th Lines of Lodgments, to complete the 36 Gross Lodgments in the whole. I
therefore place in the 5th Line these six Gross Lodgments, near the midst of it
the Magazine of Victuals K. K. on the right of the Magazine, the Regiment of
Horse S. on the left of it, the Regiment of Horse T; on the right of the Horse
Regiment S. the Foot Regiment I. and then on the right of that Regiment, to
close my Line on the right hand of the Lodgment I. I. for the Wagons, Carts,
etc. (for the reason beforementioned) then on the left hand of the Horse
Regiment T. I close the Line on that hand, with the Foot Regiment L. all which
six Gross Lodgments take up in breadth 2734 Foot, viz. Regiment of Foot L. 484
Foot; Regiment of Horse T. 458, K. K. place for the Magazine of Victuals, 500
Foot, Regiment of Horse S. 388 Foot, Regiment of Foot I. 404 Foot, place for
the Wagons, Carts, etc. 500 Foot; so that there remains 422 Foot to be divided
into five Streets, between the said six Gross Lodgments; I therefore allow 50
Foot to each of the two Streets on the right of the Magazine for Victuals, and
50 Foot for the one Street on the left hand of the said Magazine between the
Regiment of Horse T. and the Regiment of Foot L. which closes the left end of
the Line, and I allow 136 Foot for each of the Streets on the right and left of
the said Magazine K. K. because of the constant resort of the Carriages to it,
and of the crowd of the Soldiery which come to receive Provisions for Man and
Horse-meat; as also that if Fire should happen, the more hands may come to
quench it: All which six Lodgments, and the five Streets between them, make up
in all 3156 Foot in breadth, which is the due Extent of my 5th Line of
Lodgments.

In my sixth and last Line I must place seven Gross Lodgments, viz. in the
midst of it the Regiment of Foot H. the three other Lodgments on the right of
Regiment H. I place the Foot Regiment K. next to it the Lodgment H. H. for the
Artillery, and next to it the Lodgment F. F. for the General of the Artillery,
the Powder, and the Fireworks, with which I close the right end of that Line
(for the Reasons before set down) and then on the left of the Foot Regiment H.
I place the other three Gross Lodgments, that of the Foot Regiment G. next on
the left of Regiment H. next on the left of Regiment G. the Foot Regiment F.
and next on the left of it the Foot Regiment C. with which I close the Line on
the left end: All which seven Gross Lodgments take up in all 2878 Foot, viz.
Regiment of Foot C. 324. Regiment of Foot F. 396 Foot, Regiment of Foot G. 420
Foot. Regiment of Foot H. 444. Regiment of Foot K. 444. Lodgment for the
Artillery H. H. 400 Foot, Lodgment for the General of the Ordnance, Powder, and
Fireworks F. F. 450 Foot; so that there remains but 278 Foot for the six
treets, between the said seven Gross Lodgments, which I thus divide; 50 Foot to
each Street on the right and left of Regiment of Foot H. 49 Foot for each
Street, between Regiment K. and Lodgment H. H. and between Regiment G. and
Regiment F. and 40 Foot for each Street between Lodgment H H. and Regiment F.
F. and between Foot Regiment F. and Foot Regiment C. all which makes 3156 Foot,
which is the due Extent of my sixth and last Line of Lodgments, and exactly
compleats the long square of the entire Lodgment of the 36 Gross Lodgments.

Either of these two ways before set down may be practiced, but I still find
the latter more expeditious, and therefore make oftnest use of it.

Though the Figure Number VI. does consist of six Lines of Lodgments, yet
according to the nature, advantage, or disadvantages of the Ground your
standing Camp is to be in; you may make your Camp consist of more or fewer
Lines, as you find it most advantageous.

As for Example.
If I am limited to a certain Ground for my standing Camp, by reason that it is
to command some beneficial Pass, or that it is to bridle a considerable City,
or Town, where your Enemy has his Arcenals, Magazines, or Bridges, over some
Navigable River; and that by so placing my standing Camp before his Army is
Rendezvouz'd in or near that City or Town, I may make it of little use to him
as to his invading the Country I am to defend; for if I am posted so near it,
as that he cannot imbattle his Army but under the reach of my Artillery, or
march his Squadrons and Battalions over his Bridges, but so as I may attack as
many of them as I think fit, and which are come over, while the rest are on the
other side, or marching to those which are got over; I say, if in these two
Cases, or in other the like Cases, I am limited to a set proportion of Ground
to incamp in, I will make the length and depth of my Lines of Lodgments
accordingly: As for instance, if by making my standing Camp to consist but of
four Lines of Lodgments, I thereby get some Eminences of Ground within my Camp,
which if I made it consist of five or six Lines, I should be necessitated to
leave out, and consequently must secure such heighths, by making Forts on the
top of them, and Lines about the foot of them, which will be a prejudice to me
if done; and by the Enemies possessing them, a disadvantage to me if not done,
I would make the Number of my Lodgment Lines but four; and on the other side,
if the Ground for my standing Camp be such, that if I should make but four or
five Lines of Lodgments, I should thereby enclose within my Camp, or border
upon it, some Moorish Lands, I would make it consist of 6 or 7 Lines of
Lodgments, to avoid that mischief.

These two Instances will evidence no standing Rule can be given of how many
Lines of Lodgments the settled Incamping shall consist; for that must still
depend upon the judgment of the General, and nature of the Ground; wherefore
the Romans manner of making their standing Camps always an exact Square, and
the usual modern way of making it a long Square, may neither of them be always
the best.

After the Ground for the standing Camp is resolved on, and that in Pasteboard
or Double Paper, the Lodgments are agreed upon with how many Lines of Lodgments
deep the whole shall consist of, it is the duty of the Quartermaster General,
and of the Engineer General, to wait on the General with it, who approving of
it, the Quartermaster General with his Assistants, and the Quartermasters of
every Foot Regiment, and of every Troop of Horse, with those appointed to take
care of the Lodgments, for the General Officers, the Train, the Strangers, the
Sick, and the Marketplace (if you will have it within the Intrenchment) are to
receive from him respectively, their Number of Foot in breadth, (for the length
never alters) which every one of their Lodgments is to consist of, and also in
what Line of Lodgments, and who is, or what is next on their right, or left
hand, to be lodged or left void, with the breadth of the Street on each side of
the Lodgment, when it varies from the usual wideness of 50 Foot, and then the
four Angles of the whole Camp, and afterward of every Lodgment are to be
staked out, with the Streets, which are to run the whole breadth of the Camp,
as also between Gross Lodgment and Gross Lodgment; after which, every Gross
Lodgment is to be gone upon, by those appointed to work on the Hutts, and the
Breast-work, which is to inviron every Gross Lodgment, yet so as no hands must
be diverted, of the Foot Regiments from intrenching the whole Army, for that of
all things, must be the very first gone about, and finished; then the Engineer
General leaving the 300 or 206 Foot wideness for the Alarm place, round the
whole Incamping, is to show the General in Paper, his Project for fortifying
the Camp, with the several sorts of Works which are to defend it, and flank the
Line; always having the largest Bastions, or Forts, on the four Angles of the
whole Intrenchment, and the most capacious Works on the rising'st Grounds, to
plant the most Ordnance on, the better to command the Fields without the Camp,
and with Graffs and Rampards, the deeper and the broader, to those larger
Works; all things being seen by the General, and agreed unto by him, the
Engineer General with his Assistants, is immediately to put them in practice.

And first he is to stake out the Alarm place, which is to be the 300 or 206
Foot in wideness, between the Circumvallation Line, and the Lodgments of the
whole Camp; then to stake out the four Lines of the whole Circumvallation of
it, erecting long Poles with Streamers on them, at the four right Angles of
them; then to turn up one Sod all along the said Lines, for the better
direction of those, who are to raise the Parapet, the whole length of it;
leaving the Gaps which are to be at the Entrance or Gorge of every Work or
Bastion, which is to flank and defend it.

Next to stake out and mark the Fortifications, which are to secure the Camp,
with their Graffs, and the distance between the undermost inward Sods of the
Parapet, and Rampards, and the outwardmost nearest the Graff; then he is to sum
up how many Feet invirons the whole Line, which shuts up the Camp, together
with the several Works which are to defend it round; afterward he is to cast
up how much in proportion to the just number of the whole Infantry of the Army,
every Regiment is to do of all those Works and Lines, and to appoint every one
of them the part they are to perform, which he is afterward to stake out to
their Officers, that every Regiment may know its proper task, and where it
begins and ends, and then they are without delay to fall to their Work, and
never cease till it be finished.

This apportionating to every Regiment of Foot, its equal share of the whole
Work, is done by the Rule of Three, and when thereby the exact share of
Regiment A. is found, the like must be done as to every other Regiment, till
all of them be gone through. In what is already expressed, I take it for granted,
that the Works to flank the Line as well as the Line it self, are only in
effect Parapets, and that may serve for a short time of Incamping, or when you
are certain the Enemies Army cannot attack yours; but if it be for a standing
Camp, and in which you will secure your self against his Attempts; then all
your Works which flank your Line, ought to be filled with Earth, to the height
you judge needful, and from that height to erect your Parapets, which may be
Cannon-proof, with Portholes, or with great Cannon Gabions well filled with
Earth, or Skite Gates through the Flanks and Faces of the said Works; and in
such cases, the usual method is to have your Pioneers or hired Soldiers, or
both, to do those extraordinary labors; and this must be resolved upon at your
first Incamping; since it will be too late to go upon it afterward, because
when your Bastions and other Works, to defend the Line, are only thin Parapets,
made 6 foot high, both the casting the earth over those Parapets, to fill the
Vacuities will be of hard labor, and also the Sod Work too weak to keep in the
burden of new Earth, which by the great weight of it may belly and slide, and
all Works which have Rampards, ought to have the Earth filled, but as the
Sod-work rises, both that the casting in of the Earth may be the easilier done,
and that it may have the more time to settle as the Work rises.

Besides if your entire Line, and the Work which scours it, is only to be six
Foot high, and but six Foot thick at the bottom, and three at the top, the
Sod-work which faces and lines it, is usually but one Sod thick, which is
sufficient to keep in the Earth between, giving it so much battering; but if
you come to fill the Vacuities of your flanking Works with Earth, then you
ought to lay double, sometimes treble Rows of Sods, and those well ram'd, to
face and line your Works; also good store of Frith must be mingled amongst the
Earth, which fills the Vacuities; both which will bind it so, as it shall not
be apt to slide.

This Caution I esteemed not amiss to set down.

The Ichnographie of an Army Encamped, is in the following Figure Number VI.
with a Table annexed, as also a Prospect, how a Line may be fortified, and
secured.

When the whole Circumvallation of the Camp is entirely finished, for that must
be the first Work of all, the general safety depending on it, the General of
the Ordnance, and his Officers, and others belonging to the Train of Artillery,
must mount their Cannon or Fieldpieces, on the several Works which are to
command the Country about the Camp, and to defend the Line which invirons it;
and to have them laden with Round or Case-shot, and a sufficient quantity of
Ball and Powder, and number of Gunners and Matrosses, constantly to attend the
Service. If your Camp be designed for a standing one, and that you apprehend an
Enemy will straiten you in it, because you are too weak to give him Battle;
then I would also raise some Cavaleers, or mounts of Earth, of a reasonable
height, and plant the longest Ordnance on them, the more to command the
Fields; the^e Cavaleers I would raise on the most advantageous places in the
Bullwarks, at the Angles, and in the Works which inviron the whole Camp.

Whilst these things are doing, the Quartermaster General and his Officers,
ought to distribute to the General Officers, and those of the Train, as also to
the Colonels of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, etc. the quantities, dimensions and
places, where their several Lodgments respectively are to be; the boundaries or
outmost Lines of every one, being forthwith to be staked out; at the four
Angles of every Gross Lodgment respectively, and on those Stakes, small
Streamers of Taffaty, or other slight Stuff, are to be placed; and of the
color of the respective Regiments, or General Officers, to the end that all of
every Lodgment, by those small Streamers may know, where they are to lodge, and
how much ground is allotted for it; then the Quartermasters of the Regiments,
and of the Troops, with those appointed for the Lodgment of the General, and
others, unregimented Officers, are immediately to fall to work, in dividing
their Lodgments, and in making their Hutts and Stalls, the Qu^rtermasters of
Troops with their Corporals, and the Se^geants of Foot with their Corporals,
are to see the (...) and Stalls finished, for the Lod^ments of their respect
(...) Troops and Companies, and the due regularity in hutt^g or pitching their
Tents, punctually observed; according

feet A Foot Regimt of 8 Comp. every one 100 men breadth of its Lodgmt 276 B
Foot Regimt of 9 such Companyes breadth -- 300 C Foot Regimt of 10 such Comp.
breadth -- 324 D Foot Regimt of 11 such Comp. breadth -- 348 E Foot Regt. of 12
such Comp. breadth -- 372 F Foot Regt. of 13 such Comp. breadth -- 396 G Foot
Regt. of 14 such Comp. breadth -- 420 H Foot Regt. of 15 such Comp. breadth --
444 Soldiers 9200 Breadth of Lodgmts. -- 2880 foot

(...) Foot Regt. of 8 Comp. every one 150 men breadth -- 404 (...) Foot Regt.
of 9 such Comp. breadth -- 444 (...) Foot Regt. of 10 such Comp. breadth -- 484
(...) Foot Regt. of 11 such Comp. breadth -- 524 (...) Foot Regt. of 12 such
Comp. breadth -- 564 (...) Foot Regt. of 13 such Comp. breadth -- 604 (...)
Foot Regt. of 14 such Comp. breadth -- 644 (...) Foot Regt. of 15 such Comp.
breadth -- 684 (...) Foot Regt. of 16 such Comp. breadth -- 724 Soldiers of
these 9 Regts. 16200 Breadth of the Lodgmt. -- 5076 foot

(...) Horse Regt. of 4 Troops each 100 men breadth -- 388 (...) Horse Regt. of
5 such Troops breadth -- 458 (...) Horse Regt. of 6 such Troops breadth -- 528
(...) Horse Regt. of 7 such Troops breadth -- 598 (...) Horse Regt. of 8 such
Troops breadth -- 668 (...) Horse Regt. of 9 such Troops breadth -- 738 (...)
Horse Regt. of 10 such Troops breadth -- 808 ^orse 4900 Breadth of the 7
Lodgemts. -- 4186 foot

(...) Generals own Lodgmt. breadth -- 600 (...) One Officer General Lodgmt.
breadth -- 400 (...) One other General Officer Lodgmt breadth -- 300 (...) One
other Genll. Officer Lodgmt breadth -- 300 (...) Strangers Lodgment breadth --
300 (...) General of ye Ordance Lodgmt breadth -- 450 (...) Lodgmt for ye sick
breadth -- 300 (...) Lodgemt for ye Artilerye breadth -- 400 (...) Lodgemts for
ye Wagons Carts etc breadth -- 500 (...) Lodgemt for ye Magazine of Victual
breadth -- 500 (...) Place for ye Markett breadth -- 400 (...) Piazza before ye
Generals Lodgmt breadth -- 400 ^tall of ye breadth of these 12 Lodgements --
4850 foot

^e Numbers which are set down in the ^uerall Lodgemts are the Numbers of feet
^ontained in ye breadth of each Lodgemt

Figure six This is the Lodgement of an Ar^y in six Lines of Lodgements the
whole Consisting 7 Regimts. of Horse which make in all 49^ ^n and 17 Regts. of
^oote which make in all 25400 The Generals Lodgement (...) O^ers Genll. Genll
of the Ordnance Train Wagons Piazza Lodgemts. for strangers, for the sick
(...) ^gazines and Market place


Place this foll: ^20

to the beforementioned Rules, and that no time be lost.

The Romans in hot Weather, made the Soldiers by turns, to sprinkle well with
Water all those Streets round their Line, as also the Piazza, other Streets,
and void places, where the Officers and Soldiers use to walk all the day long;
and if something like this were done in Camps, it would be of good use.

The distributing the Guards, the Word, and going the Rounds, I would recommend
to have observed in the Camp, as in the Garrison; only if you suspect to be
assaulted in your Camp, you must have Parties of Horse, Day and Night;
especially in the Night, beating the ways, and scouring the Country on all
sides, that you may have timely notice for your defense; And if you believe
your Enemy will attempt you in the Night, it would be advisable to have great
Piles of Wood, and Fagots, a convenient distance without your Line, to set them
on Fire when your Enemy is ready to begin his Work, the better to see how
effectively to bestow your small and great shot, amongst them; and still in
case of Alarums or Assaults, those Regiments must be led to defend that part of
the Line, which they are the nearest unto, the like for the Horse; and every
Regiment must know the portion of the Line, which they are to make good before
there be need, lest then it may be too late. There seems to be ten Particulars
which ought (if they be attainable) to be minded, in Incamping an Army in a
standing Camp.

I. That the Camp be settled in a safe place, that is to say, that no heighths
or eminent Grounds be so near it, as that an Enemy seizing on them on a sudden,
may both by seeing into your Camp, or planting his Cannon and Mortar-pieces on
those heighths, annoy, and disturb it.

II. If it be possible, that it be seated on a Navigable River; for by the
benefit thereof, the expenses of bringing Victuals, Ammunition, and Forage,
will be cheap and expeditious, but otherwise dear and slow, if all be brought
on the Axel-tree, or Backs of Beasts; for whatever is so brought, the Bringers
(when it is for Sale) so heighten the price, as the poor Soldiers are hardly
able to buy what they need.

But if you cannot Camp near a Navigable River, you must never omit to have
your standing Camp by a River; for the dung of the Horses, and the stanch of
the Butcheries, will else hazard the infecting the very Air of the Camp;
besides Water must still be at hand for the Soldiers, the Horses, and the
Beasts of draught, to drink; and if Water can be brought about the Graff of
your standing Camp, or a great part of it, it will thereby become the more safe
and defensible.

I would still have the Butchers Quarter, near the brink of the River, that
they may with the less pains rid their Quarters of all the filth, which else
will soon be nauseous in them.

III. Great care must be taken, that no Woods or large Coppices, be too near
your Camp, lest your Enemy lodging in them, may from thence too safely annoy
you, and accommodate himself.

IV. A flat Champaign Ground is the most eligible to Incamp in, because in such
a Situation, the Enemy may be discovered, and seen afar off, the Cannon of
your Camp will be the more useful to you, and prejudicial to him; and when you
find your opportunity, you may the sooner, and the more easily draw out your
Army, and put them in Battalia to fight.

V. A standing Camp, though it be best posted in a Plain, yet there must be no
moorish or wet Ground in it, for the Vapors which will thence incessantly
arise, may soon infect your Army.

VI. Great and strict Inquiry must be made, whether the Plain your standing
Camp is to be in, cannot be overflowed by the River near it, if great Rains
should happen; and your own Engineers must diligently view, if your Enemy, (in
case he be the stronger) by making great Dams below your Camp, cannot force the
River to overflow it, though the greatest Rains will not do it; as also,
whether your Enemy being in effect the powerfuller in the Field, may not turn
the River, from above your Camp into it, in which cases, if Floods, if Dams
below, or turning of the River above, may drown your Camp, such a Situation
must not be made use of.

VII. In scituating of a standing Camp, you are to elect a place, near to which
you may have good Grazing for your Horses, and Cattle; Grounds proper for
Meadow, (which usually are near a River) and Wood and Coppice, both for Fuel,
and making your Hutts.

VIII. If the River adjoining be Navigable, or not always fordable, Bridges of
Boats must be cast over it, else you will be soon straightened by your Enemy,
and probably he will raise Mounts and Batteries on the other side the River,
which shall play into your Camp, and exceedingly annoy it, if not force you to
abandon it, and in disorder too, whereby he will have too fair an opportunity
to defeat you; therefore before your Bridges of Boats are cast over the River,
you must immediately provide to secure them against they are cast over, by
raising Forts, and Lines between the Forts, in which you may draw up safely
your Battalions and Squadrons, and likewise furnish those Forts with good
Artillery, and man them always sufficiently.

Also a competent distance above your standing Camp, you must have a Boom or
Cable under Water, or Chain ready to draw across the River, and cover and well
defend them at both ends, together with Boats well manned, thereby to defeat
any design of your Enemies, by floating Engines he may make, to destroy the
Bridges of Boats.

IX. The standing Camp must not be too scant, nor too large, but duly
proportionate to the Army, Train, and Baggage, you are to lodge in it; and all
the ways unto it, you must with your best industry secure, and what you cannot
secure, you must spoil and make them useless to your Enemy.

X. Lastly, If there be any Eminencies of Ground near your standing Camp, and
yet without your Line that invirons it, you must secure those heighths, not
only by making Redoubts or Forts on the tops of them, but also by making a
Line, if you have men enough to do it, round about the foot of those heighths;
and you must make covered ways from your Camp to those Redoubts, or Forts, the
more safely to relieve them, in case your Enemy vigorously should attack them;
nor is it amiss to have Mines under them, to blow them up, should your Enemy
enter them; whereby he will be the more endamaged if they enter, or the more
deterred from entering.

All Coppices and Woods which are at too much distance to be secured by a Line,
ought to be cut down or burnt, to prevent those advantages, which else in many
ways, your Enemy will draw from them.

In making your Line, you may have sometimes unequal Grounds, through which you
run it, some being high, and some low; on the heighths of a standing Camp,
(which are natural Cavaleers) I would still make Forts, and plant my longest
Cannon on them.

Where the Ground is sandy, or gravelly, or for any cause apt to slide, I would
not depend on the facing of Sods, but drive Poles into the Ground, Wattle
between them, and fling the Earth which arises out of your Graft, between the
outwardmost and innermost Wattlings.

Where the Ground is Moorish on the Verge of your Line, and is sometimes, in
dry Seasons, passable by Horse or Foot, I would with Pallisadoes and Stockades,
secure it; or by many joined Turnspikes, or Chevaleers de Freze, and without
these I would, during the whole length of the Moorish Grounds, at a competent
distance, cut two or three broad and deep Ditches, which will fill themselves
with Water, and thereby discourage your Enemy to attack you in the weakest part
of your Line, or if he did assault you there, much incommodate him, and render
it almost impossible for him to make use of his Horse in the attempt; I have
also known in such cases, several Lines of deep and pretty large holes without,
but near your Line, made at unequal distances, and covered with slight Hurdles,
with a little Earth strewn over them, both to entangle an assaulting Enemy if
he know it not, or discourage him if he knows, or has cause to suspect it; for
it were Temerity with Foot only, to enter the Line of an environed Camp, where
Horse, and Foot, and Cannon, are ready to welcome them; and by the immediately
beforementioned methods, it will be difficult, if possible, for him in case his
Foot enter, to have them seconded by his Cavalry, without which they are much
likelier to be driven out, than to be successful.

I would likewise for the better defense of those feebler parts of your Line,
erect Batteries and Redoubts within it, the better to defend them, and to rake
your Enemy, should he enter.

There are several Cares indispensably incumbent on a Commander in chief, who
posts himself in an entrenched standing Camp, I shall enumerate some.

I. To have a Country behind his standing Camp, to supply it constantly, and
at reasonable Rates, with Victuals, Forage, and all other Necessaries, and to
preserve it, both from the incursions of the Enemy, and from the insultings or
injury of his own Army.

II. To secure thoroughly those Towns, Forts, or Fortresses, nearest to his
Camp, and in which he lodges his Magazines, which are to supply him, when the
Country cannot, or will not do it longer; and therefore he ought always,
before his Enemies are near, (whereby they may awe the Country from supplying
him, or the People of it may make that the pretense) to get into those places,
with great diligence, all the Victuals and Forage he can; and from thence to
furnish himself, with what his Camp cannot contain, or cannot be laid up dry in
it; but still to have as much Provision within the Line of his Camp, as
possibly he can, for there it is safest and at hand; for Biscuit, Cheese, Butter,
Meal, and such like meats, may be long kept in good condition, in little room,
and are ready for food without Cookery; if the Country be not perfectly well
affected to the General, he ought to take Hostages from it, to supply the
Victuals, Forage, and other Necessaries, at the rates, times and quantities,
which shall be agreed upon; these Hostages, if well chosen, and diligently kept
within the Camp, will make the Country punctual in performing, and be a
sufficient answer to make those of it, who would starve the Camp, or the Enemy,
(who else might frighten them from supplying it) that they dare not but obey,
because their Hostages else will suffer.

As the chief Commander of such a standing Camp, must make his agreement on
equal terms with the Country, for his sustenance out of it, and see to their
punctual performance of it, so he must as punctually pay the Country, according
to his Contract, since Fear and Gain, are usually the most operative motives
with the People, to make good all Agreements.

III. The Convoys of Horse and Foot, which are to secure those who must supply
your Camp, must never omit their duties, in punctually meeting, rather before
than after the hour, and in carefully conveying, what is brought to the Camp,
and must be strong in proportion to the need; for should such Parties fail of
meeting the Country, at the set time and place, it might discompose all your
Affairs, discourage the Bringers of Necessaries, and give them but too much
cause to fail, by your example; or should the Convoys by being weak or
negligent, be defeated by the Enemy, or the disaffected of the Country, you
would not only lose that one Supply, but too probably, deter the Country from
coming with another.

IV. The Major General, and Commissary General of the Horse, must make all the
Regiments of Horse and Foot, do equal and proportionate duty, according to
their Numbers, in going on such Convoys; for which end they ought to keep exact
and written Lists, of all the Parties they send on such employments, from time
to time; and inform the General of them; else if by favor any be exempted, or
favored, the duty will be the heavier, and the discontents the higher.

V. If the places in which the standing Magazines are settled, which must supply
the Camp, be at a great distance from it, or may have the Ways infested by the
Enemy, Forts ought to be erected, and well manned at competent distances, the
one from the other; into which should any of your Convoys be unexpectedly
fallen upon, they may shelter themselves, and what they Convoy, till relieved
from the Camp; for all such attempts from the Enemy, are sudden, and by
surprise, and they dare not stay to force such a Fort, lest they draw the Camp
upon them; besides when every two or three miles there are such Forts, erected
in the fittest places, they do not only make the Convoys march the more
securely, and discourage your Enemy from attempting them, but also the Country
People without Convoys are the more invited to bring their Provisions for your
sustenance.

VI. If I foresaw, my Enemy would endeavor to straiten my standing Camp, by
possessing the Country about it, I would immediately burn and drive whatever I
could not secure, in my Magazines, or within my Line, the sooner to necessitate
him to dislodge; so that no two Particulars are more carefully and speedily to
be performed, than to secure your own Victuals and Forage, and to destroy all
that your Enemy will otherwise be Master of; and doubtless the first and most
important duty of a General, is to provide Food and Ammunition for his Army;
for men can live and fight without Pay, but can do neither without Food and
Ammunition; and he who intrenches well his Camp, and has Food the longest,
must in time have the better of that War, without fighting, though his Enemy be
his Superior in strength; Gaspar de Coligny, Admiral of France, and who in
military knowledge has been exceeded by few, if by any Captains in past Ages,
would often say, War is a great Monster, which begins to be formed by the
Belly, meaning that Food ought to be the very first care of a General for his
Army.

A standing Camp thus situated, fortified, and provided for, may truly be said
to be in a good posture; but in regard all these desirable Particulars
beforementioned, are not usually to be compassed in all places; whatever is
defective by Nature, must be supplied by Art and Industry.

There are several Orders for the well regulating a Camp within it self, which
ought to be given, punctually observed, and the Breakers of them indispensibly
punished.

I. That all Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Stealing, Drawing a Sword, and
Quarrelling, be exemplarily punished, both in those who are the Guilty, and in
those who knowing it, do not detect it; for which end, daily Court Martials
ought to be held, that the Faulty may as soon suffer as their Offenses are
proved; that the Officers and Soldiers daily come to the Service of God, at the
times the several Chaplains of the Regiments are appointed to officiate; for
without the blessing of Almighty God, how can any so much as hope to prosper:
Yet alas how debauched are the Generality of the Soldiery, who hourly, as it
were, carrying their lives in their hands, ought, most of all men, to be
prepared for death; yet they, of all other Vocations, are too frequently the
least fitted for it; and though God himself does at all times, and on all
persons, forbid Wickedness, yet he repeatedly does it to the Soldiery, in the
XXIII. Chapter of Deuteronomy, and the 9th Verse, viz. When the Host goes
forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. If we own
God to be our General, which who dares deny he is, since he is pleased to call
himself the Lord of Hosts, we ought to obey his commands, and punish those who
break them, else we shall be found to be more obedient to a General, than to
our God.

II. That the Camp be kept exceeding clean, which is not only decent, but
healthy.

That none of the Soldiers do their Easements within it, but in some convenient
places, at least 100 Foot without it, as the Martials of every Regiment shall
appoint, either in the River or Brook, or in some Pits to be dug by every
Regiment for that end.

That the Troopers, every morning and evening, be made carry out of the Line,
all the dung of their Horses.

That the Butchers do the like as to all the filth in their Shambles, and be
made kill their Beeves, Sheep, etc. out of the Camp, and that all dung and
filth be buried; and that the Suttlers and Victuallers, keep their Cellars and
Kitchins sweet, and that the latter be still covered with Sods, or raw Hides,
for fear of Fire.

III. No man, without express leave of his Officer, is to go further than
Cannon-shot out of the Camp; nor lie out of the Camp, under a most severe
Penalty.

IV. That none be admitted who are Suttlers or Victuallers, to entertain
Soldiers at Night, after the Warning-piece is gone off; nor in the morning,
until the Reveille be beaten.

V. That none be admitted Suttlers or Victuallers, but by the Martial General,
who is with his Underofficers to take care, that no bad Meat or Drink be sold
to the Soldiers, or good sold at unreasonable Rates; That he set the price on
all the Camp Provisions, which are daily sold, and are not supplied out of the
Magazine; nor must any thing be sold amongst the private Soldiery, but by his
or his Officers License; and by sound of Drum, to prevent the sale of stolen
Goods, to detect the Thieves, and to hinder many other mischiefs. Many such and
other Orders are given in standing Camps and Leaguers, according to the Wisdom
of the General, the Discipline of the Army, or the present condition of the
Country.

I have the longer and more particularly, insisted on this part of the Art of
War, of entrenched Incampings, because it is what in England we have not been
much accustomed unto, and therefore are generally the less knowing in it; for I
have seen eminent Commanders there, when they came with Armies for the War of
Ireland, so great Strangers to the Rules of it, as their Camps appeared to me
to be like Fairs; and some of them, not only have ingeniously acknowledged to
me, they were to seek in that great part of War, but condescended to inform
themselves from me, what I could tell them on that Subject, choosing rather to
confess their ignorance, that they might mend it, than to continue under it;
though I heartily wished them a better Instructor.

I also have been convinced by reading the Greek and Roman Histories, that they
owed as much of their Conquests, to their well Incamping, as to their other
excellent Military Discipline, and their Valor; it would be almost endless to
enumerate, what Kingdoms and Provinces they kept in obedience, by their
standing Camps; and how often they stopped the invasions of Torrents of
barbarous Nations (as they were pleased to term them) by the same proceeding;
and having first wearied out their Enemies, by such safe and beneficial
delays, then on some great advantages, they would give them Battle, and defeat
them; none of which they could have effected, or rationally have attempted, but
by their thoroughly knowing how to Incamp advantageously, by constantly
practicing it, and by a timely providing of Food, and Forage.

I have likewise observed these few last Years, that the French, who have not
only many eminent Commanders, if not the most of any one Nation, and daily
improve the Art of making War, have begun to revive, and with great benefit to
themselves, this almost obsolete part of it; For I take the Prince of Conde, to
be one of the famousest Captains, that any Age has produced; and I observed
when the Prince of Orange, the Imperialists, under the Count de Souches, and
the Flemish Forces, were united; the Prince of Conde who was sent to oppose
them, would not give them Battle, but Encamped himself advantageously on the
French Frontiers; so that they justly apprehended to enter them, and leave him
at their backs, whereby he kept them long at a Bay, and when he found his
opportunity, gave them at Seneff so considerable a blow, as the French from
having been on the defensive, they became afterward the Assaulters, and closed
that Campaign, by taking some of their Enemies Garrisons.

The Marshall de Turenne also, who was sent General to the War in Germany, and
who in the Military Art had hardly a Superior, having there to do with the
Count de Montecuculi, who, I believe, has not been excelled by any Captain in
any Age, would still by entrenched Incampings, when the Germans were the
strongest, preserve himself and Army, by spinning out the time, and cover those
Territories and places he had won, while he had been the most powerful; and to
me it seems a thing very worthy observation, that after by the Marshall de
Turenne's being killed, when the French King sent the Prince of Conde from the
Army in Flanders, to command his Army in Germany, he did also by entrenched
Incampings, weather that Storm; which in it self was so threatening, not only by
the sudden loss of so great a Captain, but also by the Germans being led by the
Count de Montecuculi, and the present Duke of Lorrain, two persons as
considerable as the very Forces they lead; I say it seems to me very worthy of
observation, that two such justly celebrated Commanders, as the Prince of
Conde, and Monsieur Turenne, should observe the very same methods, in managing
the same War; whereas usually when one General succeeds another, in heading the
same Army, and ordering the same War, the last Comer judges it a kind of
diminution to his own skill, to tread in the very paths of his Predecessors;
but the Prince of Conde not doing so, thereby, in my poor opinion, renders
three things evident:

I. That he truly judged himself so justly secure in his own Reputation, as it
could receive no diminution, in following the steps of the dead General;
especially he having done the like before, and successfully in Flanders.

II. That a wise and great Captain, will rather by his actings, confirm that
course to be best, (if it be so in it self) by imitating his Predecessor, than
try new methods of War, whereby out of but a mere hope to do the like thing, by
a different way, he may hazard his Reputation, his Army, and the Country he is
to cover and protect.

III. What two such Generals have practiced, (all circumstances considered) is
to me an Evincement, that by Camps entrenched and well posted, a Country may
be best secured, an invading Enemy may be best resisted; and in time, all
advantages being taken in the nick, may be defeated, or made retire

As the French King manages his Wars on the German side, by his Captains, and
makes it oftener defensive there, than invasive; so on the Flanders side, he
makes it generally offensive, and leads his Armies himself, which is the
solidest way to be successful; some few of the many Reasons why I believe it is
the very best way for a King to lead his own Armies, I shall here set down:

I. It evidences he has a Genius to the Wars, else he would not himself be at
the head of his own Armies; and that makes the Nobility and Gentry of his
Kingdom Warlike, since all Subjects of Quality, generally addict themselves to
what they find their Prince is most inclined.

II. No Prince is likely to be so well served, or is so well served, as he who
with his own eyes, sees who are active or remiss in their duties; to reward the
first, and punish the last.

III. How many opportunities to be victorious are lost, by a Generals sending
for, and staying to receive Orders from his Prince; all which, by his own being
on the place, are laid hold of and improved.

IV. How many brave men will not go to the War, if the Prince be not there in
person; who if he be, cannot then be kept from the honor and duty of waiting
on him.

V. How many valiant men of his Guards are to attend his person, which if it be
not with his Army, is thereby deprived of so many good Fighters.

VI. How many good heads may be consulted with in the Army, when the King is
there, who would not be drawn thither, unless he were there; either by reason
of their crazy healths, or believing it below them to be in an Army, where any
commanded but themselves, or some such other Considerations.

VII. How many Garrisons may be bought, and Commanders bought off from the
Enemy, when the King in person is the Merchant, which otherwise would not
listen to, or trust to the Bargains offer d by his General.

It were endless to enumerate all the real advantages, which a Sovereign has,
who makes War in person, against Enemies, which make War only by their
Generals; nor can there be almost a larger illustration, of the truth of what I
have said, than what we have seen with our own eyes, these three last Years;
even that the French King singly, not only makes War, in effect, against all
the Continents of Europe, but also gains, rather than loses Ground; which
possibly could hardly be done by him, though he is a great and brave Prince
himself, though he has a large and noble Monarchy, many eminent Commanders, and
almost an innumerable company of good subaltern Officers, and is absolute, and
has all his Territories united, and fronting upon the Countries of almost all
his Enemies; If to all these advantages he did not in person often lead his
Armies, where he means to make his chief impressions; and if he did not by
entrenched Incampings, oppose by his Generals, those of his Enemies, who else
might invade his Dominions; and if he did not also excellently manage the Wars
on his side; and if he were not also helped by his Confederated Enemies being
entangled under many inconveniences, and hindered by many obstructions; I say,
if all these did not concur, it would seem to me almost impossible to do as he
does, especially since he has also at the same time engaged himself in the
protection of the Messineses, with his Maritine and Land Forces; whose Militia
he must not only pay, but what is worse, feed the useless mouths of both Sexes,
and of all Ages; and which perhaps is more than all this, he must send all
things to them in his Fleets, by a long Navigation; and hindered therein, by
the joint Naval Forces of Spain, and the United Provinces, so that many
conclude, he may gain more fame by extending his Arms so far abroad, even while
he has so much need of them near home, than solid benefit by engaging in that
revolted Peoples defense, unless some considerable Emergencies be favorable
unto him; but yet on the other side, why may it not be believed, that the
inuring his Subjects to Navigation and Sea Fights, is singly worth the expense
of that Sicilian War; and indeed all things rightly considered, perhaps he
could not more usefully attempt the attaining that end, than by making War in
the Mediterranean Sea against Spain; for thereby he gives His Majesty and the
States of the United Provinces less jealousy, than if he managed it in any
other of the European Seas; he makes the War laborious, chargeable and tedious
to the States, if they pay their Mediterranean Fleet; or to Spain, if that King
be at the sole expense of doing it.

It is also no little augmentation of his Glory, that France, which till his
Reign was so little considerable at Sea; and that Spain, which though during
the Reign of King Philip the Second, made Europe, and the Ottoman empire
apprehend his Armada's, yet cannot now, even in conjunction with the Fleet of
the States, hinder France from frequently relieving of Messina, and the other
revolted places of the Island of Sicily; nay, in Sea-Battels has forced his way
to that end: so that all things duly weighed, perhaps the French Monarch could
not make a more hopeful War by Sea than this, to train up his Subjects to fight
on that Element, if he aspires to be as formidable on it, as he is actually on
the Land; which may not be unreasonably presumed he does, by the Stupendous
and Royal Foundations he has laid for the building of Ships, and equipping
them; and for the educating his Subjects to Navigation, and encouraging them to
pursue that Calling; and by the numerous and stately Navy he has built in a
very few Years; which is such, as some believe, may at the present, equal for
Number, and size even the Fleet Royal of England, or the Navy of the States;
and should this be true, may it not be more likely, that he may ten Years
hence, if not sooner, attempt to give the Law at Sea; then that ten Years past,
he should be so strong in Ships of War as now he is; especially if while his
Navy is growing, he can render his own Subjects capable to manage it; for it is
easier to increase Fleets, than at first to build them: So that this Messinese
War, which some consider as a blemish in his Politics, may be none of the
least depths of them.

But since I have asserted two particulars, viz. the French Kings excellent
management of his Wars, and the advantage he reaps, by the intanglements and
difficulties which his Confederated Enemies are under: I esteem my self obliged
to set down some of my Grounds for those two Assertions.

I. I find that having so many formidable Armies to deal with, and being
thereby unable to have Forces, both to face every one of them, and reserve
Armies also, he is very cautious to avoid a general decisive Battle, lest the
loss of it might hazard his Monarchy.

II. He has been usually in the Field about the beginning of March, and by
having his Armies excellently well provided, and frankly hazarding his
Soldiery, he has taken in 18 or 19 Weeks, before the whole Confederacy can
imbody, more Countries and important Garrisons, than they have retaken in the
six succeeding Months after they are imbodied.

III. Being an absolute Monarch, and having none in his Armies but such as
depend on his Will; he may always pursue the Council which is in it self best,
and may execute it with expedition, and secrecy; so that having resolved where
to make his impression in the very opening of the Spring, he provides in the
Neighboring Territories his Magazines for Victuals and Forage accordingly; and
thereby what supplies him with both, does disable those Territories to supply
his Enemies on the place, should they come to raise any of his Sieges, with an
Army formed of the Forces of the whole Confederacy: And by his having formerly
secured or consumed all Meat and Forage near his Leageurs, makes it impossible
for the other in that ill season of the Year, to carry all of both forts on the
Axle-tree, sufficient for themselves, though it were but for a few days; and
having by his Lines of Circumvallation made it almost an act of Temerity to
attempt to force them, he makes it also an impossibility to constrain him to
raise his Sieges by a diversion. For what place can they besiege in a Season,
when the earth yields no sustenance for Man or Horse; and when they have not
Magazines of both laid in beforehand to supply them. And if they should attempt
to raise his Sieges, but by such part of the Forces of the Confederacy as can
carry Provision and Forage with them on the Axle-tree, or by Boats, it is much
more than an even Wager, that they will repent it, sooner than he.

IV. Since the Germans are the greatest force of the Confederacy, by his so
early in the Year attacking the Spaniards, Flemish Territories, he renders the
German assistance useless to those Countries in that Season; since it is almost
a Winters march to lead Armies timely enough from the Center, or remote parts
of the Empire (where commonly they have their best Winter quarters) to the
Frontiers of Flanders, were there no impediment but the length of the Way; but
when to that is added, the ill season of the Year, and the vast charge and
difficulty of carrying Horse and Man's meat, besides Artillery, Ammunition, and
needful Baggage so far, to form also Magazines then timely enough to answer the
occasion, Experience as well as the Reason of the thing, sufficiently evidences
is not practicable; so that no formidable Army, can at such times be expected
from thence: Besides the great Garrisons the French keep at Brisac, Schleckstad^
etc. and the Flying Camp they have on those Frontiers of Germany, renders it
hazardous to send the Body of their Army to relieve Flanders lest during their
absence, their own Territories be exposed to the incursions of the French. The
Spaniards on the other side, though assisted by the States, are not over-able
to cope with all the power of France, headed by their King in person, and
attended by all that brave and numerous Noblesse, which usually wait on him;
nor is it over-likely that the States will be ready to hazard their Armies,
only to relieve the Spaniards, who some have thought are not able, and others
have fancied are not very willing to relieve themselves in Flanders; so that to
me it seems the French King plays a wise and secure Game, as he orders his War:
for if the Germans should march in that ill season, and unprovided with
Magazines, they would probably by such a march in the dawn of the Spring,
disable their Army to do much all the ensuing Summer; and if they do not make
such marches in the Spring, the French King does then gain more than he can
lose all the rest of the Campaign, which is a Military Dilemma can hardly be
avoided: Besides, the farther the French King advances his Conquests, and the
more Garrisons he takes, in his Enemies Countries, during the Spring, the more
he secures himself from having his own Dominions invaded by them in the Summer,
at least by the way of the Spaniards Netherlands.

There seems to remain then but two other probable ways for their doing of it,
by Lorrain, or by Alsatia; in the first, he is not only gathering a great Army,
but strongly fortifying all considerable places there, and in the latter, I
hear, he has laid all the Country waste; so that it will be difficult, if
possible, to invade him by Alsatia, and it will be no easy task to do it by
Lorrain, when so many strong Garrisons must be taken, his Army looking on; or if
untaken left at their backs should they enter France, and Monsieur de Crequi's
Army to watch and attend their motions, which by great detachments may be
reinforced according to their need by the French Armies in Flanders; and to me
it would seem a temerarious Action, for the Confederates to enter France, if
they could, and leave the French New Conquests in Flanders, with the Armies
which cover them, the old and newGarisons in Lorrain and the Marshall de
Crequi's Army there, and the Desert of Alsatia at their backs, and this too
without having any Confederates (that are yet visible) in France to join with
them, or any Garrison in it at their devotion, where they might form Arcenals,
Magazines, leave their Sick or Wounded, etc so that in my poor judgment, it
seems against all the Maxims of Reason and Military Experiment, that the
Confederates will invade France if they could, as the present state of Affairs
are: I know it is almost the general opinion, that great Action will be this
ensuing Summer, but I must own I cannot bring my self to believe, the Event
will be proportionable to the Expectation. For to me it seems very probable,
that the Game the French will play is, with their best and greatest Army to
oppose (but without giving a decisive Battle) the Germans, when they enter
Lorrain, which is the likeliest, if not the only way they will come; and
thereby the French having all the Garrisons, and the standing Bridges over the
unfordable Rivers, they may, by posting themselves in advantageous places, and
by entrenched Incampings, keep the Germans at a Bay, spin out the Summer, and
by the little progress of the War, endeavor to render the Empire weary of it.

For having, in effect, made Lorrain the only way by which the Germans can
advance, they have doubtless already so well furnished their own Magazines in
those parts, that they will be provided for plentifully; whereas it is to be
doubted whether the Germans can be so well furnished with Victuals, when all
they eat must be brought on Carriages, and often from Countries or Stores at a
considerable distance, and from Princes whose Territories get little, and
suffer much by the War, while the French will have their Food at hand, and will
destroy whatever they cannot secure; by which means, the farther their Enemy
advances into Lorrain, the more unlikely and troublesome it will be to be fed,
while they are there; Nor will the Germans probably be able to force any
considerable place there, since such as are so, will be well fortified, manned
and provided for, and to sit down before a strong Garrison, while an Army which
it may be is as strong as their own, is ready to relieve it, or to cut off all
their Convoys, is no usual Enterprise.

If the Prince of Orange be strong enough to act apart with his own Army, and
the Governor of Flanders, by additional Forces of the Germans, be able to do
the like with his Army, the French, who have Armies to attend their motions,
will, in all likelihood, either relieve the places they shall besiege, or if
they shall have so strengthened their Lines of Circumvallation, before the
French can fling the necessary relief into those Garrisons they shall besiege,
as it will render it too hazardous to try to force the Line, the French, by
diversion, may besiege some places of theirs, and Take as much as they Lose;
for in that Season they will have Forage in the Field, and their Magazines of
Victuals near, neither of which the Germans could have in the beginning of the
Spring; when the French enlarge their Conquests, so that the French by that
excellent conduct wherewith they order their Affairs, do certainly take places,
before the Confederates can come into the Field, and will, in all likelihood,
lose few after.

On the side of Alsatia, the French keep but very few Garrisons, and those
excellently furnished, and the Country generally wasted; so that if the Forces
of the Circles of the Empire besiege and reduce one of them the ensuing Summer,
that will probably be the most they can aim at, and possibly all things
considered, more than they can effect.

To the best of my observation, the French with great prudence, attack Places
in the beginning of the Spring, when there is no Army to relieve them; and in
the Summer, when the whole Confederacy is in the Field, they are usually on the
defensive, and cover what they have took; and in my weak judgment, they do at
least as much by their always providing well to eat, and by their entrenched
Incampings, as by their good Fighting, which questionless is the most hopeful
and the most solid way of making War; for it has been for many Ages a standing
Military Axiom, That the lesser Army if it can feed and avoid being forced to
fight, it will weary out the greater Army in no long time.

These are some of the many Reasons which induced me to commend the French
Kings excellent manner of managing this War, and why I cannot readily believe
the results of this ensuing Summer, will be so great as many think.

I shall now mention some of those Inconveniences and Intanglements which his
Confederated Enemies, seem to me to lie under, and which are so helpful to him.

I. That Union being made up of many absolute Sovereigns, and States, some of
the highest, some of the middle, and some of the lesser size, nothing can be
designed, much less attempted by them, but by joint consent, and after long
consultations; at which since the Sovereigns cannot be personally present, they
must be carried on by their Ministers, whereby before any thing can be finally
resolved, much time is consumed, motions are much slower, than the Nature of
War requires, the due secrecy of designs cannot be observed, on which depends
the life of all Military Action; and such Resolutions as possibly in themselves
are the very best; are usually opposed by those of them, who find not their
particular Interests in the observing and pursuing them.

II. When after much time and labor, during a whole Winter, all the
Confederates agree how the War shall be best managed the ensuing Summer; it is
great odds, but all or the most considerable measures then taken, will be
broken again, for they only knowing their own Project for the Campania, and not
their Enemies, his early actings may necessitate them to alter theirs; in which
case most of the Summer will be consumed in concerting how it shall be
employed. This uncertainty, during which their Armies are at a gaze, does not
only give great Advantages to an active and vigilant Enemy who is resolved what
to do, and vigorously prosecutes his designs, but also slackens the courage of
their own Soldiery; toward which, no one thing can more contribute, than
Irresolution in their Superiors; Nor is it a possible thing (at least in my
humble opinion) to order a War as it ought to be, when those who command in it,
must on all Emergencies send to their Masters for new directions. And therefore
the Romans, as jealous as they were of their liberty, never were embarked in a
dangerous War indeed, but they created a Dictator, who was absolute for the
time being, and who was not fettered with the necessity of sending to the
Senate for new Orders, on new Accidents, but was at his liberty to improve them
on the place. All which confirms on the account of Reason what Experiment in
all Ages has clearly evinced, which is, That a Monarch who is at the Head of
his own Armies, has a hopefuller Game to play in War, than many mighty Princes
who compose a League, and act by several Generals, and are acted by various
Interests.

III. Though the opposing the formidable and growing Power of France was the
true Cement of the present Confederacy and Union, yet as by the greatness of
their own strength their fears of France lessen; so many of it cool in their
first vigor, lest by too much humbling their Enemy abroad, they may too much
heighten their greatest Allies at home; and so what in show renders the League
the stronger, does, in effect, weaken the actings of it.

IV. Oftentimes they can neither agree to divide what they have gotten, nor how
they shall divide what they may get; though possibly, the dividing of the Bears
skin is more easily agreed unto before he is killed, than after; and possibly
also those of the Confederacy which are weary of the War, had rather make their
being unsatisfied with their Partition past, or to come, the pretense of their
withdrawing, or remissness, than to own they are tired with the charge,
trouble, and hazard they undergo, and then how apt are such Princes or States
to listen to a Neutrality, if offered by the French.

V. What differences are and must be raised every Winter, how the Armies shall
be then quartered; for some Sovereigns which are the least rich, and have the
scantest Territories, yet have the fittest to make Winter Quarters in; and
whereby posting great Bodies of the Soldiery, they may be the better able to
resist the incursions of their Enemy, and to make successful ones into his
Territories; but if such Winter Quarters be granted by the lesser Princes, and
States; than those who are to be least Gainers by the War, undergo the greatest
burden of it, and suffer the most considerable damage by it: And if they will
not quarter the Forces where they are most useful, then not only the whole
Union suffers thereby, but also those lesser Princes themselves and their
Subjects; who not being willing to be eaten up by their Friends, and unable to
resist with their own Forces those of France, become a Prey unto the latter, to
avoid being devoured by the former.

Nay, sometimes the necessity of the common safety and benefit, makes the
stronger of the Confederacy take Winter Quarters on the weaker, without or
against the permission of the Princes themselves; whereby Animosities are
raised, in which Friends to the Wronged, or fear of being in the future under
the like usage, makes others share in the discontents and resentments. And such
Forces as are quartered in any Princes Territories against his leave, are
thereby all the Winter put on double duty; that against the Enemy, and that
against the People of the Country; who else, would by surprise revenge their
Princes Affront, and prevent their own farther Sufferings. So that their
Winter Quarters which should be to refresh them against the Spring, is
frequently more harassing to them, than all the Summer Service is, or can be.

VI. Since the War is pursued by several Armies at once, and consequently a
greater Monarchs Forces is to be often united with those of a lesser, many
difficulties arise about the chief Command in an Army so composed, and greater
mischiefs are too frequently the inseparable consequences of its being so
composed. For where the two Sovereign Powers whose Troops make that Body, have
their distinct Generals in it, though one of them be made the Superior as to
Command, yet Battles are not to be given, nor Sieges undertook, or continued,
without the concurrence of the other General, who perhaps if the hazards both
Armies are to undergo, be to redound to the benefit of his own Master singly,
or chiefly, will be more inclined to embark in them, than he will be, if the
result of the Success be more for the advantage of his Colleague, whereby
particular ends, often obstruct the general good of the Union.

I shall give two remarkable instances of this great Truth which very recently
happened.

The Prince of Orange not being able singly to take Maestricht, is therefore
joined with the Flemish Forces, etc. When by the Valor, Conduct, Danger, and
Indefatigableness of that brave young Prince, (true Inheritor of the Virtues of
his famous Ancestors, and deservedly Worthy of the Royal Blood of England,
which he has the honor to be of) the Siege was so far advanced, as that the
place must be taken, unless relieved by a Battle, or his own being necessitated
to raise it; the French King orders Monsieur de Schomberg with all the united
Forces of those Parts, (which his Courage and Conduct justly entitled him to
command) to try to relieve the place sufficiently, or make the Prince raise his
Siege: Upon the advance of Monsieur Schomberg, the Prince, (as I am credibly
informed) was absolutely for giving him Battle, that the fruits of so much
Time, Labor, Expense, and Blood, might not be lost, and lost with some
disparagement; but his Associates judging that to be too hazardous a Counsel,
the Siege was raised, and possibly with more loss of Men, Cannon, and
Reputation, than the ill success of a Battle could have cost. Far be it from me
to say, that those who were for raising the Siege, believed it of more
importance to their King to keep his Troops entire, than that the Prince should
be again Master of Maestricht; much less will I say that they would not venture
all their Forces on an Engagement, where the States were to have the greatest,
if not the sole benefit of the success, though the others were to run a great
share of the hazard; but this I hope without offense may be thought, that it
had been more advisable never to have engaged in that Siege, than after having
so far proceeded, to have quitted it: For who could in reason believe, that so
great a Monarch as the French King is, and so jealous of the Glory of his Arms,
as all Europe has seen, and too many of it felt, would let a place of so vast
importance as Maestricht, be torn from him without a Battle; so that in my poor
judgment, the Siege should never have been resolved upon, or the Battle should
have been given to have made it good. To be warm in undertaking a great design,
and cool in justifying it when undertook, is seldom attended with success, or
reputation. All which that Generous young Prince so well foresaw, as I am
confident nothing would have made him besiege Maestricht, if he had not fully
believed his Allies would have ventured a Battle to have carried it. I know not
whither to do so, was a part of their written Contract, but I take it to be
clearly inferred by their sitting down before it; and therefore though the
Prince might share in the trouble of the ill success, yet he ought to have no
part in the fault of it.

The second Evidence of this Truth, was in the Year before; when the Prince of
Orange was in conjunction with the Imperial Forces, and the Flemish; how little
was there done when united, and how much was suffered, few are ignorant of; but
as soon as the Prince commanded singly, how Gloriously did he end that
Campaign, by the reduction of Grave, which though it had been long besieged by
General Robenhoft, who was a brave Commander, yet till the Prince of Orange
came thither, the Siege moved not on, with the Life, Vigor, and Success, which
his Example and Conduct gave unto it.

And in the taking whereof, it will not be so much a Complement to him, as a
Truth of him, if I should say, Alexander the Great at his Siege of the
Mallians, or King Henry IV. of France, (as great a Captain I believe as even
Alexander himself) at the taking of Cahors, ran not greater hazards as to their
Persons, than the Prince of Orange did for the reduction of Grave.

Lastly, (to omit many other Particulars) oftentimes those Generals which are
really the fittest to manage the War, cannot be employed to do it; since if a
Sovereign who is of the Confederacy, will go in Person to command an Army, or
send his Son, Brother, or some first Prince of his Blood to do it, none of them
but will be the chief, though some under them may perhaps be more capable of
being it: Whereby Superiority in Command may not always be vested in him, who
is the fittest to discharge it; and therefore sometimes the War prospers
accordingly.

I hope whoever shall undergo the trouble of reading what I write, will be in
some degree satisfied, That I had Reason to assert both the French Kings
excellent management of his War, and his being helped therein, by the
unavoidable obstructions and intanglements which the Confederacy of his Enemies
does subject them unto, both from the nature of such an Union, and from the
situations of the Territories of those Sovereigns which compose it.

But if the Body of the Confederates strength could constantly lie as near the
Frontiers of France, as the strength of France, by that Monarchs Absoluteness,
Unitedness of his Dominions, and wise Management, can be brought (when he will)
near the Territories of the less strong Princes of the Union; possibly his
maintaining a War against almost all the Continent of Europe, might be a
greater Trouble, Charge and Difficulty to him, than yet he has found it.

Nor indeed can so dull a judgment as mine is, readily foresee, why the French
King may not continue the War, long enough, to make his Enemies, or many of
them, weary of it, unless his methods be broken by some unforeseen great
Accident; as a Revolt within his own Territories, or some decisive Victory
which the Confederates may obtain, either from the French Generals confident
belief of winning it, or from the necessity of the French giving them Battle,
to preserve an endangered detachment of his Army, or a Garrison or Territory
worthy of that hazard, or some such other great Accident; or unless the Kingdom
of Spain (now newly under the entire Ministry of Don John, a wise, and warlike
Prince) be able, and willing, to invade the South-west part of France with a
Royal Army; such a powerful diversion perhaps might put all the Affairs of
France into a new Fold; for hitherto, little Armies have busied Spain at home,
and preserved the French Pyrenean Frontiers, while all the great Ones have been
employed against Germany, and the Spanish and States Netherlands: Nor is it
very improbable but such an Attempt may be made; for I have still observed,
that when the Ministry of a great Monarchs Affairs is on a sudden changed, the
new Comer either entirely alters the measures taken by his Predecessor, or if
he pursues those, he does it with greater Forces and Vigor; since in all such
Mutations, the Honor of the new Minister, (if not his Safety) as well as the
good of the State, incites him to a better, or more prosperous Conduct of
Affairs, than that under the late Administration has been. Now whether that
Conduct shall consist in acting by Maxims diametrically opposite to the former,
or in heightning considerably of those, does depend upon the judgment, or
inclinations of him that sits at the Helm; or on the state of things as they
are then circumstantiated. But that Don John should attempt, or hope to incline
his Master to a separate Peace, is not very likely; since to do it, nay perhaps
but to attempt it, will be dangerous in it self, ungrateful to the
Confederates, and in all likelihood is not solidly and durably attainable; And
to endeavor to gain all the rest of the Union to it, or the major, or weightier
number of them, looks more unlikely to be effected; for neither has there ever
yet been made so numerous, or so strong an Union against France, as this now
is; and it may be no Age has seen, that so many Monarchs, and States, and of
such various Interests, and Religions, should be at once so firmly
Confederated; which perhaps nothing could have brought about, had not the
Examples of the Duke of Lorrain, and some other Sovereigns of the lesser size,
filled all of them with so great apprehensions of the like usage, as nothing
could allay, but such a League; which since they have after the employing of
much time, treasure, and industry, so happily made, it is not probable they will
dissolve it; especially when their Affairs seem more promising, and that
notwithstanding this stupendous League, they have hitherto lost Ground.
Whereby none of them all, nor no less than all of them, can judge himself safe
til, by the Forces of all, they have by Arms reduced this deluge of France,
into its first and natural Channel. For to think to do this by a Treaty, looks
very improbable to me; because the French King is yet too high in his hopes and
strength to fall so low, as to give more by a Treaty, than (it may be) he can
lose by a War; and none of his Enemies can well think themselves secure, but by
keeping fast this knot, which was so long a tying, and which experimentally
they have found, has been their common safety; and that in nothing less, can it
well be found; so that the continuance of the War appearing to be the likeliest
measure that can be taken, it is hardly to be believed, that Don John, whose
Genius is for Arms, and his Education has been in them, will draw his Masters
Sword but half out; but if he unsheaths it, 'twill be to purpose; which yet as
I think can hardly be done, but by being at the head of a brave Army, (and
possibly getting his young Monarch to be personally present) and thereby making
an effective Invasion on the Southwest parts of France: For no Ministry that
preceded his, did of late attempt it; and yet the only attempting it, may give
more solid Advantages to the whole Union, than hitherto all the Arms of Spain
has done as they have been ordered; nor may he in any other way more acceptably
Apologize to the Emperor in particular, and to the rest of the Union in
general, for having got the Queen Regent out of the Government, than by his own
being more beneficial to him and them in it.

Besides, the present complexion of the Affairs of Spain, seems such, that it
may be his only true interest, to be considerable in Arms; which he can never
be, but by being great with the Swordmen; and that he can never hope for, but
by being at the head of them, and leading them to daring and high Attempts. All
this seems to manifest, it is not improbable he may invade the French Pyrenean
Frontiers, for there only he can be so considerable, and at once both so useful
abroad, and safe at home; on which last there seems a necessity on him to fix
one Eye, as the other on the humbling of France; lest otherwise the late
Ministry of Spain, get again into the Saddle.

I beg the Reader's pardon for this long digression, which perhaps I may the
sooner obtain, when he shall be pleased to consider, that I was partly drawn
into it, by observing how useful this revived Part of the Art of War, of
posting Armies in Entrenched Camps, has lately been to those, who have well
understood, and on fit occasions practiced it; And though all which I have now
said, is not properly congruous to the Title I have given to this one Chapter;
yet it may not be altogether impertinent to what the whole Book treats of; for
the successful active part of the Art of War, has no less dependency on the
considerative part of it, than the effect has on the cause; and what I have so
weakly, and disorderly exposed, may yet furnish a solid, and fertile judgment,
with no ill Reflections, and Notions, on this Great Subject.

Of Battles.
ALL who have commanded Armies, or written of the Military Art, have
universally agreed, That no one Act of War, is so great in it self, or in the
Consequences of it, as Fighting a Battle; since the winning of one, has not
only been the cause of taking of the Place besieged, (if in the Field the Army
is defeated which comes to relieve it) but also by the gaining of the Victory,
a Province, nay, a Kingdom has often been the Reward of the Victorious.

But as the Advantages are eminent to him who wins it, so the Prejudices are no
less to him who loses it; and therefore nothing ought to be more exactly
considered and weighed in War, than whether a decisive Battle shall be given,
before the resolution to fight it, is taken.

There is hardly any thing which seems to me more essentially needful to a
great Captain, than perfectly to know and lay hold of all advantages in a day
of Battle; and to know all the disadvantages, that he may avoid them. I shall
therefore in what I write on this Subject, specify some general Rules or
Principles, which, in my opinion, ought never to be unknown or unpractised by a
General or Commander in chief.

I. The first is, to be so vigilant and careful, as not to be forced against
his will, to come to a Battle; but if he is so unhappy, or faulty, as not to
avoid it, then to be sure to disguise it from his Army, by his words, looks,
and actions; since for a chief Commander to evidence Fear, or Amazement; or to
own he has been over-reached by his Enemy, before he is gotten out of the ill
consequences and effects of (...), ^oes to that degree deject his own men, that
they are half conquered before they fight. For the Generality of the Soldiery
in an Army, have their Senses much better than their Understanding, and
consequently take their Omen of Victory usually, from the cheerful looks and
words of their General; who ought therefore in no wise to seem disanimated, or
doubtful, but always cheerful and confident.

II. The second is, That no General should resolve to give his Enemy Battle,
but on rational, or, at least, very probable Grounds, that he shall win it; and
also when the advantages of gaining it, will be greater than the prejudices
will be, if he should lose it; for whoever elects to fight a Battle on other
Considerations, cannot answer the doing it, to his Prince; to the Army he
leads; or to his own Judgment, and Conscience.

III. The third is, Whoever has his Enemy at such an advantage, as he must
submit in a short time without hazarding a Field, ought on no terms, to expose
his Army to a Battle; but should derive that from Time, and Patience, which
else he must leave to the decision of Fortune. As within my own memory I have
known, That a General greedy of Honor, and impatient of Delay, when, by the
wise conduct of those under him, or the ill conduct of those against him, his
Enemies Army was so cooped up, that it could not long subsist, nor Force its
way; he drew his own Army off of the Passes which shut up his Adversary, that
he might come out, and decide it by a Battle; which he lost, and deservedly.

For the turns in a Battle are so many, and are often occasioned by such
unexpected Accidents, which also proceed from such minute Causes, that a wise
and great Captain will expose to Chance, only as much as the very Nature of War
requires.

IV. The fourth is, When a Battle is resolved upon; the Field to fight it in,
ought to be answerable to the Numbers of your Army, and the quality of your
Forces.

As for Example.
You should never choose a Ground to fight on, (if you can possibly avoid it)
which you cannot fill up, with your fighting, and reserve Squadrons and
Battalions; or as it is now usually called, your first, and second Line. That
is, you must still endeavor to cover the outward flanks of your Wings, with a
River, a Wood, a moorish Ground, or something equivalent; for else you will
expose your Army too much, if your Enemy does overwing you: Whereas if you
cannot be charged but in front, you will have the less to fear, and your
Adversary the less to hope. For Instance: If I found my Army drawn up in
Battalia would take up in its utmost extent but 15000 Foot; I would not choose
to fight in a Plain that was 20000 Foot wide, if my Enemies Army were either
more numerous than mine, or were stronger in Cavalry than I: But if by some
Accident which I could not foresee, or possibly avoid, I were to fight on such
a Ground, I would immediately cover one, or, if possibly, both of my Flanks,
with what the Nature of the Place afforded; as besides a River, a Brook, a
moorish Ground, a Wood, or Coppice; or a steep Ground, with a Ditch or Trench,
or some place so encumbered, as my Adversaries Horse could not fall on that
Flank, without disordering himself before, and in his doing of it.

But in case the Ground was so level and clear, as it afforded me none of those
Advantages, (which would be an extraordinary thing) I would then, by my
Carriages, or by immediately casting up a long and large Ditch, or Trench on my
Flanks, supply by industry, what I could not otherwise attain. And if I had
leisure, at the two ends of each of these Ditches, or Barricade of Wagons,
especially at the Front end I would cast up a Sconce, Redoubt, or Fort, and
stuff it with Musketeers, whereby the Flank of my Wings would be covered, and
the Front and Rear of them defended by those Musketeers.

'Twas almost thus, that Lewis, Prince of Conde acted in the Battle at St.
Denis, in the Reign of King Francis the First of France; And had not only
thereby the Resolution, with an handful of the French Protestants, to fight the
Constable of Montmorancy, whose Army was three times as great as his; but also
to make it so disputable who had the Victory, that the Historians of those
Times give it without seruple, to the Party they were of, and wrote for. And it
seems indeed but doubtful who had the Victory; for the next morning the Prince,
and the Admiral Chastillion (by Andelot's being joined with them, who brought
them not above 1000 men, (with which, until then, he made the River of Seine
useless to the Parisians) drew up their Army again in the Field of Battle, and
shot some Peals of Cannon even into Paris, yet none of that King's Forces came
out to fight them; so that the Protestants having for a few hours braved the
French King's Forces, and that vast City, marched away toward Champagne, to
meet their German Relief.

But on the other hand, the Historians who were Royallists, attribute this
wholly to the death of the Constable; and not only to the Consternation which
it caused, but also to the Irresolution of the Counsels, who should succeed
him; since the Duke of Anjou, who at last did, was by many judged too young for
so weighty a Charge; and it is reasonably to be believed, he would not then
have been nominated, but that the Queen Regent was irremoveably settled, not to
lodge in such intricate times, the absolute Military Power in any of the House
of Guise; or in that of Montmorancy but in one who entirely depended on her,
and would be guided by her.

And it is probable that the Protestants (who doubtless had been much disordered
in the Battle) durst not have made that Bravade, depending only on their own
strength, but at least as much on the irresolution and disputes of their
Enemies, who should be their new General: And therefore having set the best
face they could on their tottering Affairs, for a short time judged it not
advisable to continue playing that part any longer, than they believed they
might do it safely by the King's Army being without a Head.

I have only instanced this Particular, to manifest how a lesser Army may
oppose a much greater in Battle, if the Flanks of the lesser be so well
covered, as that it can only be charged in Front; which ought always
indispensibly to be provided for.

Nor is it only needful where a Battle is to be fought, to pitch on a Ground
answerable to the Number of your Army, but also answerable to the quality of
those Forces which compose it; and to those of your Enemies with whom you must
have to do.

As if my Enemy were stronger than I in Cavalry, I would avoid all I might
fighting him in a Plain; or if I were the stronger in Horse, I would use my
utmost industry to engage him in an open Country. And on the contrary, if I
were stronger in Infantry, I would shun the Combat, unless it were in an
enclosed Country, or encumbered by Woods, Brooks, Coppices, Rocks, or moorish
Grounds; so if he were the stronger in Foot, I would avoid fighting in a place
where he who has the most Infantry, may therefore have the most hopes of
Victory.

But if you are commanded to fight by your Prince, or are engaged to do it to
answer an end worthy the hazard of a Battle; or for any such other rational
Consideration, great care must be always taken to make choice of that Ground
which is fittest for you, both in respect of your own Forces, as also of your
Enemies; And in a most particular manner, if you are weakest in Foot, to cover
them the best you can with your Horse; and on the contrary, if you are weakest
in Horse, to cover them with your Foot.

V. The Ranging of an Army in Battle to the very best advantage, is a great
furtherance to the winning of the Victory. But the so doing of it depends much,
not only on the Wisdom and Skill of the General, the Nature of the Ground, and
the Quality of his own Forces, but also on those of his Enemies, and on the
disposition of him who commands them; so that although no standing Rules can be
given to answer all these varieties, yet some positive Maxims may be set down,
which if punctually observed, as things are circumstantiated, may beneficially
answer all occasions, and emergencies.

And I the rather say this, because I have seldom found that the greatest
Captains of elder times, (whose military knowledge and practice the Moderns
justly value, and extol) have ever observed one and the same form in giving
Battle; but have varied therein considerably, according to the occasion.

Cyrus being to fight against Croesus King of Lydia, and in a large Plain,
fearing to be environed, drew up his Army but Twelve deep in File, whereas
formerly the File was 24 deep. Whereby he augmented the Front of his Army,
double; overwing'd Croesus's, and won the Victory.

Caesar, at the Battle of Pharsalia, against Pompey, did quite alter the manner
of the Roman Imbattelling. For having found that Pompey exceedingly outnumbred
him in Horse, he covered one of his Flanks with a little River, and drew all
his Cavalry to the other Flank; among the Squadrons whereof, he placed Bodies
of his best Infantry, and there he began the Battle; Where, by having all his
Horse in one Wing, and those accompanied by select Legionary Foot, he soon
Routed that half of Pompey's Horse which opposed all his; and then falling into
the Flanks, and Rear of his Enemy, won the Victory.

These two are very remarkable Instances, which, among many others, verify
what I have said.

I shall now mention some of those standing Maxims, which, in my humble
Opinion, are indispensibly to be observed, immediately before, and in a day of
Battle.

1. The first is, With great diligence to view so well the Field you will fight
in, as when you have drawn up your Army on it, you may not afterward alter the
Order of it, or change your Ground; for all such Mutations in the Face of your
Enemy are very dangerous, and gives him also the greater Confidence, and your
own Men the less; as being an evidence to both, of a great Failure in Conduct;
And it may also be highly hazardous, either to remove the whole, or even some
gross Squadrons, or Battalions, to the Ground which on second thoughts may be
believed the better Ground of the two; since your Enemy being then near, may
take the benefit, which such disorders, while the alteration is making, may
give him, and may improve it to your total overthrow; so that, it is in my poor
Opinion, more advisable to keep the Ground, and Order you are in, though by
your oversight, neither should be the very best, than to alter it in the sight
of your Enemy, and when he is near; And all changes of Grounds, or Order, in
his view, ought never to be made in Gross Bodies; but almost insensibly to them
and your own Army, by a few Files at a time; and where they cannot be so made,
it is better to leave them unmade.

I had been often told, but could scarcely credit it, that at the fatal Battle
of Naseby, after my Lord Fairfax his Army was drawn up, in view of His
Majesty's, it having been judged that the Ground a little behind them, was
better than that they stood upon, they removed thither; I had the opportunity
some time after, to discourse on this Subject with Major General Skippon, (who
had the chief ordering of the Lord Fairfax his Army that day) and having asked
him if this were true, he could not deny it; And when I told him I almost
admired at it, for the Reasons before expressed, he averred, he was against it;
but he obeyed the Orders for doing it, only because he could not get them
altered.

After the Ground to fight on is well chosen, and all the advantages of it
discovered, then to possess, and to secure the most useful and commanding Posts
of it with all imaginable diligence. As King Henry IV. of France did, at the
Battle of Arques, where that great Monarch showed as much conduct as any of the
Greek and Roman Generals ever did, in any of their greatest Battles.

II. The second is, If you come near your Enemy, but yet so late in the day,
that the Battle must be deferred till the next morning; then, if the Season be
sharp, to shelter your own Army in the most convenient Villages and Woods,
adjoining to the Field you will fight in, and thereby give them all the cease
you can, as King Henry IV. of France did, the night before the Battle of Iuri.
But you must not on any terms neglect the safety of your Army, for the ease of
it; and therefore it must be Quartered, or Camp'd so well, as that on the touch
of the Drum all may be Embattled, and ready to receive your Enemy.

For which end great Corpse de Gards ought to be advanced, and many Sentinels,
as covertly as may be placed near the Enemy, and every moment visited, and
relieved, by vigilant Officers. These Sentinels, or Perdu's, are to give
instant Notice to the advanced Guards if the Enemy moves, and those Guards,
with their Seconds, or Reserves, are to find the Enemy play, while your Army is
drawing up to receive him. But still fresh Troops must be sent to sustain your
advanced Corpse de Guard, if they are vigorously attacked; lest by their being
totally overthrown, your Enemy be encouraged to push at All, and your own Men
be somewhat disheartened; For it may so happen that your Enemy, if he finds all
the advantages of the Place to fight in, are so well secured by your care, and
diligence, as that the next day it may be hazardous to fight in that Field; he
may make choice in the night, if you are not Entrenched, to attempt you, where
the confusion which darkness usually engenders, may be equally divided between
both Parties; this of the two, being the more eligible.

Nor were it amiss, but very advisable, if you have to deal with a General who
is hot, and undertaking; or one who, by the necessity of his Affairs, must put
All to hazard, that in such Nights, when you are near your Enemy, and may, for
the beforementioned Reasons, have ground to believe he will attempt you during
the obscurity; and while you are unintrenched, to cause great Piles of Wood, or
Fagots, or some such combustible stuff, to be ready to be kindled in fit
places, and at fit distances, that if he advances, you may the better see how
to point your Cannon, and dispose of your small Shot most effectually; and by
such Fires also, terrify, and disorder his Horses, which generally are
frighted at the sight of Fire, especially in the Night.

This I find was practiced near Lorges in Beausse, by Anthony King of Navarre,
Francis Duke of Guise, and the Constable Montmorancy, when Lewis, Prince of
Conde, and the Admiral of Chastillion, pressed by the necessity of their Affairs,
went to attack the Royal Army by Night; and which so much disheartened the
Assaulters, as they retreated.

The Quartering of your Army at all times (but especially when that of the
Enemies is very near) ought to be in such manner, as that the Soldiers may be
soonest in Battalia to receive him; and therefore to lodge it in the Form you
will fight, is still the very best; that is, that such Forces as compose your
Wings, and Body, may have only to go out of their Hutts, Tents, Villages, or
Houses, to be in the Figure you will fight in; else in case of an Alarm, the
disorders will be many, and dangerous; but this way, there can be but few, if
any.

The nearer you draw toward your Enemy, or your Enemy to you, your Quarters
must always be brought closer, and your advanced Guards of Horse, and Foot,
the stronger; and your discovery the more vigilant.

III. The third is, To be the first drawn up, on the Ground you will fight in;
which is constantly attended with three considerable benefits. The point of
Honor which you gain by being the earliest on the spot, which animates your own
Party, and often daunts your Enemies. The being thereby enabled without
opposition to possess all the advantages of the Ground, either for the planting
of your Cannon, or for casting up Parapetts on some Eminencies which command
all about it, (as Sir Francis Vere did at the Battle of Newport) or by drawing
up your Carriages, or making a Ditch to cover one, or both the Flanks of your
Wings; which you cannot well do, if your Enemy be earlier, or as early as you
on the place. The being thereby sometimes in a posture to fall upon, and cut
off your Enemies Squadrons, and Battalions; or to Rake them with your Cannon
while they are drawing up, which is an advantage, when it may be taken, that is
of great use.

IV. The fourth is, That your Squadrons of Horse ought not to be too great, for
the Reasons which I have formerly mentioned in that Chapter which Treats of the
Disciplining of your Soldiery. Yet if that need requires, two, nay three of the
small ones may be put into one great one; but still I would advise, that the
same Officers should command the same Squadrons, when united, as they did
before: By which means they will retain the Agility which is in small Parties,
and yet when there is need, have the force of great ones; and this I propound
to be observed; because, whoever has been practically versed in fighting, will
hardly deny, but that 150 Horse in two Squadrons, will be likely to rout and
beat 200 Horse in one Squadron; And the reason to me seems very evident; for
besides the opportunity you have thereby to fall into his Flank and Rear,
whatever Body of Men does fight, or has fought, disorders it self, though it
gets the better; and being disordered, a less Number that is not, to speak
humanely, must (if the Men be equally good) overthrow a greater that is.

And daily Experience shows how difficult, if possible, it is, suddenly to
Rally great Squadrons, when by Fighting they have been disordered; especially
if but a small Squadron is at hand, to fall on them, and improve their being so
discomposed: Nor indeed can great Squadrons march many Paces, though the Ground
be clear, and level, without disordering their Ranks; but if it be uneven, or
rugged, they are almost out of their fighting Order, before they come to fight;
which are mischiefs that less Squadrons, are not so liable unto: But Battalions
of Foot, as being more Governable, may be large, according to the occasion and
need; especially those which are composed of Pikes: for a great Battalion, or
Stand of those in the Vanguard, the Battle, and the Rearguard of the Infantry,
are the safety of the whole, and under their shelter All Rallyings may be best
made.

V. The fifth is, A General must never omit in the drawing up of his Army, so
to dispose of his Squadrons, and Battalions, as probably every one of them may
come to fight, again, and again, if the need requires, before they are totally
overthrown. It is also observable that in a Battle, whoever keeps in Reserve a
Body of Men, that are not led to fight until all the Enemies Squadrons have
fought, rarely misses to carry away the Victory; and whoever has the last
Reserves, is very likely at last, to be the Victorious.

One signal Illustration of this Truth among many, I shall instance; At the
Battle of Dreux in France, where the Constable Montmorancy, assisted by Francis
Duke of Guise, (the greatest Captains of that Age) commanded the Royallists;
and Lewis Prince of Conde, and the Admiral the Protestants; He, and the
Admiral, defeated all the Forces they saw; took the Constable Prisoner; past
over the Bellies of the Swissers, who made almost a miraculous resistance, and
concluded, they had therefore won the Victory. In the mean while the Duke of
Guise, who led the Left Wing of the French King's Army, either by design, as
his Enemies said, or as an act of high conduct, so covered his Troops, with the
Village of Blainville, and the Trees and Shrubs about it, that he was not so
much as seen by the Protestants, nor moved from thence, until the Constable was
taken Prisoner, the Marshall de St. Andre killed, and all those Forces which
were considered by the Protestants, as the whole Army of the Royalists, were
entirely routed, and so confusedly flying, as he was in no danger to have his
Squadrons disordered by the Runawayes of his own Party; but then, advancing his
Troops, which were entire, he soon turned the Fortune of the day, took the
Prince of Conde Prisoner, and overthrew all that opposed him. For it is a
tedious, and difficult, if not an impossible task, to put into good order
again, an Army that has newly fought, so as to bring it suddenly to fight
again; some being busied about the Pillage, and Prisoners they have taken, or
are pursuing, others being loath to return to new dangers; and all in effect
being so heated, and disordered, that they do not, or will not hear, the
Commands of their Superiors.

VI. A sixth is, A General must never bring all his Troops to fight at once;
and therefore is still to draw up his Army; at least in two Lines, or orders of
Battle, and in three in case the Ground, and the Number of his Forces, allow
it: For those Lines are in effect so many Armies; and the second Line being
entire, though the first should be broken, often recovers the day; especially
if the second Line be at so just a distance behind the first, as if the first
be overthrown, it does not disorder the second; and also so near, that some
Squadrons of the second Line, can come up timely enough to redress any
beginning of a breach in the first, without too much discomposing it self.

The Romans constantly fought their Infantry in three Lines, or orders of
Battle, the one behind the other; if the Hostatii were worsted, they fell
between the Intervals of the Principi, and there Rallied again, while the
Principi advanced to give a check to the Pursuers; and if both the Hostatii and
Principi were Routed, they fell in between the Intervals of the Triarii; but if
those could not sustain the shock, the day was lost.

VII. A seventh is, To have expert, vigilant, and valiant Commanders, to be at
the Head of those five Gross Bodies, of which an Army is usually composed in a
day of Battle; that is to say, the three Tertia's of the Infantry, (which as
they march we usually call, Van, Battle, and Rear) and the two Wings of the
Cavalry; they ought to be Men of great Judgment, Authority, and Presence of
Mind, to remedy all Disasters, and to improve all Advantages in the nick of
time; for in such Actions, the least delay or remisness, is too usually
irrecoverable.

To these five chief Officers whose Stations ought to be in the first Line,
there ought also to be five others to command in the second Line; for this is
of equal importance, if not of greater; since it is easier to give the Attack
well, while all is in Order; than to recover a Disorder, when it once has
happened.

In my opinion it is a Duty in a General which he ought never to omit, not only
to appoint before the Armies Engage, what Persons by Name shall command in
chief the five Gross Bodies of the first Line, and of the second Line; but also
what Commander in every of the said Gross Bodies, shall in course, succeed in
the Conduct of every such Body, in case the Person whose right it is to do it,
or who is appointed to do it, should be killed, or so wounded, as he is thereby
disabled to discharge so weighty a Trust, and to declare openly to every Gross
Body, who by Name is to lead them; and who by Name is to succeed him who shall
be killed, or disabled from discharging his Function; that no Man may be
ignorant, or pretend ignorance therein: For if this be not done before Troops
are mingled in the Fight, it will be too late to do it afterward; and I have
known sad Disasters occasioned for want of this necessary Precaution.

Some who have been guilty of this Omission, have, as their Excuse, alleged;
that when he who commanded that Gross was killed, or put out of Fight by his
hurts, or his Horse being killed, the eldest Officer or Colonel in course was
to supply his room. But that is not in all Cases, a sufficient and full Answer;
for sometimes Regiments of Horse, and Regiments of Foot, have made up one
Gross; and though a Colonel of Foot has been the elder Colonel, yet in the
Field, a younger Colonel of Horse, has claimed the right of doing it; and
thereby Disputes amongst themselves have risen, when they should have only
disputed against the Enemy. Besides, I have also known that the elder Colonel
has not been so fit to command a Gross, as a younger Colonel has been; and the
Soldiery also have known it, who will not be a little troubled to be lead by
one, who they all know was not so capable of that Honor and Trust.

Neither do all the inferior Officers, or private Soldiers, know the dates of
every Colonels Commission; and if their own Colonel pretends to the Seniority,
they will not desert him in his pretense, by immediately submitting to be led
by, and obey another. But by the method I propound, these Uncertainties, and
dangerous Disputes, will be avoided; else if they are ever run into, it may too
probably be fatal. And since a General in the Field, may appoint on the death
of a General Officer, who shall act in his place, till the King's pleasure
therein be known, (which is usual enough;) and in making this choice, acts not
always by the rule of Seniority, but by the fitness of the Person; and yet
therein does no Wrong to an elder Colonel: I see no solid Reason why a General
may not temporarily Nominate who shall command a Gross Body, in case he who did
it, is killed, or disabled; especially in a day of Battle, when All is at
stake, and when no Advantage ought to be lost in Nominating the ablest Person
for the vacant Charge, lest thereby the Victory be lost.

I am fully of opinion that the greatest Captain that ever was, or will be, is
not, or can be, of himself sufficient to redress all Disorders, and lay hold of
all Advantages, in an instant, when Armies are once engaged. The utmost he can
do, is to choose well the Field of Battle; to draw up his Army according
thereunto, to most Advantage; to give his General Orders, and to give the best
Orders wherever he is in Person; but he cannot be Ubiquitary, nor send Orders
to every place timely enough, to have them obeyed successfully. And therefore
it is indisputably necessary, that he have under him, expert chief Officers, at
the Head of all Gross Bodies, who may supply what it is impossible for him
singly to command; for he can be well obeyed but to the time he sends his
Troops to the charge: after that, those only who lead them, and are with them,
can actuate them according to the General Orders, or as the occasion requires,
which those under him must have the judgment to lay hold of, as it were in the
twinkling of an Eye; so short are the moments to acquire the Victory.

Together with those chief Officers who command Tertia's, and Wings of Armies;
it is of high importance to have an able General of the Artillery, and that he
have sufficient Officers under him; for the Carriages well disposed, and the
Cannon early and well planted, do not a little contribute to the Victory; and
if it may be, I would never have the Cannon fired, so as the Bullet, if it take
place, can only carry away a File; especially also, now our Files are so
shallow; but always to point your Artillery so as the shot may rake thwart the
Squadrons and Battalions of the Enemy; and then it does not only do execution
while it has any force, but also disorders whole Bodies of Infantry, or Cavalry.

VIII. An eighth thing is, to place always your best Soldiery in the Wings of
your Army, and to begin the Battle on that side where you judge your self the
strongest, and your Enemy the weakest; and with those Troops to advance as
expeditiously as you can, (without disordering them) while the rest of your
Army moves as slowly as they may. For if your first Impression be successful,
you may fall into the Flank, and part of the Rear of your Enemies, while the
Residue of your whole Army is marching to attack them in the Front; but then
the motion of your Army must be quicker, as soon as ever they see your advanced
Wing is successful. I would recommend to Practice one thing more, which I have
on trial found very beneficial; it is this: During the motion of your advanced
Wing, to edge it by degrees, and insensibly, toward the outward Flank of that
Wing of the Enemies which you go to charge; so as by that time you mingle, you
may outwing them, and thereby attack them at once in Front, Flank, and Rear, if
he has omitted to cover that Flank; And therefore to begin the Battle with that
Wing of yours, which is the strongest, is not only most advisable, but also to
place your best men in that Wing of yours, which is opposite to that Wing of
his, which has the Flank of it uncovered; if by neglect, or want of time, or
means, either of his Flanks are not secured; I have known great advantage
obtained thereby; and if your Enemy be not very timely aware of this, it may
more than likely contribute considerably to win you the day. I mention very
timely aware of this, because if he discover not your design until you are on
the Point to execute it, it will be too late to prevent it; since no alteration
can be made when you are ready to join, but it will, in all likelihood, be
ruinous to him who in that juncture of time shall attempt to make it. When I
mention your beginning the Battle with that Wing in which you have placed your
valiantest Soldiers, I intend thereby, that the second Line of that Wing shall
advance as well as the first; else, while you fall in the Flank and Rear of
your Enemies Wing, his second Line may fall into the Flank and Rear of as many
of your first Line, as are so employed; unless your own second Line be ready to
prevent it; and to improve all the Advantages which your first Impression shall
give you.

The placing the best Men in the Wings of an Army, is very ancient, and seldom
has been omitted, but to the loss of those who were guilty of such Omission;
the Reason is, the Troops on your Wings are not wedged in, as the Troops in
your main Battle are; but are at liberty to take all advantages that by
accident, or by the ill conduct of your Enemy, or by your own good; may be
offered you; and you cannot so much as rationally hope to fall into his Flank
and Rear, but by attacking one of his Wings; because you cannot overwing him,
but only by falling upon one of his outward Flanks.

Hannibal, who was so excellent a Captain to win Victories, (though possibly
not to make the best use of them,) at the famous Battle of Cannes, placed all
his valiantest Men in both his Wings, and the worst Men in the midst of his
Battle; whereby, when the Romans came to the Charge, (who had placed their
choicest Legions in their main Battle) they soon pierced into the Body of
Hannibals Army, which was what he designed they should do; for then with his
two Wings, in which were all his choicest Troops, he immediately encompassed
the Romans, and totally defeated them. But at the Battle of Zama, or as some
call it Nadagara, which ^e fought against Scipio, though the Fate of Carthage
depended on the issue of that day, yet he totally altered the Order he had
observed at Cannes, and lost the Victory; For at Zama he placed all his new
raised Men by themselves, to endure the first Attack of the Romans; and of all
his old Soldiers who had so memorably served him in his Wars in Italy, he made
as it were an Army apart, and drew them up a few Furlongs, behind his new
raised Africans, who were therefore soon cut in pieces, as his reserve Army was
not long after; whereas if he had observed the like order of Battle at
Nadagara, as he did at Cannes, he might have had the like success.

IX. The ninth thing is, To prohibit, under the severest Penalties, the
absolute Chase, or the Pillage, until the Enemy is totally Routed on all sides;
and then have those Troops only to pursue, which are expressly appointed for it,
always having Squadrons to march after the Pursuers as near and in as good
order, as if they were going to the Charge; that if the Pursued should Rally,
and Face about, you may have those ready to fall on, and break them a second
time.

How many Victories seemingly won, have, in an instant, been lost, for want of
due care, in these two Particulars of such high concernment, which therefore
ought never to be omitted; Neither is there any thing which more encourages
flying Enemies to rally, and fight again, than the seeing a disorderly Pursuit
of them; for in such a Pursuit, all the advantage of the prevailing Party is
immediately vanished, when the Chaced do but turn about; for such an evidence
of restored Valor, too often daunts those who are to oppose it: Nor can any
thing more deterr the flying Party from doing that, than to see several Bodies
in good order, ready to make them repent that confidence; and though brave
Officers will not cease pressing, promising, and threatening their Men that
fly, to Face about; yet the Private Soldier who sees those Bodies are ready to
fall on them, conclude it is more dangerous to do so, than to run, and
therefore are too often deaf to all Oratory, or Menaces of that Nature; for the
frighted Soldier, as well as the hungry Belly, has no Ears.

These Nine Particulars may not improperly be called Maxims in War, and
therefore ought to be still practiced before a Battle, in a Battle, and after
the Enemy is Routed. I know many of the Ancients, and not a few of the Moderns
have with much industry always endeavored to gain the Sun and the Wind of
their Enemy in the day of Battle, and doubtless both are very desirable to be
on our backs, when they may be obtained without losing thereby more certain
Advantages from the Nature of the Ground you are to fight on; For those are
mutable, especially the latter, and the former is still in motion, so that no
Precaution can ascertain the keeping of them when they are gotten; and
therefore one must not lose the stable Advantages, in hope to gain the
unstable; but if both may be had at once, they must never be neglected.

I shall now proceed to set down several other Particulars, which I hope will
be useful to whoever has the Curiosity and Patience to read them.

When an Enemies Army advances to raise the Siege of a place, which otherwise
can hardly hold out longer; in my poor judgment, it is not advisable to defend
the ordinary Line of Circumvallation, but to draw out of it, and give the Enemy
Battle, if your Men be as good, your Numbers as great as his, and that your
Ground you fight on, be as fit for you, as him.

Some of the Reasons and Experiments which induce me to be of this Belief, I
shall here express.

If the place be large which you besiege, your Line of Circumvallation must of
necessity be many Miles about, for it ought to be out of the reach of your
Enemies Artillery, else you will too much expose to the mercy of it, your Army
that is lodged within it. All this Line must be equally defended, unless it be
where the situation of it secures it self, or does it but thinly manned: for
not knowing in what part, or places of it, he will attempt to force it, you
must secure every Foot of it, which in consequence does so disperse your Army,
that if he once enters, it will be impossible to draw it together expeditiously
enough to beat him out again; for as soon as ever he is gotten within it, he
flings down immediately such parts of it as are near him; that the Squadrons
and Battalions of his Army may come in, and they marching on the heels of each
other, will certainly be imbattelled, and rout all the small Forces which may
be in readiness near that place; and will also hinder those further off from
imbodying. Besides, if the place besieged is seated on an unfordable River, or
that may be so in a rainy season, (as most commonly considerable Fortresses
are) it is not to be doubted but you will cast over it Bridges of Boats, or
fixed Bridges, that you may surround the place, (which else might with safety
be every day or night relieved) and thereby also have free intercourse between
both parts of your Army which are divided by the River; and it is as little to
be doubted, but as soon as he has entered your Line, his first care will be, to
make himself Master of all those Bridges, that such as are, as it were, in a
Pound, may not escape; and that having defeated half your Army, he may march
over them to destroy the rest, who seem then but too ripe for Ruin, when half
their Friends are cut off, and all their Enemies are marching against them, and
the Besieged, by their Sallies, ready to assist them.

This seems to me to be the usual, and fatal Consequences, if your Enemies Army
entering your ordinary Line of Circumvallation, which being most frequently but
a Parapet with a narrow and shallow Ditch, is but too easily forced, and indeed
not to be held tenable of it self; If the Forts, Redoubts, and other Works
which flank it, and which are usually raised a Musket Shot from one another,
with many hands to mann it, did not, in a good degree, secure it.

But those Works usually are such slight things, especially when an Enemy is
entered, that few of the Resolutest which are posted in them, to guard them,
stay to do it after; for commonly the attempt on such a Line is made a little
before the break of day, that the Obscurity may the less expose the Assailants,
while they advance to storm it; and that the daylight, may help them soon
after they are gotten in, to improve all advantages which are offered them
thereby; and it is in this twilight ordinarily, that those in the Works to
defend the Line, steal out of them, when they find the Enemy is entered, as
those who then expect more safety from their feet, than from their hands.

He who resolves to force an ordinary Line of Circumvallation, either does it
without any noise, or else alarms it round; and often most warmly, where he
means not to make his attempt; while small Parties are doing this, in the dark
he is drawing all the rest of his Army to the place, or places, (which still
are near each other) where he intends to make his real impression, and does it
with that silence, as the Defendants cannot discover his intentions, till
usually it be too late successfully to oppose them.

I must therefore frankly acknowledge, since the defenses of such a Line are so
inconsiderable; since the equally manning them so dissipates the Army which
does it; since it cannot hopefully be defended otherwise: And since it cannot
be safely defended that way, I have almost wondered at those, who rather choose
to make good such a Line, than to give Battle to the Enemy who comes to raise
the Siege. This being a more hopeful thing, a more glorious action, and whose
Consequences, if Success attends the Besiegers in the Field, will be much more
great, than to defend the Line can possibly be; for thereby you can at last but
carry the place: But by a Battle gained over the Relievers, you usually carry
the Fortress but as one of the many good effects of getting the Victory; for
few, if any Towns, hold out, after the relief sent them is defeated.

What I have said on this Subject, proceeds from my taking two things for
granted; the first is, that the Circumvallation Line is after the usual and
common Form; that is, but a Parapet, and that the Works which defend it are
very inconsiderable either toward the Field, or within the Line.

The second is, that the besieging Army has as good Men and more than the
Relievers bring; for it is necessary he leave his best and most advanced Works
well guarded during the Battle, both to preserve them against his return with
Victory, as also by them to hinder the Besieged from sallying on their backs,
while they are fighting with the Relief; but indeed if the Line need not be of
much circumference; if it be high, and the Graft large and deep; if your Army
is not strong enough both to fight the Enemy in the Field, and to secure at the
same time your most advanced, and most necessary Works; if the place you must
fight in, is an open Country, and that your Enemy does much exceed you in
Cavalry; or if it be an enclosed, encumbered Country, and he does much exceed
you in Infantry; if you have Victuals, and Forage enough, within your Line, and
your Enemy have little with him, or without it; so that he can stay but a few
days, and that you may probably in fewer days take the place by Assault, or
have it surrendered by Capitulation. I say in a Case thus Circumstantiated, I
would not admire a General would justify his Line; but rather admire, if he
should draw out of it, to give Battle to the Relievers.

I shall therefore now instance some Examples of famous Captains, who have kept
within their Lines of Circumvallation, when the Enemies Army came to relieve
the Besieged, and in them have resisted their Attempts, and as a consequence of
that success, have gained the places.

I shall also give Examples of some other great Generals, who have chose rather
to draw out of their Lines, to give the Relieving Army Battle, than to stay
within their Lines, and in them to oppose the Relief.

I shall then enumerate some of the many Reasons, why I believe such various,
and opposite methods, have been practiced by such celebrated Chiefs in War;
nay, sometimes by the very self-same General; though I must say, I find many
more Examples in Histories, and in my own time, for drawing out of ordinary
Lines of Circumvallation to give Battle to the Relievers Army, than for
opposing the Succors by continuing within them.

Caesar, who I esteem the famousest Captain of the Universe, in the famousest
of all his Sieges, that of Al^sia in France, chose to stay within his Lines to
oppose the Relief of the united Gauls; or at least fought them in the Field
only with his Cavalry, which on occasion he drew out of his Lines, and in which
Services he owns his German Horse did him most service; who have been famous,
for their Valor, even as long as Historians have recorded any great Actions of
War, in which that Nation had a share.

But because this memorable Siege is so minutely, and particularly related by
Caesar himself, and does thereby imply, he thought it even his Masterpiece in
that kind; and since by his Conduct there, the most eminent Captains of the
Moderns, as I have been credibly informed, have modeled the design of their
Sieges, viz. the Prince of Orange, the Duke of Parma, and the Marquess of
Spinola, in their great Sieges of Maestricht, Antwerp, and Breda; I hope those
who read this Book, will, at least, judge me worthy of their Pardon, if I stay
a little in the Relation of this prodigious Siege of Alesia; since also no less
an Author than Paterculus, when he treats of it, has these very expressions,
viz. So great things were done at Alesia, that they might seem too great for
any Man to attempt, or any but a god to effect.

Caesar having defeated the Cavalry of the Gauls, whose Army was led by
Vercingetorix (a Person worthy to command a National Army) Vercingetorix shuts
himself up in Alesia with 80000 of his chosen Soldiers, sends away the Relics
of his Cavalry, (as useless in that Siege) and requires all the Nations of the
whole Country of Gallia, to come to his Relief, which he conjures them to
hasten, having but 30 days Corn in the Town to feed his Men, which in all
probability, by the frugallest management, and the carefullest distribution,
could not suffice for above six Weeks.

Caesar immediately resolves to besiege this great General, and greater Army;
in hope to reduce both, before the Relief could come; yet admirably well
fortifying himself against the Relief, if it should come early enough to succor
the Besieged.

What these stupendous Works were, both as to the Circumvallation to oppose
the Relievers, and as to the Countervallation to resist the Attempts of the
Besieged, you shall have briefly related, and from his own Commentaries,
wherein he writes, viz. That he made round about the Town, a Ditch of 20 foot
wide, and 20 foot deep, with upright sides, as broad at the top, as at the
bottom; 40 foot behind this Ditch, he made his first Works; behind them he made
two other Ditches of 15 foot in breadth, and 15 foot deep, and behind all these
he made a Ditch 12 foot wide, and 12 foot deep, with a Rampard, and Parapet
thereon, and erected Towers round about the whole Work; at every 80 foot
distance the one from the other; besides the Palisadoes, Stockadoes, and those
other Fortifications; which he comprehends under the name of Cippi, of which
there were five Ranks; and of Stimuli, of which there were eight Courses or
Rows, round about his whole Camp. So that it seems to me, none of his Enemies
could come to attack his Works, but must run on several Ranks of sharp Stakes,
or into Holes, or on Galthrops, which were also covered, or hid with Branches
of Osiers. Caesar further adds, That after the inner Fortifications were thus
perfected, he took in 14 Miles of Circuit, and made the like Fortifications in
All Points against the Enemy without, as he had done against the Town: which
are his own words.

These are the first Lines of Circumvallation and Countervallation, which I
ever read of in any Siege; and I fully believe the making of both as ordinarily
they are made in our modern Sieges, when we equally apprehend the numerous
Sallies of the Besieged, and the strong Attempts of the Relievers, was taken
from this Model of Caesar's; but the Copies are very much short of the Original
as to the quantities, and qualities of the Lines; so many prodigious Works of
11 Miles about toward Alesia, and 14 Miles about toward the Armies which came
to succor it; with the several Rows of Stakes, Holes in the Ground, and other
Traps to destroy and catch the Gauls, I think is admirable, and to perfect
them, one would judge, must be the labor of some years, though a vast Army
undertook it; whereas indeed as I believe it could not possibly be the labor
of many days: For though Caesar mentions not how many days it was before the
Relieving Army came; Yet since he expressly says Vercingetorix found scarce 30
days Corn in the place, when he shut up himself in it, with his 80000 chosen
Men; and that he surrendered it not, till the Relief had made three Attempts to
succor it; it is undeniable 'twas not Famine only which made Vercingetorix
yield: And therefore it could not be many days in which Caesar began, and
perfected all these wonderful Works.

This being the true Narrative of the strength of his Lines, both toward the
Town, and toward the Field; it is not to be thought strange he elected to
withstand his Enemy within such Fortifications, and that he repulsed their
General Assaults, though three times made; nor can any one reasonably believe
Caesar's Army could have justified 11 miles of a Line against 80000 men within
the Countervallation, and of 14 miles against 248000 men without the
Circumvallation, had not the multiplicity of his Works, the one within the
other, and the strength of them every way, made them defensible enough, for the
paucity of the hands which were to justify them.

Yet the finishing of these amazing Works were not the only Labors of
Caesar's Army; but to do the constant Duty, Night and Day, of the Camp,
especially most strongly until the Line of Countervallation was finished; the
providing not only Forage, and Victuals, from hand to mouth; but also to lay in
besides, Magazines of both, for 30 days, which Caesar writes, by his Orders,
were done: That thereby, as I suppose, he might not be necessitated to stir out
of his Lines when the Relief should Incamp it self close by them; which else
might have hazarded the cutting off his Army by piece-meel going to Forage, or
forced him to have come to a decisive Battle, whereby all his Labor on his
Lines would have been needless; as also by carrying into his Leaguer what was
in the Villages, and Country Neighboring on his Works, to deprive his Enemies
Army of all sustenance but what they brought along with them, or were daily to
be fetched by them to their Camp, from a great distance.

And lastly, to have still in his Leaguer, more Victuals than the Besieged
could then have within the Town, thereby to compel the Relieving Army to attack
those almost unconquerable Works; or the Town to surrender for want of Food in
the sight of the Army which came for the Succor: These necessary performances,
together with his often fighting against such Forces, as almost hourly, Night,
and Day, made numerous Sallies, and were obliged to do it, both to harass, and
lessen Caesar's Army, and to retard the finishing of his Works; which when
completed, would render it highly difficult, if possible, to relieve the
Besieged; I say, and I think with reason, all these Economies of War, were at
least as difficult in the Actings, as the making those laborious
Fortifications; Yet all were to be done, and done at one and the same time; and
in so short a space, that I scarce know to which of the two, my Admiration is
justlier due.

At length the Relieving Army appeared, which consisted of 248000 men, as
Caesar, who condescended to be the Commissary of their Musters, reckons them to
be; and also writes, how many every State of Gallia, did particularly send; so
that at once he was to withstand 320000 of his Enemies; and which was more, to
fight with them at the same time, when they attacked him in Front and Rear.

This formidable Relieving Army was led by four Generals, viz. Comius,
Veridomarus, Eporedorix, and Vergesilaunus; All great Captains, and accustomed
to make War even against Caesar himself; where they could not but have learned
much, having to do with such a General, and yet for many Years continued the
War against him; and one of them, viz. Comius, had learned the Rudiments of
War, under Caesar himself, and acquired so much Honor in serving the Romans,
that Caesar rewarded him with the Principality over the Morini.

The Gauls seated their Camp on a Hill half a mile from Caesar's Works, and
sent their Cavalry into a Plain under it, and their nimblest Archers concealed
behind their Troops.

Caesar makes his Cavalry match out to fight them, lest the Gauls, by having
their Cavalry unfought with, even under Caesar's Works, might grow too
insolent, and his own Army be intimidated. The Roman Horse were worsted by the
help of the Gauls Archers; but Caesar's German Horse Relieved them, Routed the
Gauls, and cut in pieces their Archers, and then all Caesar's Troops return d
within their Line.

The Gauls made three several General Assaults on Caesar's Camp, the first by
Day, the second by Night, and the third at full Noon, Vercingetorix every time
Sallying out at the same hour with his Army: In these three Attacks all that
Valor, Skill, and Industry could perform on both sides, was not omitted. Some
Particulars I shall enumerate; the Gauls finding the Rows of Stakes, and
Holes, and the Galthorps, destroyed many of their Men, flung up so much Earth
over them, as covered them; and thereby made them useless to the Romans: Then
filling their Ditches with Fagots, Hurdles, and Earth, raised the Outside, on
which they went to the Assaults, higher than the Line they assaulted, and so
went on advantageous Ground to the Attack; and Caesar, when he found his Men
distressed in Front, by the Enemies overnumbring him, and fighting on equal
Ground, would often command his Cavalry, sometimes his Legionary Infantry, to
sally out of his Line, and to fall on them in the Rear, whereby he routed them.

The last days Attack, seemed several Battles, rather than one General
Assault, such great Bodies fighting at once both within and without the first
Lines toward the Field, and toward the Town; for the Gauls having discovered
the weakest, or more properly the least strong part of Caesar's Line, while all
the residue of their Army were assaulting the rest of the Works, Vergesilaunus,
(who was Vercingetorix's near Kinsman) in the obscurity of the preceding Night,
had marched behind a Hill, and concealed himself there with 60000 select men;
who at Noonday (when the Romans were with all their Forces defending their
Works both against the Besieged, and Comius, etc.) assaulted them unexpectedly,
entered the Line, whose Ditch they had filled, and with many shouts, daunted
Caesar's Soldiers, as he himself confesses. But Caesar, at last, by the Valor
and Expertness of his men, and by his excellent Conduct, relieving them in all
parts, where they were oppressed, and leading them in Person, to many Charges,
was Victorious, and Chaced the Gauls to the very Works of their Camp, and to
the Gates of the Town; and adds, If his Soldiers had not been quite spent with
that days hot Service, few of all the Gauls had escaped. They lost in that
last days attempt, above 60000 men, so that despairing to perform what they
came for, they did that Night abandon their Camp; and many were killed by
Caesar's Cavalry, who pursued them in the obscurity; and the next day
Vercingetorix capitulated, and yielded; he himself gallantly mounted, and
armed, at all points, having first leisurely rid round about the Chair of State
in which Caesar sat to receive him, alighted off of his Horse, and, as an
evidence of his being Conquered, disarmed himself, and then went and sat down
on the Ground at Cae^ar's feet, without speaking one word.

Some of those many Reasons which induced Caesar, in my opinion, to continue
within his Lines, and not to give the Enemy Battle in the Field, I shall here
set down.

I. He could not shut up in Alesia a much greater Army than his own, without
making very strong Lines of Countervallation against it.

II. Having made these wonderful ^ines, and knowing of the vast Relief which
was certainly hastening, to succor the Besieged; he, with so small an Army as
his own, (which probably could not consist of above 30000 Foot, and 6000 Horse,
for he never had above 10 Legions at once in all Gallia) could not reasonably
hope both to keep in Vercingetorix with 80000 chosen men, and fight against
Comius, etc. with 248000 good men, unless by prodigious Works he could supply,
what he wanted in Numbers of men, and also by so posting his Army between his
Lines of Circumvallation, and ^ountervallation, as to be thereby ready to
resist both ways, and often, with the same Reserve, Battalions, and Squadrons.
For whatever Justus L^psius computes, That the space between these two Lines
must be 5000 Foot, yet in reason I am fully convinced they were much nearer
each other, for else they could not answer the end for which they were made;
since no Squadrons of Reserve can (...) answer both ways, a distance of a
Mile, much less do it as often as need requires; and our modern Lines of
Circumvallation and Countervallation, (which are but Copies after Caesar's
Original) are generally no farther asunder, than to leave space to Camp the
Army in, and that the Battalions, and Squadrons, may be drawn up between them
so near, as timely enough to relieve either, or both Lines; and to me it is
inferredly evident, that Caesar had this in his prospect, by acknowledging he
was necessitated to run that part of his Line, which Vergesilaunus assaulted as
the weakest, on the hanging of a Hill; for had he ran it on the top of the
Hill, it would have taken up too much Ground; that is, have made his ^ine of
Circumvallation too far distant from his Line of Countervallation, and thereby
rendered the Reserve Battalions between both Lines, useless to one, or both.

III. Caesar seeing that Vercingetorix, not designedly, but compelled by
necessity, had cast himself into Alesia with 80000 chosen men; for the Gauls
Cavalry having been defeated the day before by the Italian, and German, on
which Cavalry of the Gauls, Vercingetorix most depended, and losing their
support, despaired of retreating in the face of the Roman Horse, and of the
Legionary Infantry, had no better Game to play, than to get into Alesia, which
was very near him; Caesar therefore had abundant reason to believe the Town had
not wherewithal long to feed so many mouths; for I conclude it was not a
Magazine of the Gauls, since Caesar particularly mentions, that the Manubii by
whose interest only, Vercingetorix was admitted into it, were by him expelled
out of it; the longer to enable his Army to eat: which sure he would not have
been so ungrateful to have done, if they had been his Garrison, and also had not
mere want of Corn constrained him to it; I say, since Caesar, by their want of
Corn, had probable hopes to reduce them by Famine, before their expected Relief
could come, (for a League of many petty States are not overwarm to adventure
their Forces to relieve the Defeated, but are more inclined to make their
Peaces apart) and therefore having shut them up with prodigious Works, he was
afterward compelled, as it were, to make as vast Works against the Relief,
when he foresaw the Besieged could hold out till the Succor came; for else all
he had thitherto done, had been uneffectual to answer his final end; since the
full manning of those Lines against the Besieged, must take up too many of his
small Army, to leave him enough Forces to fight the vast Succors in the Field;
and therefore he resolved to continue within his Lines.

IV. Since he could lay up one months Magazine of Victuals, within his Works,
which was more than Vercingetorix could have in Alesia, after Comius, etc. came
with the Relief; Caesar had all the reason imaginable to justify his Lines,
and not to draw out of them, to give his Enemy Battle; for he might justly
believe, that if the Relief had hopes of cutting him off from all Provisions
which he had not got into his Camp before their coming, they would only design
to block him up within his Works, and then he might sooner starve
Vercingetorix, than Comius, etc. could starve him: And by having ruined the
flower of the Gauls Forces, and their Generalissimo, he should be the better
able to fight the rest in the Field, when the Consumption of his Magazines
within his Camp, necessitated him to issue out of it.

Or if the Gauls, soon after their Arrival, should endeavor to storm, and
force his Camp on the Field-side of it; and Vercingetorix, at the same time, on
the Town-side of it, he might be the better able to resist, and repel both,
being within such Works; so that which soever way they acted, Caesar had great
cause to keep within such stupendous Works; by the help of which, he, at last,
defeated his Enemies Field Army, and reduced to his mercy their besieged Army;
and did it both at one and the same time. Nor had Caesar left Comius and the
Relievers, any probable hopes to besiege him successfully, while he was
besieging Vercingetorix, could he have been fed within the Town longer than 30
or 40 days; for Caesar had furnished his Camp, for one month, and had thereby
brought into it, all the Provisions which were near it in the Country, and
(more than probably) destroyed, by his Cavalry, all he could not bring within
his Line; and when 248000 Soldiers, with the many useless mouths (as to
Fighting) which in the best regulated Armies attend such Forces, must be fed,
and all this Victual and Forage must be brought far off; it would have been
very difficult, if possible, to have supplied them for any considerable time
with Food.

I beg the Readers pardon that I have thus largely insisted on this one
Instance, which in some degree to repair, I will almost but name the subsequent
ones.

The Example of Caesar's keeping within such excellent Lines, and in them
resisting, and defeating the Relief, being very ancient, I will give the Reader
a recent one, to evidence that in parallel Cases, equal Success has been the
Consequence.

Henry, Prince of Orange, a most excellent Captain, did in the Year 1632.
besiege Maestricht, the Spaniards apprehending they should not be able with
their own Armies only, to force his Lines (which were as strong in needful
places, as the very Fortifications of the Town) prevailed with the Emperor to
join with them for that Service; the German Army, commanded by Count Papenheim,
a brave and adventurous General; and to heighten his endeavors to relieve the
place, he was promised 100000 Crowns, and the Order of the Golden Fleece, if he
effected it: But the Prince of Orange had made such Lines about his Camp, and
against the Town, and so well furnished his Leaguer, as thereby he resisted all
their Assaults; and when the Relief drew off, Maestricht Capitulated, and
Surrendered.

The Reasons which, in my poor opinion, did engage the Prince of Orange to stay
within, and justify his Lines, were:

That his Works were almost as tenable as those of Maestricht.

That his Enemies did greatly exceed him in Cavalry; and the Country about it
was Champion.

That he was well furnished with Horse-meat and Mansmeat within his Leaguer.

That his Enemies Armies were ill furnished with both.

That he knew Papenheim could not long be spared by the Emperor; and that the
other Commanders, without his help, durst not attempt to force such
extraordinary Lines.

And that if he had raised his Siege, and retreated before the Enemy advanced,
he had not only lost all the Blood, Treasure, and Time, which were consumed in
this Siege, but also had given the Enemy leisure, and means, to repair those
defects in the place, which his knowledge of, had been a chief invitation to
him to besiege it.

I shall now Present my Reader with two remarkable Instances, of famous
Generals, who even in our own memories, chose within an ordinary Line of
Circumvallation to oppose the Army commanded to relieve the Besieged, and were
thereby defeated, and forced hastily to abandon their Design.

The Archduke, assisted by the Prince of Conde now living, besieged Arras, and
raised one of the ordinary Lines of Circumvallation about it; Monsieur de
Turenne, assisted by His Royal Highness the Duke of York, came to relieve that
place.

The Archduke, and the chief Spanish Commanders, resolve to justify their
Line; but as I have been assured, the Prince of Conde was absolutely, either
for giving the French Army Battle, or retreating before the Relief was near;
this wholesome advice was not followd.

His Royal Highness and Monsieur de Turenne assault, and carry the Line, being
themselves two of the very first which entered it; and doubtless had entirely
cut off the Spanish Army, had those Bridges been immediately secured by the
French, by which the Spaniards held communication. I was positively told by a
Person of great Honor who was present, that His Royal Highness, whose judgment
in War in so green an Age, was almost as much admired, as his Valor,
exceedingly pressed to have it done; which being a while omitted, the Prince of
Conde in Person, with almost incredible diligence, got together many Squadrons
of Horse, then caused their own Bridges to be destroyed, and with his usual
Conduct, his Sword in his hand, made the Retreat, and saved the residue of that
broken Army.

In what the Prince of Conde then did, we may learn one very observable Lesson;
That a great Commander, when a fatal mischief is fallen into, which his advice,
had it been followed, would probably have prevented, is notwithstanding obliged
to hazard his Person, and employ his best Conduct, to make the Loss as easy as
possibly he can, to his own Party.

A second Instance of the like ill Success, by pursuing the like method, is in
the same Monsieur de Turenne's besieging Valenciennes jointly with the
Marshall de la Ferte; and resolving within an ordinary Line of
Circumvallation, to oppose the Spanish Relief, led by Don John of Austria, who
forced the Line on the Marshall de la Ferte's side of the River: As soon as
this was known to Monsieur de Turenne, he instantly broke his own Bridges over
it, sent away his Cannon and Baggage, and marched after it, as expeditiously as
he could; and therein acted the best part, which in such a Case, was left him
to manage.

These two Instances, so fresh in our memories, seem to me no ill Evidence,
That whatever Besieging General shall stay within such an ordinary Line, and of
great Circumference, when an Army comes to attack it, it is great odds but he
suffers thereby considerable loss and disgrace.

By the French forcing such a Line justified by the Spaniards before Arras; And
by the Spaniards forcing such a Line justified by the French before
Valenciennes; it looks, as if the Victory were not won so much by the Conduct
and Valor of either Army, as by the Difficulty of defending such a Line; And
therefore whatever Nation does play the like Game, will, too probably, sustain
the like Loss.

I might particularize several other Examples of this Nature, even within our
own Times, but, to avoid cloying my Reader, I purposely omit them; and will
rather employ his patience, in giving him some instances of great Captains, who
chose to quit their ordinary Lines, to give the Relieving Army Battle, and were
successful therein.

Maurice, Prince of Orange, in the Year 1600, had besieged Newport, believing
that the mutiny of many of the Spanish Forces, would disable the Archduke from
relieving it; but those Mutineers being unexpectedly pacified, and the Archduke
marching with his Army to relieve the Place; that Prince, though always loath to
come to a decisive Battle, yet in this Case, having had only time enough to
make an ordinary Line of Circumvallation, quitted it, led thereunto by his own
judgment, and the concurrent advice of our Noble Sir Francis Vere, and advanced
to meet the Archduke; gave him Battle in the open Field, won the Victory, with
116 Ensigns, and 5 Standards; and perhaps had also won Newport, had he in
earnest again besieged it, which he forbore to do, partly because la Burlotte
had cast into it three Regiments with great Conduct and Celerity.

In the Year 1633, the Duke of Lunenburg, with Milander, and Marshall
Kniphausen, had besieged Hamelen, a strong and considerable place, seated on
the River Vess^r in Germany; and having reduced it to great Wants, the Germans
resolved to relieve it; and Rendezvous'd a great Army for that end, under the
Command of General Merodes, and Count Cronesfield. The Besiegers on their
Enemies Army drawing near, left some Regiments for the defense of their most
advanced Approaches, and to hinder the Garrisons sallying during the Battle; and
with 9500 Horse, near as many Foot, with 42 pieces of Cannon, Field and
Battering, went to fight the Relief, which consisted of near the like Numbers.
The Battle was long, and bloody, it lasted above 9 hours; but at length the
Protestant, and besieging Army, got the Victory; the marks whereof were, the
Duke of Lunenburgs, Milanders and Kniphausens taking 50 Ensigns and Standards,
800 Wagons, 13 Cannon, 2000 Prisoners, and Merodes the General, who soon after
dyed of his Wounds, as 5000 of his Men did on the spot: The Victorious
immediately returned to the Siege, and the Garrison soon surrendered.

In the Year 1638, Duke Bernard Weymar, on a sudden, sits down before
Rhinefield in Alsatia, and reduces it almost to the last Extremity; the
Imperialists send Duke Savelle, and General John de Were, with an Army to
relieve it. Duke Weymar following his own solid Opinion, and being seconded
therein, by the advice of Henry, Duke of Rohan, one of the greatest Captains of
that Age, (who went a Volunteer to that Action, to wipe off some Calumnies
which his Enemies had unjustly laid to his Charge) quits his Lines to give the
Enemy Battle, but leaves some Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse, to
justify his Works, and beat in the Besieged, if they should sally: Savelle and
Were accept the Battle, and, after a sharp dispute, Weymar got the day, cuts in
pieces the best of the Imperial Troops, takes all their Baggage and Cannon, and
Duke Savelle, General Were, and Spureter Prisoners; then returns to Rhinefield,
which soon after surrendered unto him.

Monsieur de Turenne, a few Years since, besieged Dunkirk, Don John of Austria
came with an Army to relieve it; Monsieur de Turenne abandons his Line, gives
Don John Battle, wins the Victory, and as a consequence of it, had Dunkirk
yielded to him; in which Battle our Countrymen did great Service.

King Henry the Great of France, when Alexander Ferneze, Duke of Parma, and
Charles Duke of Mayenne came to the Relief of Paris with the United Forces of
the League, and of Philip II. of Spain, would not stay within his Lines, but
drew out of them, to give his Enemy Battle; which those two excellent Captains
would not accept of, but, by a rare Conduct, having forced Lainy in the sight
of the French Army, by that way, flung the wanted Relief into Paris.

For whoever does well understand the Trade of War, will never put Affairs to
the greatest hazard, when they can be carried on with the less.

In our sinful Times in England, when Robert Earl of Essex marched to the
Relief of Gloucester, his Highness Prince Rupert, whose high Genius in War,
admirable Valor, and great Judgment, has made him justly to be esteemed both by
his Friends and Enemies, a General of the very first Form, would not stay in
his Works before that City, but leaving most of his Infantry in them, advanced
with his Cavalry to meet the relieving Army on the Downs; which doubtless he
had defeated, as several of the chief Officers of it have owned to me, had not
some Brigades of the Earl of Essex's Infantry, done almost Wonders on that
occasion.

These, and many other the like Instances, make it seem to me, even a kind of
Maxim in War, That a besieging Army, which has only an ordinary and vast Line
of Circumvallation to cover it, ought not to stay in it; but to give the Relief
Battle, or raise the Siege before the Relief be too near; it being, in my poor
opinion, altogether unadviseable, to stay as if you would fight, when you are
resolved not to do it; for whatever Army retreats from another, thereby
evidences that he apprehends his Enemies; which highly encourages them, and
does not a little deject your own Forces; who therefore are the more prone to
be disordered, if vigorously pushed; and to be disordered, is almost the next
step to being defeated; so that early Retreats, where the Resolution is taken
not to fight, is most eligible; for why should you hazard to be engaged, when
you resolve to avoid it?

Though I cannot say that the besieging Army quitting an ordinary Line, has
always had success in giving, or offering Battle to the Relieving Army, (for
that depends on many Circumstances, and unforeseeable Accidents) yet the
Arguments appear to me very strong for the doing of it; and Actions ought not
to be judged of only by the Event, but by the Reasons which make them to be
undertaken.

I cannot observe in all the Wars which Caesar mad^ that he committed any one
oversight so clearly deserving that name, as when at Dirachium, he enclosed,
with a prodigious Line for its circumference the Army of Pompey, which was much
greater than his own, and consequently might, when he would, force his passage
in one part of it, because all Caesar's vast Line was to be equally manned and
provided for, (where Nature made it not inaccessible) which could not but
disperse his Troops to such a distance, as rendered them not only useless when
Pompey should attack any one place of them from within with his whole Forces,
but exposed them to be cut off by parts, when Pompey got out; So that it was
believed the War had that day been ended, had Pompey been a General who had
known how to improve a Victory: And if Caesar, whose own Conduct was so
excellent, whose Soldiers were so valiant and expert, as he himself writes,
That their knowledge and experience was such as they could prescribe unto
themselves what was to be done as well as any Commander could teach them; could
not, on trial, justify so vast, yet weak a Line, when it could then only be
assaulted from those within it; how should any other General rationally hope to
justify an ordinary Line, and of great Circuit, when it is at once vigorously
attempted both from the Field, and from the Town; for the strongest Sallies
from the Town, are, when the Relief fights the besieging Army. Experiment might
teach what Reason did not.

But lest some who peruse this Treatise, may think I have forgot how much I
have already spoken of the great advantages which are derived from an Armies
being entrenched, though but as it were within a Parapet well flanked, by my
now writing so much against an Armies trusting to an ordinary Line of
Circumvallation, I shall desire him to consider, there is a very great
difference between an Army which is posted in an Entrenched Camp, and one which
is posted within such a Line of Circumvallation, though the Works should be of
equal strength. For an Army entrenched lodges so compactly, and close, and has
comparatively so little Ground to defend, and no Enemy to attack them from
within; that all the Forces of it are at hand in a moment, to justify their
Intrenchment against all Assaults from without; but an Army within such a Line
of Circumvallation, is necessarily so far dispersed, to make good every part of
it, not knowing where the real Impression will be made; and has so many Troops,
only to attend the Sallies of the Garrison; that if once the Line be entered, it
is impossible to bring Forces from such remote distances, so expeditiously to
drive them out, as the assaulting General can bring his in, to prevent all
considerable Imbodyings to resist him; without which, it were unadviseable for
the defending General to design it, and ruinous to attempt it.

Having thus set down my own opinion for giving Battle to a relieving Army,
rather than to oppose it in a large and ordinary Line of Circumvallation, with
the needful Cautions to be observed in choosing to do it; and having both by
the reason of the thing, and by examples, endeavored to manifest why my opinion
therein is taken up; and having also given my Reader nine general Maxims, which
are to be observed in giving Battle; I shall now close this Chapter, and this
Tome, with some other Particulars, which, in my belief, are not unworthy his
perusal; and seem to me fit to be observed, before, in, and after a Battle, as
being built on Reason, or Experiment.

Before the fighting of a Battle, the Field Mark, and the Field Word* ought
still to be given to every one of your men; the first is, That you may be able
to distinguish afar off, who are Friends, and who are Enemies; the second is,
That when you come to Rally, you may make your Rallyment of those only who are
of your own Troops; which else might consist partly of your Enemies men, who
might, to shelter themselves, get into your Ranks, as if they were of your
Army: And thereby not only preserve themselves, but also when you fight again,
contribute to destroy you; by killing some of your Officers which lead you on,
or by breaking your Ranks just as you were going to Charge, and thereby also
save themselves when they had done you all the mischief they could; For in the
hurry and confusion of a Fight, private Soldiers must have some very apparent
Field Mark to enable them to distinguish Foes from Friends, else much mischief
may too likely ensue.

And because such Field Marks, wherever you place them, are not still visible
on all sides of the Head or Body of every one who wears them. The Field Word is
also given; For it often happens that in a Battle, the Field Mark is by
accident lost by many out of their Helmets, or Hats, and then if they had not
the Field Word, they might be killed by those of their own Party who knew them
not personally.

Besides, the Field Mark of each Army is seen by All of both Armies before they
engage, and the matter of it, being to be had in all places by private
Soldiers, (as a green Branch, a piece of Fern, or a handful of Grass, or a
piece of white Paper, etc.) If you Rout your Enemy, he may, while he is
pursued, take off his own Field Mark, put up yours in the stead of it, and so
escape, if not do you hurt; But the Field Word he cannot know, unless it be told
him by some of your own men; and therefore the giving of both before the
Battle, must never be omitted. I remember once when some Forces I had the Honor
to Command, obtained, by the blessing of God, the Victory against the Enemy; an
Officer of mine, having killed an Officer of the Enemies, and finding he had a
good Beaver, he tied his own Helmet to his Saddle Bow, and put on so hastily
the dead Man's Beaver; as he forgot to take out of it the green Branch which was
their Field Mark, and to put on a white Paper which was our Field Mark; and
following the Execution with his Sword all bloody, a Captain of Horse of my own
Regiment, taking him by his Field Mark for one of the Enemy, and judging he had
done no little slaughter by his Sword being all gored to the Hilt, undertook
him in the pursuit, and turning short on him, before he could see his face, ran
him through and through with his Tuck, whereof he dyed in a few minutes. But
finding the Enemies (...) Mark had caused his death, he owned his fault, and so
acquitted my Captain from any Guilt.

Whatever can be done before a Battle to distract, or intimidate your Enemies
Army, ought not to be omitted; some Examples of this way of proceeding I shall
mention.

The Archd^ke; before the Battle of Newport, having cut off several Companies
of the Prince of Orange's Army (sent under Count (...) to secure some Passes on
the way the Enemy was to march) caused a Trooper of his, on purpose, to be
taken Prisoner, just as the Armies were going to Engage; who being brought to
the Prince, did with a loud voice tell him, That Count ^st was defeated, and
that immediately the Battle would be given him; and exceedingly magnified, in
the hearing of all which were present, the Numbers, Bravery, and Resolution of
his own side; and though the Prince immediately caused his mouth to be stopped,
yet so many had heard what he said, as it was in an instant diffus d over the
States Army, and struck into it no little damp, if not terror.

If the Ground admits of it, it were advisable, if it can be done safely, the
Night before the Battle to lodge in a Wood, or Coppice, or hollow Ground, some
of your men, concealed on the Flank, or toward the Rear of your Enemies Army;
who by falling on just as you are engaging, or newly after you are engaged, may
be of great benefit to you, and prejudice to him; as it was done in that great
Battle between Jeroboam and Abijah and in many others: But then great Caution
must be had, that the Enemy discover not this Ambush, lest he cut it off before
the Battle, and thereby weaken you, and animate his own Party, as it happened to
the Suedes near Lind^w in the Year 1632, and to many other parts of Armies in
other Countries; For whoever goes upon designs, whose success depends on very
fine, and nice management, must be exceeding wary, else he had better never
attempt them; and therefore though they may be, and have been practiced, with
good success, yet I am, in my own private judgment, no overgreat Friend to any
such Policies in War, where I may, in the management of them, be discovered,
and not possibly know of it timely enough, to receive no detriment thereby: For
where the Fate of a Kingdom, and the Lives of thousands are at stake, as in
Battles the first too usually is, and the last always is, I would still act on
solid Reasons and Principles; and in Stratagems, embrace such methods only, as
if they had success would be of great advantage; and if they failed, yet I
should thereby lose nothing but my hopes.

The making a Speech by a General to a whole Army before a Battle, is often
read of in our best Histories; as well as Romances; but ought, in my belief, to
be only found in the latter: since it is impossible for any General to speak
audibly, in an open Field, to above a Regiment at once; and if he makes an
Harangue to every Regiment, he will employ that time in talk, which is more
usefully spent in ordering his Forces, and in Action. Not but that I think it
highly useful that the Officers and Soldiers of an Army before the Battle,
should be told all that may heighten their Courages (as the Goodness of the
Quarrel they fight in, the beneficial Consequences of their Victory, the fatal
Effects which must attend their being worsted, the Honor they have gained in
many an Action which is too precious to be all lost in one, etc.) But because I
esteem such Orations impossible to be made by one, to many thousands at once;
therefore I think it is the duty of a General, to infuse these Incentives to
Victory, into his chief Officers first, and then to order their imparting them
convincingly to the subordinate ones, and those to inculcate them, on all
occasions, into the private Soldiers, and especially on their Guards, and a
little before they go to fight; and to do it but to a Troop, or a Company at a
time; and in these ways I do not only approve of such Oratory, but esteem it
very practicable, and highly useful before a Battle: Besides, when all the
Officers thus discourse to their Soldiers, it shows an Unanimity which cannot
be so practicably evidenced, when the General singly speaks to them.

The Shouting to the Battle is very ancient, and we read of the practice of it,
in most Warlike Nations, as amongst the Jews in the time of David, amongst the
Romans in the time of Caesar, etc. The English are so much inclined to it, as I
have but once, in those Actions I have been in, seen them omit the doing it, as
soon as ever they came within Cannonshot of the Enemy they were to fight with;
and then I minded them of that Neglect, which they immediately amended; such
shoutings bring not only a kind of terror on the Nations which do not use them,
as being commonly an evidence of great joy in those who make them, but also it
stirs up the blood and spirits before, and heats them during the Fight.

But though such Shoutings are useful going toward the Enemy, yet a deep
silence must be observed by the Soldiery, when you are about to engage; that
the Officers Orders, and the Words of Command may be clearly heard, and
punctually obeyed.

It Is observed that the Grecians went always silently to the Battle; alleging
for it, That they had more to do than to say to their Enemies.

But such Shoutings is a kind of doing, for it stirs up your own Men, and often
damps your Enemies.

This puts me in mind, how that once marching in Battalia in a plain Country
to fight the Enemies Army, and as they marched in the like order to meet us,
some Musketeers of ours running hastily to a Budge-Barrel to fill their
Bandeleers, and being careless of their Matches, the Budge-Barrel took fire,
and blew them up; at which the Enemies Army shouted; and finding our Men did
not answer them, I rid hastily to the next Squadrons, and Battalions, and
commanded them also to shout; which the rest of the Forces taking it from them,
repeatedly did: soon after, the like Accident happened to the Enemies Army, and
then our Men shouted, but were not answered; which I bid the next Troops to
take notice of, as a sign they were disanimated; and a proof that their loss
was considerable by that blowing up; the Soldiers took it as an Omen of that
Victory which God soon after was pleased to give us: which seems to show, That
Shouting, according to the Soldiers understanding, is a token of joy; and the
Enemies not answering it, an evidence of fear; and whatever may cause fear in
your Enemy, ought not to be omitted by you, since Fear is truly said to be a
Betrayer of that Succor which Reason else might afford.

Besides, there is in all Mankind a weak Part and Experience has but too
clearly evidenced, that the difference between the Best, and the Worst Men,
does not consist in those being totally exempted from the Influences, and
Operations of it, but in the degrees of being less liable to it. Now this weak
Part is affected with Noise and Pageantry, and therefore when the show of
danger is thoroughly impressed on the Intellect, by the conveyance of the Senses,
the minds of Men are too much disturbed to be then actuated by the dictates of
Reason.

The putting into Rank and File, and the forming into the order of Squadrons
and Battalions, all the Men and Boys which attend the Soldiers, and can be
spared from the Baggage, and are not armed, may be of good use; for all those
so ordered, and placed at a competent distance, as a Grand Reserve in the Rear
of all, make a formidable show to your Enemy, and inclines him to believe you
have a third Line, or Battalia, to be broken, before they can get the Victory.

Nor is this all the advantage which may be derived from thus disposing of
those useless Persons in a day of Battle; since thereby also, you will hinder
them from filching the Soldiers Goods, while they are busy a Fighting; and
will keep the Field clear, which you engage in.

I mention this last Particular, having sometimes seen the Soldiers Boys, and
the Drivers of Carriages, either incited thereto by natural Valor, or desire of
Pillage, or both, so closely attend the Rear of their Masters who were
fighting; that when they were disordered, it occasioned much hazard and
confusion in the Rallyment.

But these appearances of Soldiers, must always be put at such a distance from
the Enemy, that he may not see they are unarmed, and consequently but a mere
show; for then that will become ridiculous, which otherwise will be terrifying.

Though I have already said in General, That if your Enemy be stronger than you
in Cavalry, you must cover yours with your Infantry; and if he be stronger than
you in Infantry, you must cover yours with your Cavalry; Yet possibly it may
not be useless to set down, in some Particulars, how those General Rules may be
best practiced.

If my Enemy did much outnumber me in Horse, and I him in Foot, I would flank
every Battalion of my Shot with Files of Pikes; Nay, I would so order such of
my Battalions as were likeliest to bear the often Charging of the Enemies
Cavalry, as that the Front, and Rear of my Shot in them, should be covered with
my Pikes, as well as my Flanks; and under my Pikes, my Shot should be still
firing, either keeping their Ground, or Advancing, or Retreating, as there
should be occasion.

Nor would I omit if my Enemy very much overpowered me in Cavalry, to place
small Battalions of Shot, and Pike, so ordered, as is immediately before
expressed, in the Intervals between my Squadrons of Horse in the first Line of
my Wings: For to me it seems much more advisable, if you mingle Battalions
with Squadrons in your Wings, that such Battalions should be of Pike and Shot,
so ordered, than of Shot alone, as is the usual method in such Imbattellings.
For if such small Battalions consist of Shot only, the chief advantage you can
derive from them, is, by their firing to disorder your Enemies Squadrons, just
as you are going to Charge them; but if that fails of the hoped-for Event,
whatever becomes of your Squadrons, these small Battalions are too much exposed
to Ruin: for Shot only, will not resist Horse in an open Field, especially
when those Shot also, are disanimated by the Flight, or Routing of the Horse
that had fought on their side.

Besides, I have found experimentally, That private Soldiers never fight, with
the needful Courage, when they are led on such a piece of Service, as this of
Firing on an Enemy, and after to shift for themselves, if that Volly does not
the Work; for then they do it in haste, and too often timerously; for even
while they are firing, they are looking which is the best Way to fly, when
they have done firing; which would too much distract Men of more settled minds,
than private Soldiers are usually blessed with: To which I shall further add,
That Musketeers, so imbattled, and checkered, as it were, with Squadrons of
Horse, may too likely, on the disordering of your first Line of Cavalry, be so
shuffled together by those of it that are Routed by those of your Enemy which
pursue the Rout; and by those of your second Line which advance to stop the
Enemies pursuit, that the poor Shot can neither be useful to their Friends, nor
offensive to their Enemies.

Whereas if those small Battalions be composed of Pike as well as Shot, and be
ordered as is formerly set down, they will, (in the Spaces, or Intervals
between your Squadrons) not only make almost as great Fire on your Enemies, but
also firing under the Pikes, do it with less apprehension; and consequently
take their Aim the better, and thereby do the more Execution.

Besides, fighting with a Resolution to make good their Ground, composes their
Minds, and makes them the more Resolute against their Enemies, and the more
obedient to their Officers Commands; but what is most material of all, is, If
your Squadrons should be disordered, nay, routed, yet such Battalions as these,
will, for some time at least, keep their Ground, and with their Shot, if not
with their Pikes, gaul your Enemy, while under their Covert, your Horse may
Rally, and come again and again to the Charge, and possibly recover the day.
Nay, it makes your Cavalry fight with more Confidence, when they know, that
one, or more disastrous Charges, may, by thus ordering some of your Infantry,
be repaired by their own Rallying in the Rear of them; and those who know what
belongs to War, will not be overforward to Charge the second Line of your Wing,
leaving at once such Battalions of Infantry, and the disordered Cavalry
Rallying at their backs; but on the contrary, will hardly judge it advisable
to attempt your second Line, till they have entirely swept out of the Field
your whole first Line.

I did frequently, though unworthy of the Honor, command Forces in Chief, and
therefore I esteemed it my duty to be often thinking, and arguing, how they
might be employed to the best advantage; and though in the Wars I was in, we
always were, or at least thought our selves to be, superior to the Enemy in
Cavalry; Yet I was not seldom busying my thoughts, how we might best fight in
case he should be at any time stronger than I, in Horse, and I stronger than
he, in Foot.

The Result of those Thoughts I will presume to Present my Reader with.

The Checquering my first Line of Cavalry with small Battalions of Shot, I
judged was not the most secure, or the most effectual way, and therefore I
concluded the Impaling, as it were, my Musketeers by my Pikes, as is
beforementioned, was much the better. And because whatever is new, and
surprising to your Enemy, is still of considerable advantage, especially at the
instant in which you are going to Charge him; I resolved, had I ever had an
occasion to do it, to have acted (when the Ground allowed of it) as follows:

I. I would have drawn up all my Cavalry abreast, either two, or three deep,
as I should have esteemed it the best, as things were circumstantiated.

II. I would have appointed previously, what Squadrons should have composed my
first Line, and what Squadrons should have composed my second Line, and what
Officers should lead, or be in the Rear of every Squadron in both Lines, and
have communicated to them respectively, my Orders therein.

III. I would then have drawn up those small Battalions of Pike and Shot,
ordered, as I formerly mentioned, just in the Rear of every such Squadron only,
as was to compose the first Line of my Wing, and just as many in a Rank as
might fill up the intended Interval when it was made; and have caused my
Pike-men to trail their Pikes, that they might not have been seen by the Enemy;
which if shouldered, or ported, they would be.

IV. I would then have advanced toward the Enemy as if I had had no second
Line, or Reserved Squadrons; but just when I was come so near him, as that it
was time to form my first and second Line, I would, at the Trumpets sounding
the Charge, (which should be the Signal for the doing it) have composed my said
two Lines of my Wing, by the Squadrons of the Front Line continuing their
motion, and by the Squadrons of the second Line making a Stand or Halt.

V. As the first Lines would be forming it self by the Squadrons of it
continuing their motion, and the second Lines would be forming it self by
standing, I would in the Interval of Ground made thereby, have caused my small
Battalions of Pike and Shot behind every Squadron of the first Line, to march
up, and made an even Front with the fame Squadrons in whose Rear they had till
then marched; and so have begun the Battle, advancing with the Horse, and those
Foot, my Shot firing under their Pikes inoessantly.

This I esteemed would have been both new, and surprising; for it would have
been thought strange by the Enemy, and likely have given him an ill opinion of
my Conduct, to see me bring all my Cavalry to fight at onde; which the first
Form of my advancing would probably make him believe was my intention: But when
he unexpectedly saw that I composed my two Lines orderly in my advancing, it
might amaze, and surprise him. And in all likelihood both those Productions
might he heightened, when he should also see my small Battalions of Pike and
Shot appear unexpectedly from behind my Squadron, and advance in an even Front
with them to the Charge; so that his Horse singly, must endure the joint shock
of my Horse, Pikes, and Musketeers.

If this method of Checquering my Squadrons in the first Line of my Wing with
small Battalions of Pike and Shot, ordered, as I have set it down, should be
approved; and that you have Infantry enough so to Checquer your second Line
also, and that you shall esteem it necessary to have it done, by reason of your
Enemies exceedingly overpowring you with Horse, you may also observe the like
method of doing it in your second Line, as you did in your first, by having
such small Battalions of Pike and Shot, drawn up, and marching in the Rear of
those Squadrons which are to compose your second Line, who may advance by the
Interval Ground, between the Squadrons to the Front of them, when by your first
Lines continued motion, they have left the Ground free.

In the doing of all this, there are some Particulars I would recommend to be
always observed.

I. That your Pikes which are to be trail'd, during your advancing, behind the
Squadrons, that the Enemy may not discover by those long Weapons what you would
conceal from his sight, be ported as soon as ever you begin to appear between
the Intervals, between which you are to march up, to make an even Front with
your Cavalry; that thereby they may be the readier to be Charged against the
Enemy, who will by that time be very near; and therefore such preparative
readiness to receive him, is very needful.

II. I would have all my Firelocks load their Muskets, with Pistol Bullets; for
the Enemy against whom you Fire, will be always very near; and therefore
several Pistol Bullets out of one Gun, will do as much Execution, as one Musket
Bullet at a time, out of many Guns.

III. Those commanded Pikemen which are to impale your Shot, ought to be of the
resolutest and strongest men; for on their Courages, will depend much of the
safety of your Horse, and of your Shot; and therefore if I had Pikemen armed
defensively with Back, Breast, Pott and Faces, I would choose to place them
there; since they are also to endure the shock of your Enemies Cavalry.

IV. The shot of these small Battalions, must be still bestowed on those
Squadrons of your Enemies Wing which compose his first Line; for those are the
nearest, and the most pressing; and the Muskets being laden with Pistol
Bullets, they will not do certain Execution on any Squadrons of the Wing of his
second Line, which are usually about 100 Yards less advanced than his first
Line.

Lastly, If it be on your Right Wing that these small Battalions of Pike and
Shot are placed, then I would have them when they advance to Front even with
your Squadrons, always to do it to the Right of the Squadron they marched in
the Rear of; and if it be on the Left Wing, always to the Left: For thereby
your Flanks of your outward Squadrons in each Wing, will be covered with Pike
and Shot, and the innermost Squadrons of your Wings will be flanked with the
Battalions of the Foot of your Army.

Therefore if this be not stedily observed, your outmost Squadron of both your
Wings, will be needlessly left unflank'd by a small Battalion of Pikes and Shot,
which when you are much outnumbred in Horse, will be too hazardous, and
therefore the preventing it highly advisable.

I acknowledge I never practiced this against an Enemy, but it was merely
because I never had need to do it, neither did I ever exercise my Men to it;
and that proceeded only from an apprehension, that it might discover what I
intended, in case there had been need, and thereby probably have made it less
effectual. But I am confident it is very easily practicable, and to be made of
very advantageous use, in case the Enemy were much my superior in Cavalry, and
I stronger than he in Infantry.

But I submit this Notion to the judgment of those who are better able to
determine of it, than I.

If your Army be stronger by much in Cavalry than your Enemies, and his
stronger by much than yours in Infantry, I would then earnestly endeavor to
fight both, or at least one of his Wings with both or one of my Wings; which I
once did: and I would make all my Infantry move as slowly toward the Enemy as
they could, while I advanced a round trot with my Cavalry, and Charged that of
my Enemies; And if I had success in both my Wings against both his, or in one
of my Wings against one of his, then I would make the next innermost Squadrons
of my second Line of that Wing which had beaten the Enemies, or of both my
Wings if they had defeated both the Enemies Wings, immediately march to flank
my Battalions of Foot; but not to hazard Infantry to Infantry, till mine were
Winged by some Squadrons of my second Line, and then advance to the Charge as
expeditiously as I could, without disordering my Battalions; thereby making my
Squadrons doubly useful: And the Enemies Infantry must be resolute men indeed,
when all their Horse are routed, and that they are to be Charged with all my
Infantry, and diverse Squadrons of my Cavalry, and are to be raked with my
Cannon, which then may be drawn up for that end, if they are not soon reduced
to furl their Colors, order their Pikes, and crave Quarter.

I would further, in case I were strong enough in Cavalry to do it, even before
my Wings were fighting against the Enemies Wings, appoint some Squadrons of
mine to draw up in the Rear of my Battalions, both to countenance my own
Infantry, and the more to deter the Enemies from Charging them during the
Engagement of all the Horse of both Armies: For it is the duty of a General to
order all things as safely as he may, and to leave as little to what is called
Fortune, as possibly he can.

The clearing of the Ground you intend to imbattel on of all such Squadrons, or
Battalions, as your Enemy may have advanced on it, before you bring up your
Battalions, and Cannon on it, ought never to be omitted, and ought still to be
done by your Horse, and Dragoons, or with few, if any of your Infantry: For the
neglect of this may hazard your Army; since the Enemy having the start of you,
by getting part of his Army in the Field of Battle, before you get any of
yours, he may thereby cut you off by peece-meal, while you are forming your
Imbattelling; This I observed was carefully practiced by the Prince of Conde
before the Battle of Rocroy, and Monsieur de Gassion was commanded with his
Cavalry to do that Work; which being effectually done, it did not a little
contribute to the Princes Victory.

In the Imbattelling of your Army, I would still do it, (where the Ground
admits it) by drawing up in one Line only all the Cavalry and Infantry, and not
as I have seen some unexpert Commanders do, Draw up first a Squadron of a Wing,
which was to compose part of your first Line, and then a Squadron of Reserve to
it, which was to compose part of your second Line; and so in Sequence all your
Squadrons and Battalions of your whole Army; for that method is tedious, and
the just spaces of your Intervals between Squadron and Squadron, and between
Battalion and Battalion, cannot be so well adjusted by the Eye, as by the first
filling up those spaces with the Soldiery; for the first is but Guessing, but
the last is Certainty.

I would observe this method not only in order to the better, and more
expeditious Imbattelling my Army if the Ground allowed it, but I would also
observe it as much as orderly I could in my advancing to the Charge, until I
saw it time to form my two Lines by the continued motion of those Troops which
are to compose my first Line, and by Alting of those Troops which were to
compose my second Line, and of my third Line, if the Ground were so scanty as
my two first could more than employ it all. And this not singly for the Reasons
before expressed, but for this additional one also, viz. It being very difficult
for many and great Squadrons which have Intervals, between every two of them to
preserve the just Wideness of the Intervals if they march far; and if those
Intervals are not duly observed, it is impossible to avoid one of these two
mischiefs, either if they are contracted during your Advance the Troops which
at need are to march up through them will be disabled from doing it, or at
least so many of them as cannot, will in their separating from those which can,
be disordered, and too likely remain useless. Or if these Intervals be
enlarged, your Flanks are thereby exposed to be fallen into by the Enemy,
therefore in my poor judgment, that way is the very best, which will most
likely prevent your being involved in either of them; and that is practicable
and attainable I believe, by not making any Intervals, till almost you may have
need of them, which by advancing all your Army in one Line, until you come so
nigh the Enemy, as you judge is a fit time to form your Lines in the manner
before set down. And then the distance being so little between you and your
Enemy, it is not likely (if but ordinary care is taken) that the Interval Ground
can be either much contracted, or much enlarged, at least it is not so likely,
that either of those Ills will be run into, marching over but a little Ground,
as marching over much: and if but moving a few paces, the mischief is probably
in some degree to be run into, then so much the more care ought to be taken,
that as few paces may be so marched as possibly you can contrive.

I cannot see any solid Objection can be made hereunto, in reference to your
Artillery, for those usually being drawn in the Front of your Battalions, till
you come to place them where they are to do execution, they may be advanced
still before the Front of your Army, though you should march it but in one Line
till you come near the Enemy; but this, as all things I write, I shall
cheerfully submit to better judgments.

If you are desirous to come to a Battle with your Enemy, and that he endeavors
to shun it by constant Entrenched Campings, and by having good Magazines and
Arsenals with or near him, and a plentiful Country at his devotion behind him,
which is usually the best Game of him whose Country is invaded; for he has
little reason to give you Battle, when by keeping unfought with, you cannot
safely enter far into his Country, leaving his Army entire behind you; I say,
in such a case, you ought, by often Removings, to try for an opportunity to
give him Battle; for since he is to attend your motions, sometimes an occasion
to fight him unexpectedly both to him and you may be offered you.

Sometimes also by your suddenly sitting down before a Garrison of his, and
endangering the taking of it, he may be induced to give you Battle, which he
would not do, but in hope to prevent such a loss.

Sometimes it may be advisable for you, (if you are much his Superior in
strength) with as little Baggage as possible, and with as much Bread as your
Men can carry, and with Herds of fat Cattle to be driven with you, (which last
is a Provision that carries it self) to make Inroads into his Country, both to
destroy and pillage it, this may provoke him to follow you, lest his Country
esteem him careless in the defense of it, and thereby you may find
opportunities to fight him.

And sometimes by your invading parts of his Territories, at a considerable
distance from those places where he has formed his Magazines, either
necessitate him to remove from them, or else expose to your Army those
Countries of his which you fall upon. As Caesar by the like method drew Pomp
from his Magazines and Fleet at Dirachium, and made him follow him into
Thessaly, by which means Caesar won his famous Battle of Pharsalia.

I look upon it as a Maxim in War, never to have the Army of the Invaded
Country to give Battle to the Invading Army, but on very great necessity, or
on very great advantages; for the Invaded by losing a Battle, may lose his
Country; but the Invader by losing one, will but lose his Hopes, his Baggage,
and as many Men as are killed in the defeat; and few discreet Gamesters will
play their All against little or nothing comparatively.

Therefore as the Invaded must still be careful to avoid a Battle, so the
Invader must still be forward to offer it, on any fitting terms; for should he
not, nothing else will keep up his Reputation, which, of all humane things,
ought most carefully, and jealously, to be kept up and increased in War.

In my private thoughts, I cannot readily believe, that any Kingdom can easily
be Conquered, where the true Principles and Methods of War are always
observed, unless some great internal Revolutions of Affairs, or general Revolts
of Subjects, should occasion such a misery.

And therefore whatever I have heard to the contrary, I freely own, I cannot be
brought to believe, that this present fatal War kindled almost all over Europe,
will have such great Progresses as some of more sanguine Complexions than I am,
have believed, or rather fancied; for though France has the formidablest League
against it, that perhaps was ever yet made in Europe against any one Monarch of
it, yet I cannot find the Advances of his Confederated Enemies are very
considerable, nor can I believe they will be, for the Reasons formerly
mentioned in this Book, and also because he does by Entrenched Incampings, and
providing timely and plentifully for his Armies to eat, frustrate, in effect,
all the great Enterprises of his Enemies, which is practicably to perform the
solidest Maxims of War; and whoever he be that can stedily observe them, will
find the necessary benefits which will result to him thereby, unless a higher
Power does turn the Wisdom of Man into Foolishness, and against that stroke,
there neither is or can be any defense.

I shall now offer to Consideration three Particulars more, which are, I think,
useful to be observed previously to a Battle.

The first is, That Orders be given that no chief Officer who commands a
Squadron, or Commissioned Officer who leads one with him, have that Horse he
Charges on, advanced above the length of his head, before the Front Rank of his
Troopers.

My Reason for it is this:

Because if those who lead Squadrons to the Charge, be before the Front Rank,
they either without cause adventure to be shot by their own Men behind them, or
hinder some of them from firing, or which is far worse, when both Bodies come
to the shock, such as are out of the Ranks, and between both Bodies, are
needlessly exposed, even when they are of most use to those Men they command,
and consequently the whole Army.

In answer to this, I know some have said, It does not a little animate the
Squadrons, to see the Officers which command them, lead them on eight or ten
Paces before the first Rank, and then just as they are going to mingle to fall
into it. But I must say, I believe good Soldiers need not such Airy Animations,
and the Bad will not fight well, though they have more substantial ones.

Besides, I believe it does rather Disanimate, than Encourage Soldiers, who
have any consideration, when they see those Officers, whose Conduct they rely
upon, ^ive them so ill an impression of it, as doing a vain thing, by which
also they may too probably incapacitate themselves to command their Men, when
they are likely to have most need of being ordered to the best advantage,
either as to their Rallying, if discomposed in the Charge, or an orderly
Pursuit if successful.

To which also may be added these two other Considerarations; If the Officers
advancing some Paces before their Men, be a great Animating them, may it not be
a greater Disanimating of the Soldiery, to see them, when ready to Charge, put
themselves into the first Rank: For their going before their Squadrons while
there is no danger, and the returning when there is, will, in all likelihood,
make the latter Action dishearten more than the former can encourage; for all
Animations are more effectual, when the danger is at hand, than when it is
remote.

When the Squadrons advance to Charge, the Troopers Horses and their own Knees
are as close as they can well endure, so that it will be impossible for the
Officers to fall into the Rank if it be well wedged up; or if it be not,
thereby to give them admittance, it may leave such Gaps in it as may hinder the
close uniting of the Rank, which is so necessary to make the Charge effectual,
and commonly the Officers Horses being of the best and of the highest mettle,
when they come among strange Horses, especially backwards, may by their
fighting and kicking so disorder the Rank, that the Enemy is more likely to
come in at the breach than they.

I would also strictly forbid all those who have the chief Command of a
Squadron, to fight against any of the Enemies Squadron, who should come out in
a bravery to fight; For who knows but the Enemy may send an ordinary Person,
but valiant, on such an Exploit, and if your chief Officer of a Squadron should
engage with him, his killing of the other will signify little, but his being
kill d would much prejudice the whole Squadron, and possibly thereby the whole
Wing, if not the whole Army.

Therefore still in such Pickeerings if they shall be judged necessary at all
when Troops are ready to mingle, only such young Gallants should be allowed to
be the Actors, whose deaths, if they should happen, will not be of such a
Consequence as the Fall of an Officer, who has the Honor and Trust to command
a whole Squadron; For in War I am an utter Enemy for the sake of Shows to
hazard Substances: And since the Nature of War ^ves but too much to
Uncertainty, I would expose as little as might be of it to Choice or
Capriciousness.

A second thing which I offer to Consideration is, That your Standards or
Cornets Colors, in a day of Battle, be in the second Rank;

For these Reasons:

They are safer there than in the first Rank; and thereby the briskest of your
Enemy has the least invitation to attempt the winning of them.

The chief and solid Ends of having Standards or Cornets flying, is, That
Troopers, if they are disordered in the Charge, may see under what they are to
Rally; and it being a high disgrace to lose their Colors, it makes Men fight
the heartilier against those who would cast it on them; therefore, in my
opinion, those Cornets should still be placed in a Battle, both for the greater
safety of them, and the better to answer the speedy Rallying under them, where
they are most useful, and most secure; which last, I think, will be in the
second Rank: For there every way that your Troop can be attacked, it has a Rank
between it and the Enemy to defend them, and all the Troop also to do it, being
it is in the Center of it.

A third thing I offer to Consideration, is, That when your Enemy does very
much overpower your Infantry, that the Battalions of Pikes which are in your
first Line, may have only so many Colors flying at the head of them, as will
serve to let the Soldiers see where respectively they are to Rally, in case of
their being disordered or routed; For nothing does more excite an Enemy to push
for Colors, than to see many, and near him; and since a few will serve to
answer the need of orderly Rallying, why should there be more in the first Line.

All the rest of the Colors I would have flying at the head of your Pikes in
your second Line, where they will be much safer; and when the smoke of the
Cannon, and of the Small Shot is driven away by the Wind, or so attenuated,
that your Enemies may see through it, the sight of so many Colors flying at
the head of your Battalions or Stands of Pikes, casts a kind of dread on the
Soldiery of your Enemy, who having been accustomed to see Colors guarded by
full Companies, conclude those are the Pikes of so many entire Companies, in
your second Line, as they see Colors flying at the head of those Pikes, and
makes them thereby even despair of vanquishing such a Force in your second
Line, especially if they have been vigorously opposed, and much shattered by
your first Line*

If in Objection to this it be said, That in case you win the day, though you
should for a time lose any of your Colors, yet as one of the many consequences
of your Victory, you will recover the Colors you lost; and if you lose the
Field, they will as certainly be lost in the second Line, as if they had been
in the first.

To that I answer, It is a disgrace to have had for any time, any of your
Colors in your Enemies possession; and who knows also as soon as any of them
are taken, but some may convey them so expeditiously out of the Field, as
though you get the day, you cannot get again your lost Colors.

Besides, I have known a defeated Army, at the close of the day, which has had
some success in the beginning of it, and had then taken some Colors by showing
which in Places and Countries they retreated into, have persuaded the People
they were the Victorious, and thereby have gotten the Recruits, for their
shattered Troops, which nothing but such a Belief, grounded on such Evidences,
could have procured for them.

During a Battle, or in it, it is the duty of the General still to send timely
Succor to any of his Battalions, or Squadrons, and rather a little before than
one moment after they need it.

And for that end to have several Gentlemen about him well known to the chief
Officers of the Army, to carry to them on the spur the necessary Orders from
time to time.

It is also his duty when he sees a breach in his Army, which nothing but his
own presence can probably repair resolutely in person to lead those Troops
which are to do it; but as soon as ever it is made up, then to return in person
to that station from whence he may see how all things go, that from thence he
may timely send always his requisite Orders.

He ought also neither too hastily to believe the Enemies Army is Routed, and
therefore to command the general pursuit; for thereby he may hazard his dawning
Victory: nor too slowly to order the Follow of the Rout, when he is satisfied
it is Real and General; for else he may lose the best advantages of his success.

A General ought, when he sees a Wing of his Enemies Army palpably Routed by a
Wing of his, to draw as many as he can well spare from the second Line of his
successful Wing, to the rest of his Army, (leaving the rest to follow the
execution) that by such help and such order he may entirely and more safely
both defeat such of his Enemies as yet make head, and pursue those which are
Routed.

He ought also never to think upon, much less order his Army in a plain Field
to receive the Charge, but still to meet the Enemy in giving it. Pompey, in the
decisive Battle of Pharsalia by the advice of Triarius, commanded his Soldiers
to receive Caesar's Assault, and to undergo the shock of his Army, without
removing from the place whereon they stood, alleging that Caesar's men would
be disordered in their Advance, and Pompev's by not moving keep their Order; on
which Caesar himself says, viz. In my Opinion this was against all Reason, for
there is a certain Incitation and Alacrity of Spirit naturally planted in every
Man, who is inflamed with a desire to fight, and therefore no Commander should
repress or restrain it, but rather increase, and set it forward. And the Event
justified Caesar's Opinion therein was well grounded.

A General ought, when he sees the day irrecoverably losing, having first done
his very utmost to recover it, to get together as many of his Soldiers as
possibly he can, especially Horse, and with them to bring up the Rear; and make
his ill success as easy as he can to his own Party; and if he have any
Garrisons which he doubts his Enemy may attempt in the heat of his Victory, to
fling into such Garrisons those of his Infantry which are left amazed at their
defeat, thereby to stop the current, and give some check to the Victorious,
while he is getting together the residue of his Army, the sooner to recruit it,
and to try to recover afterward what then he lost.

After the Battle is fought, and the Victory apparently won, a General ought to
take great care, as is before set down, that the Pursuit be orderly made, and
consequently the safelier; for which end I offer to consideration,

That the Cornets Squadron of every Troop be expressly forbidden ever to be of
the loose Pursuers, but to keep always entire, and follow as fast in order as
they can, those of the other two Squadrons of it which are on the execution.

This I have practiced, and found these three Benefits thereby:

First, Thereby the Standards of all Troops are still well secured, which ought
always to be carefully minded for I have known those of them of the victorious
Party often in hazard to be lost, when out of too eager an haste to pursue a
flying Enemy, the Troopers of the Cornets Squadron have followed the Pursuit,
and left their Colors unattended, or but slenderly guarded.

Secondly, The Cornets Squadrons of the first Line of your Wing, being still
kept in order, and by being the nearest to a flying Enemy, are much fitter to
follow in a Body to countenance, and if need requires actually to justify your
Pursuers, than any Squadrons of your second Line of your Wing can possibly be;
for the Enemy by his flight having got the start, and Men who run for their
lives doing it with their best speed, it will be almost impossible for those
which are so much behind them as your second Line is behind your first, ever to
overtake them; wherefore such as are the nearest to them when they first begin
to Run, are those only who most properly and most hopefully are to march in a
Body, after those who dispersedly pursue; that the Enemy may immediately be
Routed, if he begin to Rally, which nothing does more frighten him from
attempting, than to see so near him so many Parties in good order to make him
smart for it.

Thirdly, The more of the first Line of your Wing which in orderly Bodies can
follow, to countenance and protect your Pursuers, the more you can spare of
your second Line of your Wing, to join with others of your Army to defeat those
of your Enemies which remain unbroken; and though in the Battle you should
fight the Cavalry three deep, yet after your Men have absolutely Routed those
they Charged, I would have every Cornets Squadron follow your Pursuers but two
deep, whereby a Troop of 90 Horse having in every Squadron of it 30 Men, the
Cornets Squadron being drawn up two deep, will have 15 in each Rank, and having
a Standard at the head of them, will appear a full Troop to those who fly, and
shall have but now and then time to cast a sudden look behind them, when seeing
so many seeming entire Troops as there are Squadrons in a Wing of your Army, it
will be so terrifying a Prospect, as few will dare to Rally, while they see it,
and so near them.

After the Chase is finished, which ought still to be continued, as warmly and
as far as may be, I esteem it an indispensible duty in a General, even in the
Field of Battle, to draw together all his Forces that he can, and with them
cause to be returned to Almighty God, their most humble and hearty thanks, for
his blessing, in his bestowing on them the Victory, and his preserving so many
of them from death; for an unfeigned and public Gratitude to God, is not only
what Piety, but even what the light of Nature does teach, and nothing does more
incline God to bestow future blessings, than to have Men really thankful for
the present, and to own him to be the only Author and Finisher of them.

A Generals next care ought to be, to have his Wounded Men well tended, his
Dead honorably buried, his Prisoners strictly, but civilly kept (and to have a
true List of all;) to take public notice of those who behaved themselves well,
to rebuke such as did the contrary, to send Spies to discover what measures his
Enemies will take in their Calamity, the better and more advantageously to form
his own Counsels and Actions, and most vigorously to pursue his Point, while
the terror of a Defeat is fresh in the minds of his Enemies; since it is as
essential to a General to make the best use of a Victory, as to know how to
obtain it.

I confess I have the more minutely insisted upon the protractive or fencing
parts of War, by Entrenched Incampings, etc. because few of my Countrymen have
made it much their study, but being carried on by the natural Genius and
Hereditary Gallantry of the Nation, they are always ready by true Valor
expeditiously to determine their quarrels; and though this is highly estimable,
yet I would not be ignorant of other useful methods; for I know few Men use to
travel on foot, that would not be willing to have Horses to lead in their
hands, that when they are weary of Walking, they may by Riding on them come to
their Journies end. And since Battles are what our Countrymen most breathe
after, and long for in War, I have also the more particularly insisted in this
Chapter on what seems most materially, if not essentially to be known Before,
In, and After they are fought.

But after all that I have said on Battles, nay possibly after all that has
been said, or has been practiced in them, (could both those be known) it is my
firm belief, that still very much will be, nay must be left to the Judgment and
Presence of Mind of a General, and the chief Officers under him, whose actings
must be ordered according to the circumstances present; in doing whereof most
advantageously, no set Rules previously can be given, for they must be taken as
the occasion is offered, and then resolutely and speedily pursued; yet what I
have written, may possibly be of some use, to such of our less experienced
Officers, as shall well remember, weigh and practice them, who may by their own
more illuminated Reasoning, do as the Spaniards did, who though they owed the
first discovery of America to Columbus, yet they owed the Riches they derived
from it, to their own further improving, of what he had but laid the
Foundation: And if this should be the Result of my Endeavors, I should esteem
them happily employed.

FINIS.

