The Orphans Case.
WHEREAS the Court of Aldermen made an Order in January, 1687. That all
Improvements of every Branch of their Revenue over and above the Necessary
Support of their Government, should be applied toward the Payment of their
Debts, and Published the same in the Gazette.

We, the distressed Orphans of the City of London, would (if possible) propose
for our Relief that which might answer our Just Debts, and not offend our
Guardians, so as to make them our Enemies to oppose a Bill for our Relief, as
hitherto they have done.

We are so far from streightning the Government of the City, that we are not
only willing, but desirous that this Honorable House will allow them
sufficient, not only for the necessary part, but likewise for the Splendor of
their Government.

We find by the Account brought into this Honorable House, by Order of the 25
th of November, 1692. the City did make the Charge of their Government to
amount unto the Sum of 9036 l. 7 s. or thereabouts.

We humbly conceive the following Sums given in by that Account, are not to be
paid out of the Chamber of London.

Workmens Wages and Materials to repair the City's public Buildings, 1500 l.
For Pavements, Amendments of Ways and Shores, belonging to the City 420 l.
because these Sums by Custom and Usage of the City of London ought to be raised
by The not raising by Fifteens has been the Cause of the Debts being so great.
Fifteens upon the Personal Estates of the Citizens.

In the same Account is charged for Taxes 1000 l. every one that receives ought
to pay his proportion to the Taxes, therefore not to be charged in the Account.

There is also Charged for Interest of 2700 l. 162 l. per ann. which ought not
to be in that Account.

And the Sollicitors Bills per estimate 500 l. per ann. 300 l. of this may be
deducted, the Orphans being to pay what relates to them.

These Deductions being made, the Charge of the Government will then be 5654 l.
7 s.

May it please this Honorable House to give the distressed Orphans leave to
propose, that the Government may have paid out of the Chamber of London 6000 l.
per ann. to discharge the aforesaid, Sum of 5654 l. 7 s.

That Power be given by Act of Parliament to raise 2000 l. per ann. on Personal
Estates, by Act of Common Council for repair of public Works in the said City
(if occasion be) which formerly was, and ought to be raised by Fifteens.

The Bridge-House Estate being about 3000 l. per ann. Ground-Rent, the Moiety
with the Fines for Leases renewed, being sufficient to keep the Bridge in good
Repair, the remainder to be paid into the Chamber for the City's use, as
formerly.

The Lord Mayor to have as formerly his Certainty of about 2000 l. per ann. The
Lord Mayor and Sheriffs to have the presenting of all Officers, as formerly,
except the Cole-Meeters and Corn-Meeters; which Officers places that will
remain to the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs with Fines for Offenses committed in the
City of London, and Fellons Goods, etc. may be estimated at 4000 l. per ann. at
least.

The Lord Mayor and Sheriffs by this proposal will have 6000 l. per ann. and
the Government 8000 l. per ann. besides the Advantage of the Bridge-House
Estate.

We farther implore this Honorable House, that in Mercy and Compassion to our
Distressed Condition, you will be pleased to raise by a Duty on Coals, or what
other way in your great Wisdom you shall think meet, the Sum of 10000 l. per
ann. which with the 6000 l. per ann. that remains of the City's Estate, making
in all 16000 l. per ann. and what ever this falls short at present of 4 l. per
Cent. per Annum of our Principal and Interest, we may have Credit for, and be
paid as the Revenue of the City is improved, until the whole 4 l. per Cent. be
secured; and if any Overplus after this to go to the City, and to be managed by
a standing Committee of Common Council.

Whereas there is 6000 l. per ann. proposed for the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs,
part of which is Casual, and may be more or less, as Offices fall, the Orphans
do humbly propose (if the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs shall rather choose a
Certainty) that they may have 5000 l. per ann. paid them out of the Chamber of
London in lieu thereof; and whatever the Income is by Virtue of their Offices,
may be paid into the Chamber of London, for the Use of the Orphans.

The reason why the Orphans have proposed these Methods to have the utmost that
possible may be raised by the Revenue of the City, when the necessary Charge of
the Government is paid (as in Justice they ought) is, that they may be the less
burdensome to this Honorable House at this time, when Public Taxes are great.

The Orphans are so well satisfied in this Fund humbly proposed, that they are
willing to give such Releases for their respective Debts as your great Wisdoms
shall please to appoint.


