A MISCELLANY OF SUNDRY Essays, Paradoxes, AND Problematicall Discourses,
Letters and Characters; Together with Political Deductions from the HISTORY of
the Earl of Essex, Executed under Queen ELIZABETH.

By FRANCIS OSBORN Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by John Grismond, 1659. 8. 9.

To my Virtuous, no less then in all things else deserving Niece, Mrs.
Elizabeth Draper.
Dear Niece,
IT is on all hands confessed, that some things here may be thought as unsuitable
to my Years, as your Education (not yet removed from a virtuous Mother,) By
those are not acquainted with the external Impulse which makes their
Publication to the world unavoidably Necessary, in reference to the preventing
a false Impression; no less Then that more Inward of natural affection to you
(not knowing but this may be my last opportunity) to do right to Gratitude. So
as if any expression here should be of force to make you blush, it would by
augmenting your Beauty prove a Good Effect of a cause at the worst but
respectively Evil; and only in reference to such a Superlative goodness as you
are endowed withal: whose apprehension of Ill results rather from Admonition
and Prudence, then Experience or Consent. Faults already become in many ripe
for punishment, being not yet arrived within the Circle of your thoughts.
Wherefore (since the worst can be found in these pa-Pers, if heartily taken,
does not come short of some of the best are daily made vendible,) I desire you
to vail your Judgment with Charity; known in remoter Relations so extensive as
to cover more Levity, then I hope is extant here: Orif bleered by Interest, I
should mistake no less in its own desert, then the acceptance of the World,
it can not disparage your Name long; which no doubt will suddenly be changed,
and you left free, either to own or reject what is here presented: unless God
for the punishment of the present Age will make men unwilling, because unworthy
to approach so much virtue, and other excellencies as are natural in you; the
repetition of which would not only call up the blood into your face, but
confound mine, were I guilty of half the infidelity in your Sex that ignorance,
folly and malice has voted to my share: who am so zealous through the
mediation of your perfections in the vindication of women, that I am not only
ready to become a Convert, but a Martyr, rather then appear any thing but,

Dear Niece, Your Servant FRANCIS OSBORN.

A general account of what is contained in the Book ensuing.
THe Preface. An Essay on such as condemn all they understand not a reason for.
p. 1. An Essay upon Prove. 8. chap. v. 30. Give me neither poverty nor riches:
p. 9. A Contemplation of Adam's Fall. p. 22. Sundry Conjecturall Paradoxes
concerning Reason, Learning, etc. p. 55. A Character of Honor. p. 119. Valor
and Cowardice. p. 125. A Letter writ to dissuade Mr. -- from a Duel. p. 134. A
Letter to Mr. -- in hope to dissuade him from going a Colonel under Count
Mansfield p. 141. A Letter to Mr. W. P. concerning dependences upon great men.
p. 153. -- Another to the same person. p. 157. A Copy of Verses to -- -who had
translated Virgil into English. p. 162. A Letter persuading -- -to marry. p.
163. Verses upon sundry occasions. p. 169. A Letter to two S sters, the one
black, the other fair p. 171. With Verses. p. 172. A Letter to -- - After the
death of his Lady. An Epitaph on -- p. 173. The Authors own Epitaph. p. 175. A
Letter to dissuade -- - from marrying a rich, but ugly and deformed -- p. 176.
With Verses to the same effect. p. 180. A Letter in reference to a Coy Lady. p.
182. The Petition. p. 186. A Character on a deboshed Soldier. p. 187. A Letter
to Dr. C. H. Chap. to W. E. of Pem. p. 191. With Verses. p. 194. On a Cook. p.
195. A Character of an Host. p. 197. With Verses. p. 200. Deductions from the
History of the Earl of Essex. p. 201. Essay on Court-factions. p. 240. Essay,
that the condition of men in power is to be guided by their servants. p. 253.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
REaders in the generality do not study (especially in reference to
contemporaries) what may benefit themselves, but blemish the present Authors
repute. So as the Pillars of Fame and Protection, that led our Fathers through
the dark Wilderness of Ignorance, into the glorious Land of the Living (where
they still inhabit, though under no more authentic Charter then that of
Prescription, being in all other evidences of worth matched, if not exceeded by
younger men:) are clouded through reproaches, and forced to correspond for the
Integrity of every Line by Truths most capital enemies, Hypocrisy,
Superstition and solly: And before such partial and weak Tribunalls as are
subarned no less then guided by Interest, and an awful reverence toward the
most deformed Antiquity; from whence the Pen (accounted by Caesar a decent
Companion for the Scepter) is now become the Bubble of the Rabble: Forgetting
that though it may be so in the management of Fools, yet that no virtuous acts
can be registered, or Learning maintained but through her mediation: Nor is the
progress of conjecturall propositions to be obstructed, but rather indulged in
reference to the credit of a Nation. The first Idea often owning the glory of
the whole design; manifest in Germany, that may not unpossibly stand more
obliged for her rare Inventions to the Liberty she gives, and an Indulgence the
Inhabitants have for any Novelty, though too weak to extend probability beyond
the fantaste of the first projector; Then any natural fertility inherent in
the place, appears in the perfection they receive from politer Regions; Being
themselves so far from casting Dirt or Ink in the face of the party, that in
the least case of likelihood they do all lend assistance: contrary to the baser
practice of England, where if a Spirit be found so prevalent in Reason as to be
proof against any reply, it is usual for the opposers of Knowledge to
impetrate their revenge from some weak administrator of the power of Ignorance.

Sir Walter Raleigh was the first (as I have heard) that ventured to tack
about, and sail aloof from the beaten track of the Schools: who upon the
discovery of so apparent an error as a Torrid Zone, intended to proceed in an
inquisition after more solid Truths: Till the mediation of some whose
Livelihood lay in hammering shrines for this superannuated study, possessed
Queen Elizabeth, that such Doctrine was against God no less then her Fathers
Honor, whose Faith (if he owed any) was grounded upon School Divinity.
Whereupon she chid him: who was (by his own confession) ever after branded with
the title of an Atheist, though a known assertor of God and providence.

A like censure fell to the share of venerable Bacon, till over-balanced by a
greater weight of glory from Strangers: Nor could desert and the name of the
English Jewel, given Seldom beyond Sea, free him from a like imputation at
home. Wherefore Br. Ca. Di. Ho. Ha. Hi. St. Ta. and a number more that have
Imbellished this doting Age with new notions, may apprehend comfort from this
contemplation, that Fame is no less eternal then Detraction is Mortal.
Though it may be thought strange why any farthaer prosecution of truth should
be persocuted amongst men not yet fully resolved what it is: when nothing
redounded more to the Protestants honor, then the free passage they have
always given to Books of controversies, whereas the reading of them is a
mortal Sin in Rome, and at best, liable to the Inquisition: not to be
imputed to any thing but the invincible Reason we have on our side, So well
managed by Mr. Chillingsworth, as the sluent mouths of the Jesuits were
stopped till his death, and some time after. There being nothing but
Mathematical demonstrations able to drive them from the ambiguous
interpretations they put both upon Scripture and Fathers, behind which the
Papacy has for many Centuries played at Bo-peep with State and Church. And yet
how this poor man was abused at his death, is more for the Nations credit to
conceal, then publish. Neither is this frenzy capable of any real Reformation,
since those pretend to a power of garbleing things brought to the Press, are
not all of one and the same Judgment: and from whose divisions new Books run
the fortune of the middle-aged man in the Fable, that became bald; by an
endeavor to gratify the humors of persons inconsiderable for weight or
number. I know censures do not all fall within the Circuit of one Meridian, yet
am as certain, that no Dispute can be maintained, but where half, if not the
most curious part, is supported by Conjecture. And that our best Physical
Conclusions have been deduced out of mere mistakes: which the World (though
never so long-lived) is not likely to want, and therefore improbably proclaimed
at her farthest extent of Knowledge: which if true, few would give, or increase
the stipends of Arts; it being incongruous to expect new Honor from those
confess themselves not able to augment their own, and so far dissident of an
ability to match the ancients, as they take the endeavor not only for
impossible, but a high if not a damnable presumption: Wherefore it suites
University-Interest to indulge such as bring fresh notions to their Mill,
though smutted with some errors: It being usual for wages to cease, and an
Ingine to be neglected, upon the first discovery that the work is finished: Not
to be denied to follow an opposing what is already arrived to a general
acceptance. Especially in an Age when God and the Magistrate lies blasphemed on
every Stall. Nor is the knavery of obscure Stationers a small Remora to desert:
that in envy to those of their own Trade, and to debauch the esteem of Books,
do encourage, if not hire, foul-mouthed Ballad-makers to rufsle, doggs-eare,
and contaminate by base Language and spurious censures the choysest leaves. Yet
the Blasphemers against the Spirit of Knowledge become vendible in reference to
their names they pretend in their Title Page to confute, sometime the Trade of
Al. To. who used to skirmish (though only armed with a blunt quill, and a
duller Reason) the Worthies of our Nation by Troops. Nor is it probable any
farther attempt upon our English affairs should be purchased cheaper then at
the Writer's prejudice: Since so honest an endeavor as the proving, It was the
Father that eat the sower Grapes, and not the Son, whose teeth were set an
edge, is by some so far perverted. Now in reference to this, or any thing
else may relate to me, If my Years and Infirmities that stand ready at the gate
to hurry me out of this World, nor the many lines I have drawn suitable to the
general fantasies, with a protestation never to trespass again upon Love or
History, cannot shroud me from the pelting of Tongues, Let me humbly implore
this favor of both Sexes, that such as do it, would imitate the candor of a
Carnaval, wherein (though all Italy appear but one entire Bedlam) nothing is
thrown, but what savours more of Musk then Malice. But if I am born to be
aspersed, I could wish it might be with such Ink as may at least beautify the
Writer, and not contaminate us both: it being an injury, though far below the
sufferer's revenge, to be pinched between the nasty finger and thumb of a
brawny Ignorance. Which heightens greatly the obligation to him that for my
sake undertook so unworthy an Antagonist: Whose want of a true knowledge of me
has led him into as great an excess in reference to my Commendations, As the
like defect may not unpossibly have exposed me to a censure of ungratitude, or
made me (as verily I believe I am) too sparing in his: A fault I promise to
amend upon the least intimation of an occasion.

Now being compelled to own what follows, or to venture having it laid at my
door with all the Imperfections so many Adulterated Transcriptions have
Deformed it with; I thought it less Dishonorable to trespass upon Gravity (a
Defect in Nature, or at best but a Ceremony resulting from the Morosity of Age)
then to offer violence to Prudence, (the most signal advantage deducible from
Time:) By denying my hand to the emendation of a subreptitious Copy, which I
verily believe my Youth (though foolish enough) was not in probability likely
to have been guilty of; yet must have had my abilities now measured by it. For
the sufficiency of which I shall not correspond, having been led through
Necessity and others persuasions, rather then my own, to think that though they
are out of Fashion with me, they may become decent for others to follow, or
avoid. Being in every respect else a mere Patient, and no otherwise active
then at the request, and for satisfying the Stationer, to whose care I leave
you, without any other Complement, Then that the loss will not be great to the
buyer, nor the shame much to me, should they prove waste paper, as I ever till
now esteemed them. And in answer to those shall think some expressions here too
serious to face such stuff as comes. (...) they may be pleased to know I (...)
first intend to insert some ^oti^ which discretion has since thought
inconvenient.

THE PREFACE.
THE PROEM.
IF, contrary to the Mode of such as lose their Thoughts in the open Air where
they were conceived; I have, with more Diligence, regestred Mine; it was out of
no Opinion they deserve a longer life, but to prevent Idleness, with a
Concourse of some more Tedious, if not Sinful: which in the Vacancy of
Employment, are apt to intrude themselves, under pretense of a more ancient and
Familiar Acquaintance. Nor can I yet find Cause, to repent of the pains, Since
it has confirmed me, in this Truth; That the World is not the worse, nor My
self much better, for Age and Continuance. From whence I have learned, (though
I confess, none more apt to Forget) Not to Complain of Governors, for their
Oppression, or upbraid Youth, with its Vices: Since in the best Times, Tyranny
has been moderated, rather through Fear, then Goodness. As the most seemingly-
Holy, do, at the highest, but palliate, not Divest heir Humane Infirmity. And
from hence, we may be taught with St. Peter, Not to call anything Polluted or
Defiled: All Men, at long-running, meeting with the same Market, either in
reference to their own Depraved Will, or Performance. Wherefore, I should
Conclude, (considering My own, and Others visible Lapses) That Sanctity lies
more in Repentance, then Innocence. Which is the Chief Advantage, if not all
the Difference disoernable, between Those we term Wicked, and the Just. Now if
any One (a Thing I have forneerly been very chary of) shall read These Papers,
under the Notion of Approbation; He can no more make Me Proud, then such as
Dispraise them, Angry: (It being the guise of All, to applaud Those of Their
own Opinion:) Of which there is none more Mine, then that every Thing is of a
Mixed Nature, carrying a Face like That in a pleated Picture, suitable to the
Situation and Light the Beholder stands in, or is guided by.

And in reference to one- over-Severe, I may have this to say, That not a few,
now Wiser then us both, have pleased Themselves, as much, in Drawing Anticks,
with a Coal, upon a Wall, as Others do in their endeavors, to match Apelles.
All I seek, is to sind Employment for a Spirit that would Break the Vessel, had
it nothing to Work upon, but it Self. Nor is it less true, That I might justly
be blamed for Some things here, Had more Time been employed about them, then
God in his Mercy, or to punish my Former Negligence, has afforded me Liberty
to spare. Who can be accountable to Posterity, for nothing in this kind: being
from my Birth, incapable to receive the Rich Talent of Learning, looked upon,
as The only Key of Knowledge: which if obtained, had been Little Advantage,
since I want a Memory, wherein to Hoord up what I had stolen. And so the
Acquired Groat, might not unpossibly have spoiled, and adulterated the more
Natural Shilling. Wherefore, if a Chemistry might be found, able to Extract any
thing useful toward the Conduct of Man, out of such Ordinary Simples as These,
They were highly to be esteemed; And in likelihood, more suitable to every
Taste, as Fresh-gathered from the Tree of Experience, then those Sophisticated
by the Schools, or of a Narrower interest, then That, of The whole Society of
Man.

And, if any draw benefit from These, they are most likely to be Friends: It
being only the property of Love, to look upon that with Delight, which cannot
be discovered to another without Shame. And to such I could be content, to
leave them, as the Idea of a Mind was no less Cordially employed, in advancing
the Good of Others, then of my Patience, in receiving Injuries from the same
hands. This is not said to wound Providence, under the Shadow of Fortune. Since
I have hitherto not only been blessed, beyond my Desert, but Expectation. And
have seen my unnatural Oppressors perish, and languish, through as Miraculous
means, as I have been Preserved. And by which, I am brought to the
Contemplation of higher, and more permanent Pleasures, then the poor and
despicable Consideration of Profit is able to reach. Nor could any contrary
Endeavor of mine, hide this from the Eyes of the World, to whose Judgment, I
was for a long time not so Impudent, or Imprudent, as to present more of my
Self, then I must needs; Because, Experience still finds Her in the Arms of
Curiosity, and Prejudice. Into whose Den, though I have been of late cast, (by
what Hand of Fate I know not, and so as it were Blindfold;) yet I have come off
with more Favor, from before this Tyrannical Tribunal, then diverse known of
far greater Desert.

Nor should I but for a through Essay of my own Fortune, and the Readers
Candor, venture such Stuff as is likely to Follow. Which though produced long
since, I am not able to Better now. And if Capable of Acceptance, the World is
not likely to want it.

But it is contrary to my own Aph^^isme, to debosh what I present, by saying it
was writ before I was Twenty: From whense would result, such an easy
Inference, That surely, I am no Wiser now, (which I wish heartily I were able
to confute) else I should Mend, or Conceal them. Nor can I think it Wisdom, or
Convenience, to say, They were produced in a shorter space, then Nature
requires in the production of Rarities; Though not seldom Casual; (As I
observed in a Flint, presented to King Charles, that bore the perfect Figure of
a Man.) It boing the Custom of some Heads, to afford the greater Reason, the
less they are pumped. Such as is Clearest, running commonly quickest, and most
Fluent; whereas, the Deeper requires Straining, and so becomes Heavyer, and of
a less sprightful Taste. I will not say, Mine is of that Temper, to avoid
Prejudice. Nothing being held in esteem, is easily come by. Wherefore, having
found so many condemned, upon the Evidence they bring against Themselves in
Print, I have labored to conceal my Name; esteeming it more Pleasant (if not
more Natural) to beget then father. But finding it, as impossible to hide, as
it is unsuitable to my present Condition to be idle, and no less then
unbecoming Civility, to neglect the Importunity of such Friends, as desire a
Publication of this Piece, (which being a mixture of all things, may not
improbably, like the huge Dishes now in fashion, feast the Appetites of some
one, or other) I shall once again venture into the Press, (as too many do)
more out of Confidence then Wit. Yet, let my Defects be what they will, I have
ever considered it as a Flatulent Impertinency, to Court the Reader; or think
to raise a Party, in the behalf of any thing, wears not the indubitable
Character of Reason and Truth. Against which, Ignorance and Hypocrisy have
maintained so long and unnatural a Rebellion, as Security is no other way
attainable, but by Silence, or Compliance. The continual Wrastlings against a
Rational Evidence, having brought the World into so multilated, and unsteady a
Creed, as in many Places, she is observed to halt, between the uneasy ways
of Hope and Fear. The Contemplation of which, does so stagger such as delight
in Painting their Opinions upon Paper, that they know not what side to take,
out of a Dread to fall under the Notion of Traitors or Malignants, Atheists or
Fools. And amongst others, this may pass for a Cause, why these ( formerly
looked upon as wast) Sheets, have received this Resurrection out of the Dust;
It being in ill Times, safer to appear wanton, then serious. Or like Brutus, a
Fool, then a Censor. Of what is in me, I make as good use as I can, but hate
to borrow any thing; being more willing to appear, with all my Defects about
me, then Glorious, and Splendid, through the Spoils of others. Under the same
Odium, ( in my Conceit,) lies a Supercilious Gravity; by which I should
interrupt all Commerce with those of my own Coat; And expose my Self to the
Judgment of some more wise, who cannot but see through that unnatural Veil,
the poorness of the Trash is carried under it: There being, really, no
nakedness, but in relation to others, since all have the Patience to look upon
their own Imperfections, without blushing. Which the oftener it is done, the
better may be learned, How to prize others, and value our Selves. There
appearing, no way readier, to demonstrate to a Man his particular weakness,
then by admitting him full leave to try his strength. Wherefore, so long as no
body saw me, I was not capable of blame, If wanting the Engines of Learning, I
endeavored, to shake the Pillars of the Schools. For though the Attempt, is
not very likely, to afford any Benefit to others; yet, I cannot but remain, the
stronger for it, and the more agile My Self: As such do, that swing; though
the Beam stirrs not, at which they tugge, It being natural to honest Labor,
still to be followed, by Wisdom or Reward. For, though the Generality of
Readers, are scandalized at all is not moldy through Age, or gilded with
Novelty; yet, I remember, to have heard from Sir William Cornewallis, (esteemed
none of the meanest Wits, in his Time) That Mountaign's Essay's, was the
likelyest Book, to advance Wisdom: because, The Authors own Experiences, is
the Chiefest Argument in it. For as St. Augustine says, of Short and Holy
Ejaculations; That they pierce Heaven as soon, if not quicker, then more
Tedious Prayers: So, I have reaped greater Benefit, from concise and Casual
Meditations, on several Topics, then long and voluminous Treatises, relating
merely to one and the same thing: Many Scholars being of so vast an Extension,
in the prosecution of any, (though but a seeming) Error, as they will leave no
Argument unurged, be it never so weak. Forgetting, That a Triumph is easier
obtained, then a Victory so Discreetly moderated, as may give no occasion, to
think it either Tedious, or over-severe. It being a work, impertinently
superstuous, to give two Blows, where one may suffice. This is the Cause, That
only such are esteemed, that bring the strongest Reasons, and commit the
smallest waste upon the Readers Time, or the Adversaries Repute. Nor are any to
be Commended, as Civil, or Wise, that prosecute a Contrary Practice: Too
frequent amongst us, where the Abuse of the Person, is Clinched, and Riveted so
close, with the Confutation, as unquestioned Charity is not seldom lost, in the
vindication of a more Dubious Truth. And from hence, I have taken occasion, to
Calculate the Meridian, of such Hot Heads, as can suffer no Opinions but Their
own, to stand quietly by them. Forgetting, There is as much variety, in the
Dissemblances of Men's Minds, as Experience and Commerce do observe, in their
Bodies. Which may conclude it, as great Folly, to condemn one of a contrary
Judgment, as to Implead another, because his Nose is shorter, or longer, then
Theirs. Nor is it in the Reach of any thing but Restraint, to make People
unanimous. No less, against the Freedom of Nature, then it is suitable to
Custom, and Experience, to find the Contrary in Practice, where all are left
to their Own Election. As manifest in WiseGreece and Rome, as in those Nations,
esteemed both by Them and Us more Barbarous. Nor can it but be reckoned amongst
the Causes of the Catholics Unity, That every one, may address their Prayers,
to what Saint they please. -- - Now to vindicate my Self from their Folly,
Esteem the Foulest of their Writings a fit Copy for the World, whose Heads ache
like Jupiters, till delivered of those Palla's: though so Flat and Deformed, as
if conceived in their Thumbs.

I may safely say, That heretofore, (However it is with me now, grown perhaps
through Custom more Impudent) I was not ambitious to appear in public: Since
some of my Acquaintance can attest, That diverse pieces, of late published, were
long ago as Complete, as ever I have been able to make them since. The First
Cause of their projection, being rather, for the intent to While my Self, then
Busy others. Nor shall I prosecute this Trade, longer then it continues
acceptable to the Generality, and Beneficial to the Stationer. Whose
Operation, has been more Effectual, in this Midwifrey, then any Delight I can
take, in finding my Self rated, according to the Value of every Judgment:
commonly Forestalled by Opinion, a far nearer Friend to things of this
Nature, then the Highest Desert.

At the Foot of whose Tribunal, I should never have fallen, but to redeem the
World out of a Common Error, by showing, Men are not so unhappy in the Absence
of Learning, as Scholars pretend. -- Whose First Question is, What University
you are of? And their Last, if answered, None: For then, they consider the
Party as irrational, and below Conversation. Forgetting, That though Books may
produce a few rough Materials; it is only in the power of Experience, and
Natural Parts to Build up and Burnish a Perfect Man.

ESSAY On such as Condemn All they understand not a Reason for.
THeir Presumption is no less uncivil, then Prodigious, That having nothing
else to warrant them, but a Pettish and Solitary Opinion of their own, will
undertake, to arraigne, the Truth of all they cannot apprehend, or is not quite
arrived within the Perfect Cognizance of their Reason. And by this Impudence,
do not only, proclaim themselves Judges of the present understandings; but
present, the scanty measure of their own, as an unquestionable Standard, for
all may succeed. Forgetting, to what base Offices they have put such Conceits,
and Results to, upon a more serious Consideration; which at their first
Conception, they esteemed Authentic, and not misbecoming the Cabinet of a
Prince. And if thus Capable of Deceit from Themselves; What Security are they
able to give for the Spurious Censures they pass upon Others, that one day
they shall not be taken off from Wisdom's File, and some more True and
Honorable placed in their room, to the Eternal Insamy of such, as are
scandalized at any thing, formerly, a Stranger in the Schools? Nor is this
Humor the Continent of a less Malignity, then what has been Capable
heretofore, (Nor is it less busy now) to obstruct, and Discourage all farther
prosecution after Knowledge, by branding Reason with an Imputation of Atheism:
and Hanging what they understand not, under the Notion of Witchcraft; as
Foster, a Country- Parson, did the Weapon-Salve: Against which, he Conjured up
not only the Fathers, Schoolmen, etc. but (so far as his Weak Talent could
extend) did suborne Philosophy to attest against Her Self. Nor had this mad
Duel between Him, and Dr. LLoyde, (who being both of no great Strength did
weaken the Nations repute abroad) been parted, but That Authority (to vindicate
the usual cure of the Kings Evil from being an Operation of the Devil) did step
in betwixt Them. The First, gaining the Opinion of as High an Impudence, for
Beginning; as the Other, did of Folly, for maintaining so impertinent a Quarrel.

It was the Custom of King James, (and no question, of no small Improvement to
his Understanding) to Discourse during Meals, with the Chaplain that said
Grace, (or Other Divines) Concerning some point of Controversy in Philosophy.
And falling one Day upon Atheism, He did by undeniable Arguments maintain, No
Man could be found so Irrational, as to deny a First Cause: (which could be no
other then that Power we call God.) And Therefore, no such thing in Nature, as
an Atheist.

What his Judgment was of Witchcraft, you may, in part, find by His Treatise
on that Subject, and Charge he gave the Judges, to be Circumspect in Condemning
those, Committed by Ignorant Justices, for Diabolical Compacts. Nor had he
Concluded his Advice in a Narrower Circle, (as I have heard) Then the Denial of
any such operations, but out of Reason of State: and to gratify the Church,
which has in no Age, thought fit to explode out of the Common-peoples minds,
An Apprehension of Witchcraft. The greatest Miracles, now extant, making their
Apparitions, in the Dark Corners of this clouded Imagination. Into whose Cause
I shall not presume further to peep; as esteeming it more Dangerous then
Terrible. Yet, for the better Vindication of such Innocents, as are daily
observed, to pass out of this Back-gate of Injustice, to another World, (Whose
Posterns are the Ignorance of Judges, and Folly of our Laws) I will here
relate a Story of my own Knowledge, which if too Weak to refel this Common
Error, cannot be divested of Strength enough, to persuade more Discretion, and
Charity, then is ordinarily employed, in the Trial of such poor Creatures, That
are first made mad, as Solomon says, through Poverty, and Affliction; and
After Hanged, for being no better advised, then to Confess what they never did,
or any Flesh and Blood was ever able to do.

Sir Humphry Winch, (none of the least Honest, and Conscientious Itinerant
Judges of his Time,) was, in the Northern Circuit presented with this Evidence,
against Three Silly Women, That they had out of propense Malice, not only
bewitched diverse Cattle, and Children to Death: But the principal Cause of
their Commitment, arose from the Son of a Gentleman, that was supposed to have
layn diverse Months under their Fascination; who at certain Times, would
Contract his whole Body, within the Compass of a Joyn'd-stool, and write in
Hebrew, and Greek Characters, though not knownto be skilled in those tongues;
That a Spirit came then into him, sent by these poor Wretches, by which he was
so Tormented, as he did, in his Fits, foame at the Mouth. Nor was there a
greater, and more probable Evidence wanting; For, that Night the Judges entered
the Town, One of the Witches, did privately desire the Jaylour, to bring Her
into a room by her Self, where without any Compulsion, (a thing not omitted by
our Witch Finders) She told Him, she used a Familiar, together with the Rest;
And that they had joined to bewitch the said Boy; but did humbly beseech Him,
her Fellows might not know it, nor she be returned to the same lodging, for
fear, They should torment Her: And within few Hours dyed. Now upon the Keepers
Evidence, and others of like Nature, the Two were found guilty, and Condemned
to be Hanged. But under this Proviso, That in Case they continued obstinate in
the Denial of the Fact, The Sheriff should remand them back, where they were to
live, till the Progress, which was to be Northward, that Summer. The King being
gratified by nothing more, then an Opportunity to show his Dexterity in
Discovering an Imposture, (at which, I must confess Him, The Promptest Man
Living) upon his Arrival convented The Boy. Where, before Him, (possibly
daunted at his Presence, or Terrified by his Words) he began to faulter, so as
The King discovered a Fallacy. And did for a further Confirmation, send him to
Lambeth; where the Servants of George Abbot, did in a few Weeks, discover the
Whole Deceit. And He was sent back to his Majesty, before the end of the
Progress. Where upon a Small Entreaty, He would repeat all his Tricks
oftentimes in a Day. Nor did He do and suffer all this, for a more Serious
Cause, Then to prevent a present Whipping, and avoid going to School. Amongst
other Prancks, he lived in an Orchard a Week, upon Apples only.

I shall make no Paraphrase, nor pursue the Argument further, to avoid
Prolixity, no less, then Offense. The Doctrine of such etc. Being a Diana, out
of Which, no small Profit is made, and Credit purchased, in reference to
Opinions, otherwise Ridiculous, and Untenable.

Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, Prove. 8. 30.

From this Wise Kings Prayer, we may Learn the Danger that resides, in these
two Gulphs, Poverty and Riches. The Latter, alluring no less to Pride, then the
First tempts, if not Compels toward Atheism, and Infidelity. Both gathering
Strength and Aggravation, from the Complexion, and Education of the patient; So
as if Abundance proves the Lot of a Mean Birth; and Want, the Companion of one
bred in Plenty and Eminency; it elevates the First, as far above the Sphaere of
Moderation, as it dejects the Other, below the Center of Patience. Pride
despising Gods power, no less then Poverty distrusts it. For as a perfect and
Harmonious Joy comes nearest to that pleasure and Content, assured us in
Heaven: So Anxiety and Discontent are a representation of Hell. Melancholy
being the worst of Humors, because the Devils; (if he may be thought, to
participate of any) who apprehends all ill about Him, and cannot but despair of
better. Wherefore Poverty must be allowed the most dangerouus Condition,
because infested with all those prodigious Effects, this Diabolical Passion is
liable to produce. Which are, in a manner, all we do in this World, either
Punish, or Admire: Sin being a Result of Want; from whence it becomes so far
more Illegal, then Unnatural, as S. Paul owns the Law, for the most Manifest
Original, and exactest measure of his prevarioations.

I know Abundance has been by Good men, prized below Want, when offered to be
made the Wages of Iniquity; though None besides Our Savior, was ever found,
able to grapple with the Enemy of Mankind being Hungry and in Want, as He was
in the Wilderness. Which remains none of the Weakest Effects, left us, of his
Divinity: And rather inserted, as a Mark of his own Power, then an Example for
our Immitation. Yet such Monastical persons, as endeavor to come nearest to
it, have enough to Satisfy, though possibly, not to pamper Nature. The Name of
Voluntary Hope of Merit, and the Worldly Respect it brings, bearing most of the
Charges belonging to it. Nor have they Wives and Children, which looked
through, do like Optics, multiply the Bulk of Want.

When Others (not wilfully) Sick of this Loathsome Plague, as if it were
Infectious, are not only Forsaken of All, but exposed to the Tyranny of Every
Hand desires to oppress them. Law it Self, (a Friend to all else) being so
heavy an Enemy to the poor Beggar, as it seeks to Discharge the Common wealth
of Them, with no less industry, then the Physician, does the Body of man, from
Humors putrid and noxious to its Health. I know Some make a Trade of Want; and
by it, are able to live, not one'y Idly, but in an Unbridled Luxury; Whereas,
Those here meant, Consume their Bodies, by Labor, or which is more Painful, in
the Study of the Mind; yet cannot obtain so much, as to purchase bread
sufficient, to stop the Mouths of their Family, from Barking at Heaven, and
tearing God under the Vail of Fortune, for pouring upon others, without
Limitation, what is denied to them in the Meanest Proportion. Indeed the
Ancient Stoics, no less, then the more Modern Divines have, and do still
continue their endeavors, to vindicate this unequal Distribution from the
Tincture of Partiality; but have in my mind, left it more Ambiguous. Only our
Savior in his Answer penned for Dives, seems (no less then in other Places of
his Gospel) to assign Heaven, merely for an Inheritance, to such, as Want here;
and Hell for Those that abound: As he that marks the Words, cannot but imagine,
Nor dare I apply the Figure of Hyperbole, to any Saying of His. Which exactly
weighed, is but a Salvo for a Mistake, An Indefinite Number or Quantity,
suiting better the Mouth of an Ignorant Man, then the Immense Knowledge of our
Blessed Redeemer. Wherefore (under the Correction of a more perfect Light) I
think the Simile of a Camel, (or Cable) and the Eye of a Needle justly and
Mathematically proportioned, to the Salvation of a Rich man, who is incapable
of it, without a more Miraculous Extension of the Mercy of our Maker, then is
by Himself best known to Suffice such, as in this World, have not enjoyed so
much Plenty.

And, That an Observation of the Law is not Enough, seems to appear, by Christ's
bidding Him that had Done it, To Sell All that he Had, etc. as the thing most
acceptable to God.

Wherefore I could wish, That this Tithing the Minth and Cummin of Others
Errors and Opinions, were not so nicely performed, and Charity with her
Concomitance Probity (the Whole performance of the Commandments) so quite
neglected. Which no doubt, is the great Occasion of so much Indigence, as may
be observed now; and so Contrary to That in Christ's Time, as it rather hinders,
then Facilitates, the Ways to Heaven: So as it appears, That the Devil himself
had never experimented so much power in any Person, as was able to resist the
Temptation of Misery and Want, till he met with Job. Which gave him the
boldness to wager (as it were) with God, That in case, he removed the Hedge,
his Love had placed about him, He would Curse him to his Face.

Wherefore, it cannot be esteemed, a slight provocation was the Greatest, Man's
Enemy could invent. Had he only touched his Health, the Means of Recovery
might have remained: But his Livelihood being lost, nothing continued, but Lean
Patience; far too weak wholly to ward this Blow, though it may dissemble the
taking it, or Cover the Wound for a Season.

It is no less Wholesome then Decent, to travel on Foot, with a Horse in thy
Hand; but to the Destitute of a like ease, Tedious. Wherefore Seneca may make
Demonstration of Wit, and prescribe Rules, for the more quiet enduring of
Penury, but deserves the less Credit, because writ at a time, when himself had
occasion to use more Moderation, then Patience; Which makes me believe, his
Mind (together with the rest of the Puritanical Stoics) was far averse from
their Doctrine; since a decent Frugality out of the Society of a more Sordid
Covetousness, could not have accumulated so immense a Treasure, as Tacitus
reports, was found about Him. Yet Concludes his Documents, with a Peremptory
Advise, rather to Die, then abide in so little Ease, as this, and far less
intolerable Earthly Inconveniences are observed to bring with them. Which
indeed were more to the purpose, Could Christianity make use of this his last
Receipt: Who is prescribed by her Institutes, to Tide it out, although the
Stream of its Inconveniences runs never so strong against the Nature of Man. So
as if God had set any lower precipice, as the Bottom of the Leap, then Eternal
Damnation, I think none so pusillanimous, as would not rather once take it,
then to remain still under the Weight, of so heavy and unsociable a Calamity,
that produces all things Hurtful or Hateful to Nature, For when God mans-out
his Hosts, the Poor are found in the Forlorn Hope; and Famine takes up her
Headquarters under Their Roof. Nor does the Pestilence find a more Convenient
place, to hatch her Malignities in, then the Bosom of the Indigent. And when
the Sword is so Noble, as to spare him, it is not so much out of Mercy as
Contempt. He being in this only Happy, That his Condition is not in a capacity
to become worse, no more then in any great probability of Amendment; Since in a
general Felicity, he only is unhappy. Because Want renders her Owners incapable
of Trust, By creating Suspicion, before any Fault is Committed: For where
Necessity abounds, there Theft and Deccit are supposed, as an Infallible
Consequence. When a Felony, or Murder is committed, the next Poor Houses are
ordinarily searched. Where the less is found of their own, the greater
Suspicion is conceived of what belongs to others. And so Loathsome is a Beggar
esteemed; as he that is so Charitable as to make him Drink, is yet, thus
uncivil toward Him, as to shut the Door, and wash the Cup after Him: as if it
were impossible for a Person in want, either to be True or Wholesome. Being
shunned of the Herd, as one struck by the severest arrow of his Makers
vengeance; and left nothing to accompany him, but Misery. -- Yet none may
possibly apprehend him so wretched, as He thinks Himself. Being for the most
part, deprived not only of Terrestrial, but Future Comforts. For if Conscious
of Ill, (as what means has he of living by, or doing any thing else but
Evil?) through Death (the only way to lead him out of his transitory Misery)
he apprehends one prepared for him that is Eternal. The Indigent person like
the flying Fish, being not only persecuted in his Own Element, by those more
Mighty; But upon leaving it, falls into their terrible Claws, to whom is
assigned the Dominion of the Air. This Cross having wrought so strongly with
some Complexions, as to purge away all Belief of Providence, and revive that
Old damnable Opinion, of a Double Nature in God. Now though our Blessed Savior
is not found above twice, to sustain his Followers a miraculous way, and that
in the Desert, where Nature failed; yet, by making the Rich to divide with the
Poor, he supplied that Defect, this uneven-Distribution occasions in the
World. And, that no small stress of Christian Wisdom lay in it, may seem to
appear, in the severer Punishment inflicted by S. Peter (in many places styled
the Prince of The Apostles) upon Ananias and Sapphira, then ever was observed
to attend such, as whipped, stoned, and persecuted Christ; not only in his own
person, but that of his Followers. Wherefore, if those thus set upon, do daily
fall into Heterodox Opinions, or are, not seldom observed, To hang up their
Shield of Faith, in the Temple of Despair; and Convert the Study of unrewarded
Virtue, into the more Thriving Opportunities, Deceit affords: they ought to
receive pity from us, because liable to the like Lapses our Selves, who
through Excess are found to rob the Poor, more then Necessity dares do the
Rich, out of Fear of the Ironteeth of the Law; in all Nations far more
severe, then those of Christ. Who, by not reproving his Disciples for Taking
the Ears of Corn, gives the Hungry Belly a Larger Charter, in the enjoyment of
Earthly Blessings, then the Tyranny of Power is willing to subscribe; it being
no small Augmentation of the Needy's Misery, and one of the greatest torments
in Hell, to see All Plenty about Him, and want within. To Conclude, all further
Discourse, on this Tragical Calamity, I shall say, (but not peremptorily) If
Sampson found Mercy that destroyed Himself, for the Gratification of his
Revenge; what reason is there, in denying it to These, upon the Greater
Provocation of want?

A Contemplation on Adams Fall.
SUch as think Gods first Injunction Trivial, in prohibiting Adam, to eat of
the Forbidden Fruit, and the Temptation to break this Commandment, easy to be
avoided, Do not Consider, that Man in his Innocence, had no use of any
External thing, but Meat: nor other Capacity of improving his Intellects, save
in Knowledge. A Desire, so diffused throughout the whole Mass of Humanity,
that such as are too weak to apprehend Reason of State, will pry into the
Causes of their Land Lords-Actions; or, that failing, raise Tumults, amongst
Themselves, by a too near inspection, and Revelation of the News of each
others Miscarriages. And this being the most universal Humor now, may render
it more probable to Have been the same did accompany Man at the First: Nature
remaining Depraved, not Eradicated. Wherefore this Prohibition, was placed,
according to Prudence, upon that Side, our Parents were weakest on; and so,
more fit to receive a Caution. For, had God forbidden them Theft, or Murder,
they could not have apprehended his Meaning: Nothing but Will corrupted by
Passion, being able to bring forth, such uncooth Sins into Action, which having
once fallen, within the Compass of Experience, They, by Consequence, came
within the Notion of Knowledge, nothing being yet presented to their
Imaginations, but what was already arrived within the Circuit of their Senses.
The First Man appearing to me, no better furnished with Knowledge, then an
Infant in his Primitive Innocence; but That, his Organs being made Perfect, he
was Capable to apprehend all things, with the same Dexterity, his Senses were
able to feed his Fancy: In which they might take so much Pleasure, (since
Nothing is more Tastfull to Humanity, then Understanding) That to make, this
Spring of Knowledge more fluent, he swallowed the Apple, the Fountain of his
Infelicity; which instead of gratifying his Taste and Desire, depraved both. If
he gave Names to the Creatures, suitable to the Sinful Use, was after to be
made of them, He did not only Prophecy Their future misery, but His own: And
if foreseen, why did he not prevent it? Wherefore the Fault must ly, either
upon his Ignorance, or Will. For till his Fall, he seems, to have as little
need, of the Elephant's Docility, or the Oxes Industry, as it is improbable,
but that They were both made for Employment: which had been quite lost,
together with all the Trades, the Blessing [of Increase and Multiply] is
sustained by; had not Adam fallen from his Original Integrity. This makes me
wonder, to find Eve willing, or at leisure, to Chat and Gossip it with the
Serpent; the most remote in Symmetry, from her own glorious Form, if not in
Nature, from her Temper and Complexion; Especially, having so much the more
Excellent and adapted Companion, as her Husband near her to Converse with.
Which might give Credit to their Opinion, That the Fall was long after the
Transgression: but that the Impossibility of her Conceiving a Contaminated
Issue, whilst pure in Themselves offers more then a probable Confutation. It
not being likely, they should Forget, for any Considerable time, to neglect one
of their principal Errands, which lay, in performing the Blessing, of
Diffusing his Like: The most Rational Cause such can produce, as attribute
their Prevarication, to an Excess in Concupiscence; through which, the Tree
growing in the midst of the Garden, became Contaminated. But to Bury this
Conjecture, (no less, then the Opinion of Josephus, That the Serpent had,
together with all Creatures else, before the Fall, an Articulate voice) in the
more certain Relation of Moses; (though in nothing more Concise, and Abstruse,
then about the Beginning; not unpossibly, That he might preserve Truth, at the
least prejudice to Tradition, in the Preservation of which, the People of God,
were extreme, if not Superstitiously Tender.) I shall modestly propose, That
if the Serpent, was really active, in the seducing of Man: (as may seem to
appear, by the Curse laid upon him no less Diffusive, in reference to this
World, then Ours, it reaching the whole Species; observed at this Day, to (
rawle upon the Ground) Whether we may not infer, That this-
now-Despicable-Creature, was the First that went about to infringe the
Ordinance of God: Since those that make the Serpent, only Isntrumental, to the
Devils Activity, Borrow it, from Conjecture, not Reason, which was never
observed to punish the Sword; but the Hand that did manage it to Destruction.
Wherefore, if it was the Devils Sin, nothing but the Serpents Consent in making
it self Isntrumental, could procure a Punishment: No more then to the Winds
that through his incitation, destroyed the Children of Job. Which put together,
may crowd a room for this Conjecture, That the Devil possessed the Serpent
with Envy First, at so glorious a Creature as Man was: And After, gained its
Consent, to be Isntrumental in our Destruction, and so a Cooperator with
Satan, and a Fellow in his Sin. For if it be thought unpossible, the Serpent
should do so ungrateful a Service, to Humane Nature, upon its own Instigation,
it appears as unreasonable, why it should bear all the Penalty; The Devil
having augmented, if not Begun, his Rebellion, against his Maker, by seeking to
destroy, this his Handiwork.

These seeming Contradictions, together with the Appellation of an Evening and
a Morning before the Luminaries (the only Dividers of Time) were made, might
tempt Philo the Jew, to dress in the Life of Moses, The Story of the Creation
in an Allegory, or Fable: Who standing Nearest those Times, and in a Better
Light, may be thought by such as love to be Skeptical, most probable. But since
the Ancient and Apostolical Church (To whose Creed, so far, as my Darker
Infidelity, will give me leave, I shall submit my Judgment in all Humility)
has Accommodated it to Another Sense, I think it, as far from Prudence, as
Christianity, to oppose, or in the least, Contradict it.

Though Apt to Consent, That the Lapsed-Angels might entertain more Commerce
upon Earth, before the Promise of our Savior, and whilst Man stood upon his
own Legs; then after God had taken him into his Protection; as not thinking it
meet to trust such Frailty, with so Potent an Enemy. Wherefore he confined the
Devil into Holes and obscure places, out of which upon his own Instigation, or
Imitation of the Prophets of the Lord, he gave his ambiguous Oracles, till by
the brighter Apparition of the Star of Jacob, they were struck as irrecoverably
Dumb, as they were Blind before: Averred by Plutarch in his Morals, in the
Genius, or Ghost of Socrates. And he that would find a Reason, Why our First
Parents were Ashamed of their Nakedness, must not seek it, in the Nature they
Conveyed to us, where Bashfulness is a Result of Custom, but from the
Contemplation of some creature then in sight really, or seemingly more
beautiful then Themselves: There being no Occasion for shame, but in respect of
a more Transcendent Perfection. It remaining indubitable, That Children with
us, and Men and Women amongst the Indians, (not to be denied the Exactest
Followers of the primitive Dictates of pure Nature,) are no more Sensible of
Shame, in relation to those Parts Adam and Eve are said to have Covered, then
the Europeans express, when found Barefaced. Blushing being a silent
Confession of a Fault; not to be found, amongst The Works of God: Nor any
where, till the Law had stamped the Figures of Reward and Punishment, upon such
Humane Actions, as do Advance, or Depress the general Felicity. Custom being so
exact a Disposer of the Convenience, if not Consent of Mankind, as to make
Diverse Wives in Turkey, lie quietly, under one and the same Covering. So as it
requires more then an Ordinary Intelligence, to distinguish, between the Free
Government of Nature, and the Imperious Tyranny, if I may not call it Anarchy
(for it is not in all places alike) of Education. But lest I should appear
rather a Disciple of Plato, then Moses, I shall pass by the Rabbys no less then
the Modern Philosophers, that Consume more time, in Hunting after the Original
of the Disease, then the Means to Cure it, Not to be found but in Jesus Christ.
Yet, as I said before, Since no Heart is empty of the Humor of Curiosity, The
Beggar being as attentive in his Station, to an Improvement of Knowledge, as the
Prince; It is not unlikely, to have been the Primary and Centrical Sin; from
whence The Lines of All Humane Vanities are drawn, and to which they are
Fastened. For if our Latter Artists think it no ill Argument, to prove the Basis
of the Earth Magnetical, because the Loadstone is in all Clymates found: Why
may it not be Concluded from as great a Diffusion, That A too Dilated Desire of
Inspection into things was Original Sin? Since not only Observable in Solomon
himself; but in the picture of the Fool he draws, who ran after Variety: Which
is only New Knowledge of a Strange Woman. And if I am not deluded by those
More Learned, One Word in the Original is taken for Both. But to Proceed: When
Eve saw the Fruit, she did covet; And Concupiscence is enough, Now to Condemn
us, though nor then. The Text placing the Transgression in Eating, not
Desiring: That remaining impossible to be prevented, All things till
Contaminated by Sin, being in so high a Degree of Perfection, as they did
enforce a Coveting in all did Behold them: It appearing, too low a Sacrament of
Duty in Man the Supreme Vicegerent of The Almighty, To have for a Testimony of
Obedience, only abstained from What was in it self but merely Indifferently
Good.

It is not likely, He covered his Nakedness, with Leaves of the same Tree, from
whence he gathered his Destruction: As those imagine, who suppose the Indian
Fig to be the Forbidden Fruit: For how should he Dare to Touch that a Second
time, had Wounded him, at First, quite through Himself, and his Posterity?
Though Confessed, a perfect Representation of Guilt. One Root being so
Diffusive, as by a Gum that distills from the Boughs, to dilate it Self into
the Vast Shade of a Desert, sufficient to cover an Host of Men.

Nor is Curiosity, and a Lickorish Desire of enjoying That we never Tried,
(though known to be the cloud, in which all the Storms impending Life are
engendered,) yet Cured in us. Who by Retail, drop into the same Error, we
Consider in Him, as the Highest and most Impertinent Folly. The Apple of a
Wandering Eye, not being Seldom found able to Overbalance the Wisdom of
Solomon, and the Piety of David.

Wherefore it is time to give-over upbraiding those Names of Adam and Eve: All
things we never saw, or Knew, being Empty sounds, and Impertinent Appellations.
Not seldom Laden out of Ignorance in the Contents of their Story, (as a number
of other Dead Voices are,) with insignificant Praise or Blame. Especially,
since Moses, and the Prophets are not heard to Condemn them; As Conscious to
Themselves, they either would, or could not but have done the Like. Yet we may
Safely say, That between the Suspension of the Promise and The Fall, (which
might possibly Answer the time, Christ remained on the Cross) Adam endured
greater Agonies, then e're was matched, but by God and Man: Who only, knew the
Way to untread the Maze, in which Man had lost Himself, and All that should
Succeed; If so Wicked as to harbor a desire of dilating himself, and bringing
an Offspring into a like Dilemma, in which, he saw nothing for the Present,
but Horror, joined with a Fearful Expectation of Worse to come. Not having so
much, as the Weak Twig of Hope to sustain him from falling into Despair. Which
could not spring but from the Root of an Experience, arising from a Former
Experimented Mercy: The Garden having not yet produced any Fruit so Lateward.
There being as little Marks of Forgiveness, as there was a Dismal Example of
Justice, stamped upon the Disobedient Angels. Whose condition was yet, so far
better, then Man's, as an already Determined Judgment is more tolerable, then
One that re. mayns still Arbitrary, at the Will of an Omnipotent power; And in
this miserable anxiety, God saves Adam, whom, nothing else was so merciful, as
to kill.

Now I can do no less, Then predicate here, a more charitable Opinion, then
Theirs That Conclude the Greatest proportion of men Lie under the Kingdom of
Satan: By which, the Promise of Redemption comes to be Restrained, and so the
Truth of its performance Obstructed. It being no where observable, in the
Dignity of Reason, That a Superlative power, should go less, or Beneath its
Word in relation to Good. It exceeding the Reach of the most Riged Distinction,
or Strictest Interpretation, to find a Parity, or Equal proportion between the
Head and the Heel: If any were discoverable, between crushing and biting. This
makes me Tremble at their Presumption, who Carry Breath in their Nostrils, yet,
are not afraid to Affirm That all things so Dear to our Maker, as to be
capable of a Future Happiness, are not to be found out of the Pale of
Christendom, This, or That Church, or rather Chapel. No Single Profession
extant, carrying a greater Proportion, with the whole World then a peculiar
Parish, does to a Province. As if the Fountains of Gods mercy were not as
ingenious, and his seven Spirits as Diffusive as those of Nilus; by which the
Want not the Neglect of Rain is supplied in Egypt. Nor can it be imagined with
any Salvo, to the Dignity, Pity, Wisdom, Omnipotency, and the Promise of God
First made, and therefore likely to be most inviolably kept, (he not being as
man, that he should repent) For, That the Earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is, the Fullness thereof, cannot be True, if Hell swallow up the major
part. And that Christ his Son should be found, at the last Assizes, with a
smaller Trayn (let their Glory be never so Great) then his, shall march in the
head of those miserable Souls, clothed with the Wrath of God. Can any in
Prudence, if in Equity, think That the Malice of his Enemy should be more
Disfusive in relation to particulars, then the mercy of our Blessed Savior?
who did not like the Devil Fall for our Destruction, but Rise for our
Justification. There now lives not a greater Infidel, then S. Thomas was: yet
the Apostles do not excommunicate him, nor Christ reject him, but cure him
through a palpable manifestation of those wounds, the Greatest part of the
World have not nor ever had any Knowledge of: Nor those most Reserved, any
Inspection into; but what they make through so small a Faith, as does not answer
the Proportion, of a grayn of mustard seed; Else they would remove those
mountains that shadow Truth. And if so single an Attestation as mine, might be
allowed the boldness to appear, against such a Cloud of witnesses, as have
found the Turk and Pope guilty in person, of the Title of Antichrist, I should
reverse the Sentence; and pronounce it rather against That Order of Men, or
Discipline, that put the Forgiveness of God under a Bushel, (which according to
his Dignity and Promise, ought to Diffuse it self over all the Nations of the
World) rendering by this means, the inexhaustible Treasure of Mercy, like the
Philosophers stone: (of which some have made the Gospel of Jesus Christ but an
Allegory) only attainable by a People, thus Situated, Instructed and
qualified: Whereas None that Call upon the Name of God (a custom appears by
Genesis not to have begun till after Adam) are exempted out of the primitive
Grant. The Fault of the Angels, if compared with that of Man, will not be
found, upon a true Survey, much Different.

The First endeavoring to Equal their Maker in his Power; the Latter in his
Wisdom.

It is harder to find a Reason for the Angels Sin against God, then their
Malice to Man: It being usual for Malefactors to hate their Judge, and after
Sentence, to endeavor the Hindrance of its Execution, and to bring Others, (at
least those they know he Favors) into a like Condemnation; Having Themselves
no better Condition, to Hope for, nor Worse to Fear. Like the Wicked of this
World, which seek that Ease amongst Company, they are not able to find Alone.
Wherefore the preventing Satan's further Triumph, may not improbably be numbered
amongst the Causes why God showed Mercy to Men; in the Salvation of whom, had
he been so sparing as some imagine, His Justice would appear more prevalent,
then his Mercy. And so run out into such a Dishonorable Extreme, as cannot be
matched in the Practice of the Greatest Tyrants that ever were: Which are not
found to make a Temporal Punishment to extend to a Major part, much less one
Eternal.

What ever the Text may seem to import to our Dull Capacities, There was no
Likelihood That Adam would have in this Condition (if he rightly understood
Himself) Eat of the Tree of Life: But rather have swallowed Poison, (had that
Place afforded it.) Who by Catching at the shadow of Divinity, lost the Real
Substance of Humanity; at the suggestion of the Devil: who seeing God form a
Governor, out of the Dust, the most Despicable part of his Government, yet a
more Honorable beginning then His, ( Any thing being better then Nothing) he
might look upon it, with Disdain, as unworthy the sentence of Goodness. Neither
might this Humor of Pride be provoked, if he be admitted so much Inspection
into Future Success, as to see the Creature he despised, should not only
inherit the Glory he was fallen from, but Exceed the Angels that Continued in
Integrity. Thus the Serpent growing Fruitful in Presumption, endeavors to
frustrate his Makers Intention, by laboring to Deface his Image in Man.

But Omnipotency struck Light, out of Darkness, by making the Prince of it,
Instrumental to the Production of his Son. And these Joyful Tidings, That the
seed of the Woman should prevail against the gates of Hell, God brings Himself
as a Token that he meant to perform it in his own Person. Neither is it to be
passed without Notice, That, he says, The seed of the Woman only. For by
that, might be prefigured the miraculous Conception of our Blessed savior
without a Man; Noless, Then the Perverseness of Depraved Nature. For though Adam
had thus offended and felt an Effect of the Punishment in his present
Apprehension, yet he was not able to Lay hold on the Weak Virtues of Repentance
and Acknowledgement; the Lawful Daughters of Hope, with whom, yet he had no
Acquaintance, much less Interest, before The Promise of Christ. But instead of
these Tokens of Grace, he wanted not the Impudence, to lay the Fault on God; as
if the Woman had been made and given him, for his Destruction. And in this Eves
sin was Less, and her Manners more; For though She would not take it to
herself, but Cast it on the Serpent, yet She does not upbraid God, with the
Making of it.

Now by Gods mild Answer in this no less then in his Colloquie held with Cain,
after the murder of his Brother, we may find, He is not Angry according to the
mode of men, or as some represent him with Thunder continually in his Hand. As
if our Prevarications and Miseries had Created passions in our Maker, and
taught him to be Angry, or Merciful. Since if ever he had been Capable of
Fury, it had Now appeared, when he found Malice, Ingratitude, Folly, and Pride
laid all in the way, to interrupt his Work, which his Justice must have ruined,
had it not been quenched by Love: A Virtue taken out of the Hidden Fountain of
his Goodness; which till then, he was not pleased to reveal.

And Here his passing-by all Notice, of the Devils operation, in Adams
Transgression may Color their Opinion That think Sin did Then, and Now does
proceed from Our selves.

Conjecturall QUERES, OR Problematicall Paradoxes Concerning Reason, Speech,
Learning, Experiments, and other Philosophical Matters.

BY FRANCIS OSBORN Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond, 1659.

To his very worthy Friend, Mr. To. VVo. of Linc. Coll. in Oxon.
SIR,
DID I own the Wisdom and Wealth of Seneca, as truly as I do the highest
Affection he pretends to in his Epistles: This had contained Matter no less
suitable to the Greatness of your Judgment, then the Obligation I must ever
acknowledge I owe to your Goodness.

But since I am restrained from the First by Birth, as I am from the Latter by
Fortune, You may yet be wooed to a more charitable acceptance upon this
Consideration, That though the Present be small, it was not filched from
Epicurus, or any other Magazin of Knowledge, then what lies included within my
own Invention. Which proves This I send you, as absolutely mine, as ever it was
Theirs (if any such be) that may have Discovered it before I was born. For
being acquitted by my Conscience of all Theft in this kind, I take the
Recitements of others Opinions, as relating to no greater a Shame in me, then
those are Obnoxious to, who enriched us with Guns and Printing, because some
maintain they were used in China many Thousand Years before. The ranconter
being no less Happy then his that stumbled on it at first.

I confess I have been so basely abused by Books, as that I entertain none but
upon high Commendations. And those rather New then Old, however the world is
pleased to look a squint upon them, as lesse-deserving, though some have
appeared of late to Admiration, and so far Transcendent as I fear our Period
is near. Ignorance and Barbarism, being commonly the last subdued before a
general Destruction.

Knowledge has been ever taken for an infallible Portent of Ruin found, So
busy a Companion, as she leaves nething unpryed into, in Heaven or Earth
toward the Heights and Depth's of which she is not continually rolcing her
Conjectures and casting her Darts; tenable through no Opinions long, but what
she remains feuer'd to with the strong Chains of the Mathematics I Study no
less Natural then Necessary. The employment of Children, in their exactest
Innocence, being to make Howses and raise Pyes of Dirt. So as if this
inclination were encouraged, and supported through the Direction of discreet
Teachers, These Buds might come in Future to yield (without tormenting and
subduing their Spirits) more wholesome Fruit, then the crueller Culture of the
School was ever found yet able to produce.

But I hold it no Prudence here to give a Second blow, by which the Idolaters
of Former Customs may be tempted to a like Severity in case I should mistake;
as it is very possible I may. The Land-skip I endeavor to draw being darkened
through Ignorance, Superstition, and what is more dreadful, a thick and obscure
Cloud of different Judgments so long embraced for the Goddess of Truth, as
none can prosecute the Contrary, though never so far off, under hope of a
milder penalty, then to be sent away Naked, and Wounded, which cannot but be
thought an uncivil kind of Justice, and unsuteable to the Primitive and richer
ages of the world: Where then as few were denied to search as we sinde now able
to determine. Every Sect of Philosophers domineering in his Station.

Yet rather then betray Natural Reason into their hands who desire to cut off
all farther Traffic with the Land of Knowledge, I shall leave these Paradoxes,
Problems, Queres, Conjectures, or what you please to call them, wholly to your
Disposure. Being resolved neither to be dejected, nor elated through their
Destruction or Preservation. Only I am consident if they can pass with the
smallest degree of Your Approbation, it may prove a safe Conduct in Justice
against the severest Censures of others, No less then a perpetual testimony
that I am

Your faithful Friend and Servant.

Conjecturall Paradoxes CONCERNING Reason, Speech, Learning, Experiments, etc.
MOst Philosophy lies clouded by Disputes, and the Magisteriall Determinations
of the Schools, from whence it has till of late, been thought Presumption to
appeal; Though Manifest Errors do appear in what they have already judged: And
many as material things passed by under Silence or Restraint, that cannot be
denied as fit to be known. Nor are any so likely to discover new Truths as such
as march by themselves, and out of the beaten Track of others. Curious Ideas
being like Precious Stones, sooner stumbled upon, and found in places least
looked for, then Started by the Direction of any that went before; who have
left only Discouragement, or at least but a Negative or such a perplexed
Knowledge, as renders their Understanding that rest in it more Offuscated and
Gloomy then the most stupid Ignorance it self.

Which together affords me cause enough to think our rare Inventions and
pregnant wits stifle their own Natural Fertility through a too long and
frequent Commerce with Books; Not seldom of a contrary Complexion and Style to
the Readers: yet forced out of Custom to be conversant in them. By which he is
brought to Stammer and become so Diffident of himself (such Learnning lying in
Memory the most pedantical part of Knowledge) as he dares not deliver his own
Opinion out of Reverence to Antiquity or any Authors else, but in the same
words he finds it written. The doting upon Foreign Authority keeping us still
at a stand: like the Body of Joabs Brother, beyond which the Israelites would
not pass out of a vain reverenceto their General.

And thus all further Prosecution of Knowledge and Conquest over Ignorance is
obstructed, and Scholars tied to Cultivate and confine their Travels within
the Circuit of a barren Wilderness, stocked with insignificant Terms and such
crabbed Allusions and improbable Conclusions, that have no better Plea for
their Authority then the exorbitant veneration which Tradition rather then
Merit, has awarded Antiquity above the equal, if not better Judgments found
in our Age. Nor is there hope of any further or more happy progress till these
rotten Carcasses be removed out of the way, or covered from their Eyes that
want not Hearts and abilities to jogge on better without them.

The First Man could have at the Beginning but this Advantage of a Child, that
his Organs were immediately fitted and prepared to receive no less then retain
Knowledge. Which in an Infant are Obstructed through Want of Room, or too great
a Redundancy of Phlegm or Moisture.

For if Adam was furnished with more, it must be Supernatural, and so far above
humane apprehension, as it is to imagine how he should Know his Goods, or the
use of what he never had seen or tried, unless we conceive he brought an
Inventory or Herball into the world with him.

Wherefore, according to humane understanding, Reason like Fire was at the
beginning but a Spark, till through a confluence of all Events happenable to
Man it, received Augmentation, as the other did from the Supplement of Matter;
And having once caught Paper did illuminate the World.

Now though so much Knowledge is not unlikely to be found in the Creature, as
that with the same Advantages to increase it, they might become more
intelligent then still to remain Slaves: Yet I find room for a Quere, Whether
this Defect (if capable of that Title) does not proceed rather from the Want of
Speech, then perception? Or Whether Humanity that arrogates so high, as to
proclaim it self Lord over all may not be found in some Persons and Places (as
it might not impossibly have been in the Rest) little more Rational, had it no
greater stock of Experiments, to traffic with, then every respective
individual is able to glean up of himself? Our advantages proceeding from
Commerce, whose Wheel once set a work did quickly manifest on which Side Gain
or Loss lay, the Primitive Knowledge of Good and Evil, and before whose door
Sin was first found.

And this Inspection into things at the beginning dim and modest, became by
handing from one generation to another, so huge a Mountain in their estimation
who presumed to have made a full and exact Survey of the Land of Knowledge;
That with the Giants of old, they did not only rant it over men's Persons and
Consciences, by proportioning what extent of Worship befitted the Gods, but
erected their Pillars upon the borders of Philosophy under such an Imperious
Injunction, as none, till of late have ventured to discover any thing beyond
them; Though found in other Descriptions and Relations very False, by
multiplying such poor Advantages as Man has acquired, and depressing greater
which do naturally belong to the Creature, who is inspired with the same
breath, inhabits the same Earth, is more Healthful and Strong; Only he seems
to come short in Reason. The Original of which I shall make my further
endeavor to discover. And if it prove in the abstract more adventitious then
Natural, and less beneficial, then the Senses, upon whose ruins she has
built her foundation, I hope it may hold forth an Use of Humility unto us, if
not move pity toward the Creature, who the Apostle justly says groans for
its Deliverance.

It is on all hands confessed without the least whisper of Contradiction, That,
Luxurious, idle and vicious Nations are most pregnant and happy in the richest
Endowments of the Mind. And, That it is ordinary with diverse in Ecstasies,
Fevers, acute Diseases, and during the storms of Love, Fear, etc. to have
their Inventions soar higher then in a more entire Health they have been found
after able to reach. From whence it is deducible, that Reason (for ought we
know) may be but the Effect of those Corporeal infirmities from which without
Question it receives Augmentation. Since Wisdom is not found frequently mingled
with Strength and Beauty. The richest endowments unsophisticated Nature appears
to own in all things living besides; Whereas some, if not the generality of men
outwardly Crooked and Deformed utter Inventions most neatly composed. The Loss
and Defect in one external Sense or Part making a treble Compensation in the
Mind. Contrary to Beasts, amongst whom those of the exactest Features are most
useful and Docile.

Nor is it probable but such Variety of Food separated from the blood by Fire,
and compounded with Sugar, Spices, Salt, Sawces, Perfumes, with all sorts of
Viands relating to the High Taste, which eaten are convertible into our own
Bodies, should alter and add to the Faculties of the Mind, and fill us in the
Day with some of those Rational Raptures we apprehend from the vapors they
raise so palpably during Sleep: Not to be denied the Effects of a Distempered
Brain, and strangers to such Creatures and Persons as are of more Natural
Dyets, or make their Repast on Herbs and less sophisticated meats through
which Phlegm is increased, so known a Retarder of understanding as to protract
the maturity of Children, till by a Dryer Aliment and unnatural Heat they are
exposed to (especially their Heads) it is consumed, A concurrent cause of this
rational Advantaze we pretend to have over Beasts That wanting the use of Fire
are necessarily more replenished with Fluid Humors, and so by Consequence
Less Wise, though far more Agill, Healthful and strong. Whereas those to whom
we allow the largest proportion of Understanding, are Weak, Meager, and still
under some Course of Physic, which may pass for another Cause of Knowledge;
The Operations of the Mind being most prevalent in Decrepit Bodies.

The same is incident to Wine, that does not seldom inspire a Clown with
Civility, a Coward with Valor, the most sordidly Covetous with Liberality; And
(what is most conducible to the Assertion in hand) a Fool with a larger proport
on of Wit then he had, though unable to reduce it into a Habit, by reason of
some Obstruction or Leakage in his Organs. From whence it is as apparent That
Fancy and Conceit may be gratisied at the prejudice of the Senses, no less
then by the usual practice of Students, Poets, and Accomptants that use all
endeavors to exclude and stifle the Ideas both of their Eyes and Ears, whose
Diversions they can by no means admit without hazarding the happy Success of
all they are in labor to bring about. Whereas Beasts, by reason of their
continual Fears find leisure to be attentive to nothing but sense. Like a Town
Besieged wherein all other A ts cease, but what may contribute to Releif and
Preservation, because Hearing and Smelling are their chiefest out-Guards, and
without which they cannot in safety gather their Food. Nor does their Care
extend beyond this for want of that Spur of Necessity (formed through the
Mediation of their own Arts and Nature) with which Men are pricked on to New
Inventions. Being at better Leisure and more Security. Able (standing in little
awe but of their own Species) to consume those Spirits in internal
Contemplations, through which both themselves and their Fellow- Creatures are
rendered more miserable then by Nature, without this improvement (of what they
call Wisdom) they needed to have been; Whilst the other Animalls are forced to
dissipate them amongst their Senses only to purchase Food and Safety. Yet the
Knowledge so much boasted of, is no more Ours, then Honey is the Bees, before
picked up out of the Lesse-erring Practices of the more innocent Creatures,
from whence they have deduced their best principles to the very Arts used by
themselves in the Preservation or Destruction of their own Kind. And these
hoarded up in Memory, the Magazin of Bypast Events, though possibly at first
no more retentive in man's Head then Beasts, till by the Fumes of the former
mentioned Excess, Ours become so Oily like a Pot-lid, and apt for Receipt, as
nothing worthy observation could escape without leaving an Impression behind
it. And in this mould with the help of Fire, and a continual Refining through
Time, the purest Reason, so much relied on by Statists and Politicians came at
first to be Cast.

And that this is not obtruded upon Belief under a single Testimony, it may be
found the Opinion of the French Nation, where they have not a more Apposite
expression for a Fool, then, that, His Head is ill made. No weak argument of an
universal Belief, That Midwives skill does highly conduce to an advancement or
depression of Wisdom in a Child. And from hence I have been led to this wish,
That the like office might be performed on the behalf of a young Ape (of the
Kingdom of Congo, of which some years since I saw one in England, that bare a
Symmetry if not throughout like to, yet very little differing from a Child's)
whose Skull being kept from a too sudden closing by Heat, Swathing, and the
rest of the Ligations used by Nurses to Infants might not unpossibly acquire
reason, which once attained, The Impediments to Speech, (whose principal
Cunning lies in a musical Division or mincing a continued sound into
articulate Notes) would be no sooner discovered then removed: We enjoying many
things under the Favor and endeavors of Reason, far more difficult and remote
from the Confines of Nature, then the Coynage of Languages rendered apparent
through the multitude of them met with in the world. And this once acquired,
though by chance and not altogether consonant to the exact pattern of Nature,
Custom, assisted by Imagination might render diffusive for the Future. As I
believe not only many of our new-purchased Qualities but diverse of those man's
curiosity has imprinted upon his Own Kind or Others, are already become
Manifest in a Succession of Dogs whelped without Tails. To which mutilation
(at first no question purely humane or merely accidental) Nature has been so
indulgent already, as instead of an unsightly Bob, to form a sharp comely Bone
like the Scut of a Deer.

Now since we are able to add to, or Diminish from Natures work, both in
reference to Body and Mind, it cannot appear improbable That many Alterations
(perhaps greater then we are able to imagine, or ready to believe) have had
their Flux and Reflux often repeated or changed since the Beginning. Which may
render it no improbable Opinion, (but as true as formerly it has been common)
That Apes were of the seed of Cham, or else the by-blowes of some wild stock of
Humanity: the Characters of whose kind remaining no less manifest in their
Bodies, then Affections to Women: of which there are so many living Witnesses,
as it were superfluous to endeavor to prove it. Only this may be added as a
further Testimony: That my Self have seen two Monkies that for many years did
not fail to have duly a Lunary Purgation.

Nor is this any rare Discovery, but cited as a Report by the Lord Mountain in
his Essays, No less then we find it the usual practice of the Almighty in
the Scriptures, To 'Punish a Sin in the Succession of a 'Family, as he did some
with short Life, others with Leprosy, etc. The Recital of which I will fully
omit, it being my Task rather to Propose then Determine.

And if any understand what is said here in a more positive Sense, They abuse
themselves no less then wrong me; Who have no Stronger Assertions to justify
this, Then my Weak Conjecture, which is, That if God laid the Deprivation of
Reason upon these Monsters (For other they cannot appear to be, bearing a shape
and owning Gestures as various from the rest of Animals, as their Conceptions
are remote from the Prudence of a man) for any peculiar Offense, or that humane
Lust did cause it, by casting Seed into an irrational and improper Soil,
There lies no Cure for this Bestiality, if not in Heat. Cold being a heavy
Enemy to Activity of the mind though a tried Friend to Strength, and a
Continuer of Perfection. As Heat on the contrary melts and refines the Spirits
into a more Rational Temper. The first of which is exemplified in Sheep and
Kine, which though useful, cannot be excluded the Catalogue of the most
Simple: For exposing their new fallen Young to the injury of the weather, their
Pores become sealed up so close as the Gross and Phlegmatic strangle the Purer
Spirits only capable of that Vivacity and Cunning found in those Creatures
forced to use Stratagems in the gayning of their Food, whose Whelps are housed
in Dens and Thickets. Nor are the Foggy Humors in those Creatures rarifi'd
by Sweat, most proper to the Heads of Men, That in Horses being rather squeezed
out by Labor, then distilled gently by Drops, through which Nature obtains an
opportunity to pick and Choose, who uncompelled will part with nothing but what
is Bad or Superfluous.

Now if the Head be capable of moulding into one Figure more apt for the
production of reason, then another (as it is on the side of common experience
confessed) then can as little doubt be made but that it must needs have been
litt upon in a far less revolution of Time then the World has already passed
over, if certain of her own Chronology, which some have extended many Thousand
of Years beyond what by Faith we are obliged to believe. And Wisdom once
attained could never be lost; Since (as it is reported of the Elixar) she
receives Augmentation and Improvement from every Event. And because our greater
Security and Variety of Food has suffocated and abated so much of our Sense as
it is in no proportion able to find employment for our Fancy, (against whose
Nature it is to be Idle) as That more entire may do in the Creature; Man is
continually ruminating of what is Past, or Attentive on what is Present, and by
Comparing of these, is in some Mediocrity taught to determine of the Future.
Having Wisdom or Folly objected to him, according as the Conjecture does
quadrate with Truth, and the Concurrence of a Happy Success. Whereas the rest
of Animals not being able to estate their Young, and such as succeed in their
dear-bought Experiences, (if not for want of memory the mint of Knowledge, yet
out of an Incapacity for Discourse, and Disability to employ such Arts as are
only proper to Societies limited by Laws) become stunted in their Knowledge;
and without Improvement, not owning a larger Stock then the Brevity of a
Turbulent Life is able to accumulate, for want of Words, which coined into
Questions and Answers, are only able to Barter our own, and purchase the Wisdom
belonging to Others.

Now if any think people were born Wise at the First, (I mean in relation to
the understanding now current) they cannot but alter their Opinion upon
Contemplation of the vast Improvement one Age makes of what went before, and
how many New and more useful Arts are now as it were daily invented.

And as the want of Words is a total Eclipse, of any nearer dawne or further
progress in the Creature toward Reason; so we find the Confusion of
Languages no small Remora to the enlargement of Man's: The which (as is
observable in some Plagues else) though immediately poured on us by God for
Sin, have their radical Cause yet extant in Nature it self: So a Variety in
Dialects may by such probabilities as these seem to be occasioned, Speech being
but an Appellation of Things of which Providence has bestowed many in one
place, denied to Others, a Diversity of Languages must needs attend as a
necessary Consequence. Made yet more various and less intelligible from
Moisture and Drowth; Through whose Mediocrity or Excess, Sound is rendered
either Liquid or Mute proportionate to the Contraction or Extension of their
Organs who do, or may hereafter inhabit the place. That cannot but naturally
own the Causes of such Effects. Some Pumping their Words out of their Throats,
others Lower. As I knew a tall Scotchman allowed a Pension from King James,
That could frame a Voice at the Mouth of his Lungs, seeming to be remote from
the Ears of the nearest Bystander. A Fallacy no less likely to be in practice
with the Priests of Apollo then the Original of many miraculous Narrations of
Old. And through this variety of Tone and Pronunciation it often comes to
pass, That an Englishman is not able readily to converse with a Stranger in
one and the same Latin. From whence we may modestly observe that Nature had
the Confusion of Tongues in Potentia before God reduced it into an Actual
Plague. Who did not then create it anew, no more then he did the Rain- Bow. But
did only accommodate this Punishment to his present purpose.

Now though the Multiplicity of Idioms may in some part Cloud our Knowledge
from the Experiences to be gained by Strangers, yet the Time usually spent, and
the Hardship endured at School to dissipate these Mediums, and to learn to see
through them, may not unpossibly be heavier and more tedious then the Curse it
self.

It being likelier to have been the voice of Custom then Reason that Fonted a
bare Knowledge in Tongues with the Title of Learning. In the prosecution of
which the Spirits of Children are blunted, and Wit exchanged for Insignificant
Terms, and a Stupid Ignorance of all things else, under the Tyrannical
Regiment of an Ignorant Pedagogue. Who if good for any thing, that Art must
needs go so averse to the grain of his Understanding, as he cannot but be a
mere Empericke in it. Apparent in the most, because seldom undertaken, but as
a Last Reserve, and after more easy and thriving Professions have been tried.
Where if the Salary prove not more necessary to his Fortune, then so unmanly an
Erudition does to the miserable Child, it is easy to guess who drove the
Bargain. And this Plague past some to bail themselves out of the Deserts of
Want, and the Sons of others less needy to attain an insight into such
Tongues, as our Ancestors Folly, not Reason, prompted them to, prefer before
Experience the Dialect of the World, and with which you may travail further
and in more Security then with all the Learning in Europe.

The Child now in his most Docile age to Study men, and Softest Temper to take
the Impression of Patience and Compliance, is by a Learned Tutor and
Brazen-faced Impudence gained in the Schools swept and garnished to receive a
Seaven-fold more Wilful and Indomitable Ignorance in relation to what is
Convenient and becoming a Citizen of the World. A false Opinion of what he
Has not covering from his Apprehension such Defects as really he has.

Such as make Learning a full Employment have their Judgment so overawed by
Antiquity, that like Players they dare present nothing in public but what
their Poets have left them written. And if any Exception can be made against
that general Rule, which Concludes A too long Continuance at the University no
great Advancer of parts, it will be found amongst such as passed under the
Notion of Raschalls and Libertine. It being obvious to Proof (if I were willing
to register those Glorious Names under such a Monstrous Head) That none have
graced Learning more then some the University has exploded. Invention being an
Art of too noble a nature, to be learned under a Prentiship, or the great
Restraint of the Schools. That spoil and dead the fresh and piquant Taste of
later and New Wits by putting them into Old Forms, patched up with Sentences,
which does unavoydably make a Rent in the Authors style. It being impossible
for one to write or behave himself suitable to the gusto of all, or of the
Major part that has not spent his time in a more universal Commerce then the
guize of an Academy is able to afford. And if any doubt of this Truth, show the
Infidel a meer-Schollar in the Company of Ladies; Or (that failing to Convert
him,) A managing his Horse, or Estate after the old Idolater his Father or
Uncle is dead, Who thought no other Calves deserved to be Worshipful that had
not learned to bleat after the Mode of Dan or Bethel.

The ancient and indeed most Natural Trial for Land in this Nation (since
Strength and Valor measures out the Livelihood and Place of Abode to every
Creature) was by Combat: At this Day reduced into the Art of Fencing, whose
exactest Professors are not seldom confounded and beaten out of their Play by
an active Countryman, that owns no more Cunning then a Robust arm, and a quick
Eye is able to inform a Cudgel withal, easily found in every Wood: Because
managed contrary to a premised Method; The practice of the Science, (far easier
called Noble then proved so) had only acquainted the Fencer with, who becomes
further to seek, and is put in a greater Disarray through this more Natural,
but less Methodicall way, then another possibly might have been, that deals
his Blows by a less Artificial Direction. The Faculties of Soul and Body
being observed at long running to receive seldom amendment, often Detriment
from the Restrictions of Art: unless in things like Painting merely Delusive,
or Grafting, and Planting wholly Laborious. These being Imbellishers, if not
Restorers of Nature, whereas the Liberal Sciences (as the Schools call them)
Labor to Confine Experience within General Rules, though found to be as
Diffusive and Numberless as the Accidents and Events depending upon Motion.
And through whose mediation alone Reason is capable of a further Improvement.

As Man's refusing no Nourishment has already been owned (and I doubt not but
under the Favor of some seeming probability at least) for an Advancer of that
Wisdom, we transcend the rest of Gods Creatures in. So I presume it may as
rationally be proposed for an Occasion of long Life: Since through so various a
Change of Meats the several Humors of our Bodies are in a continual
Vicissitude so stimulated and held in such an equal Contest, as neither Heat
nor Cold, Drowth nor Moisture are suffered to exceed that just Proportion
Nature has assigned to maintain all things in Being: Few Creatures attaining
to so long a Continuance as Elephants, Horses, etc. most Domestical with Men,
which by reason of the great Variety of Herbs they feed on in Summer, and their
Dry Diet in Winter (Noted by That Honorable Restorer of Philosophy for a great
Prolonger of Life) do not seldom reach the most ordinary Ages of Men. And
amongst Birds, those of Prey, Parrats and Geese; the First feeding on all sorts
of Flesh, nor will they refuse Fish upon occasion; As the Second of every thing
eatable by us; The Third upon what is held venomous to Human Nature, besides
Grass and Corn. Whereas Doves, Sparrowe, etc. are of short Continuance; To
which I shall only add, in Favor of my former Assertion, That the Fowls
first mentioned come short in understanding of nothing that has Wings.

I heard it First affirmed by a French Student in Physic, and known it
verified by my own Experience in relation to many That all Foul may be eaten,
(if not for Delight) in a Siege, or time of Necessity, without Danger. Opinion
rather then Nature having caused a Disgust generally arising against some (of
Themselves) Delicate Meats, as my Self can attest for Young-Bald-Bazzards,
Sparrow-Hawkes, Owls, etc. Together with a Number of Things more an effeminate
Niceness has exploded our Tables. Yet in the mean time Mushromes, Frogs,
Whelkes, Snayles, etc. have crawled into the Dishes of Princes, and are daily
eaten in their Courts for Dainties, which amongst other Viands not in use
amongst our Ancestors are not unlikely to Occasion other Vapors then their
more Unsophisticated Food did Alembecke the Heads of such orderly Persons
withal, whose Dreams if not Waking Imaginations must needs differ from ours.
As I can instance from a repeated Experiment ofmy own, Who encouraged through
the former mentioned French man's Confidence, did eat at Supper a considerable
Quantity of the Green-woodspite with the Long-Tongue. After which I found my
Sleep taken up with uncouth and (as I then apprehended) no Impertinent Fancies,
the Cause I made a Second Experiment, with the like Success. From whence may
be deduced, That if our Nourishment or any Outward or Inward Application or
Disgestion may be of force to inspire Sleep with various Dreams, which
remembered waking seem not unworthy our own most serious Meditations no less
then the Attention of others more Wise. Man alone that has extended his Food
over all things eatable cannot but participate of every Effect they are either
in gross or respectively liable unto, and so Capable of a more Diffusive
Knowledge then the Creatures, not able to digest that Variety Custom has
rendered the Stomachs of Men familiar withal. Theirs being commonly of One
Temper and without Mixture. Ours Hot and Cold, Dry and Moist, bordering upon
the next Confines of Poison; And not seldom a Composition of all Contrarieties
together. Now if our Bodies (as Doctor Brown no less wittily then truly
says) are in a small revolution of Time licked from our Trenchers, why may not
what we Eat, work as effectually upon our Spirits as Flesh, and as well waking
as asleep?

Upon the first view of Cornelius Agrippa's Vanity of Sciences, I did applaud
his Diligence, in becoming so versed in every Profession, no less then his
resolute Detection of their Abuses: By which he confirms me in the Opinion,
That what we esteem Wisdom, is of no more Signal Advantage (as I have often
said) then what is deduceable out of the Weakness of others. Yet upon
Inspection into the Bottom of his Reprehensions, I find the World is held up
and kept in plight merely by Cheating: So as those Trades he has reduced under
a Numeration are not only Guilty, but Himself and all such as make it their
Pastime if not their business to be Scepticall in what is generally looked upon
as Certain; and to fish for more probable Truths in the Depths of Nature. Where
nothing is found pure without Mixture, (if we may not with Reverence say
Sophistication) to her very Products of Life and Death. Since the one would be
as far to seek of any Content in the Absence of Hope, as the Other of
Bitterness out of the Presence of Fear. Now since the Mother of All Things
uses such slights to flatter her Children into the Act of Generation, for her
own sake of Continuance, and for the same has represented Death in the most
odious Aspect, to Terrify us out of the Desire of the Grave, (which though
opposite to her present Intention, cannot but be as necessary to a Future, and
that which Religion teaches, is only Capable to make us in the least measure
Happy) How should her Creature Man produce more useful, or gather more Lasting
Fruit then Those of Sodom, that vanish upon the offer of Fruition, since the
most beneficial Calling or Employment is incapable of affording a more
Honorable Salary, then Industry can worm out of the Wants of Others? From
whence we may safely affirm, That Sin is the chiefest Task-master, Since the
most are busied about what is Destructive, Superfluous, or uncertain. And to
remove this from vulgar Understandings, the best and readiest Chapman for all
Things adulterated in reference to Honor, Profit, and Universal Good and
Tranquillity, the Preservation of which has diminished much of the Natural
Stock belonging to Particulars. Such ranting Terms as Agrippa mentions, are
stuffed into all Sciences. Through which the most Familiar Things are rendered
unintelligible without a Lexicon. And in no other respect useful, then like
Gaudy Shells, and Glistering Stones to adorn the Fountains of Learning toward
the Gratification of their Eyes, who led by the Ocean of Books that daily issue
out, come to visit them like the Heads of Nilus. Though such Cawting cannot but
be Destructive to nearer Relations, by which every Profession is furnished with
an Opportunity of Deceit, to the end of the Chapter of Trade. The Continuance
of which renders the Buyer oftentimes further to seek in the Knowledge of the
Name, then the Thing. An inconvenience so visible and Epidemicall, as it could
never have come under my Pen, had it continued within the Circle of Men
obnoxious to the like Fault, and not fallen so heavy upon Children, whose
misery no less then Loss of Time I have not yet forgot; endured and spent
upon Forms little Different from those of a Gally, to no more Thriving an
Intention in reference to the Public, Then Apothecaries paynt and adorn their
Shops which is to delude the Ignorant, and hide from Inspection such Arts as
lie more in Parade then Substance. The Occasion not only of a greater Expense
of Years in this Lymbo, to the loss of the more useful vision of Experience,
but a smaller proficiency in Learning, such being held so long viewing the
Superscription, as small leisure (if any desire) is left to consider the
Contents. Nor does the universality of this Abuse render it more tolerable then
the Multitude, as well as variety of Company can the Pains of Hell. Learning
running in this Course so contrary to what She professes, which is to render
Reason more plain, That She brings, like Eve a Tottered Apron to cover it.

Though Chalk-Stones may appear of too weak and soft a Temper to perfect a
Fabric, yet they become useful and necessary to mark and delineate the First
Grounds for the Greatest and most exact Designs: So Idea's the Embryo's of
Knowledge, are not seldom found in Heads apter for Conception, then Production.
It being a labor proper and peculiar to Jupiter alone to be at once delivered
of so exact a Minerva, and so strongly armed as may be proof against Detraction
and Emendation. Yet rambling Wits ought (in my poor Judgment) to be indulged,
because by Crumbling their Conjectures on all Subjects, they have in every Age
further enriched the World, then Solider understandings are known to have done.
Which may appear upon Trial fitter for Nourses then Mothers, whom in a short
Time they teach their Children to forget, and Call that by their own Names,
never cost them more pains then to Educate and ( loath suteably to the
Apprehensions of Men. A Truth so manifest, That if all the Arts (not to mention
the Altars) were forced to refund what has been primitively borrowed from the
Poets, They would (if not be Naked) want many of their richest Ornaments. And
if we call to Account who first did embellish our Language, we shall not find
them amongst the Greatest Clarks, but such as were more Conversant with Men
then Books. For though the First like Phlegmatic Cattle, hanging their Noses
still over their Tables, may appear more plomp and voluminous, yet such as with
the Eagle Survay the World, cannot but be more Active and Exemplary.

Nature holds out proof against all Constraint. For if violated in one sense,
it is still for a Gratification of some other Passion or Affection, at the
present more prevalent. Coneys, Ferrets, etc. do not seldom devour their
young, but it is always for want of Water or Meat. Nor are Women (out of Fear
and Shame of what Law has rather forged then found in the Records of Nature)
less cruel to their Children, when squeezed between the Bark of Reproach, and
the dreadful Tree of Destruction, they make them away.

For though Nature has placed Mother and Child in a relation next in blood;
She has removed them many Degrees off in that of Affection, ever most
prevalent in reference to Themselves; Especially when all hope determines as it
does here.

To conclude, Selfe-Murther (as we call it, though reckoned amongst the highest
results of Valor) being still to avoid a present, or put to silence all
expectation of Future Misery, esteemed worse then Death, may no more then the
rest be contrary to the award of this universal Mistress, whose highest
intention is Well-being, no more then it is against Reason Of two Evils to
make choice of the Least.

No Element is found liable to a more general Diminution then it is subject to
an universal Excess. Manifest in the Sea, that receives not any Augmentation
from the greatest Confluence of Land-Floods. The Reason is, That her
Commings-in are Mathematically adjousted to her Layings-out. All possible
Abatements in one place being reemburs'd in another, by a continual Bartering
and Exchange. From whence through a Natural Chimistry so much is Commuted or
Calcined as only makes good the Principal Stock without incroachment upon
Superfluity or Want.

Such as seek further after their own Original, or are in Quest of a remoter
Cause then God, prosecure a no less impertinent Study, and from whence no more
certain Solution can be expected then Conjecture is able to return their
Curiosity, who endeavor to find out what Mutations may succeed after Death
has determined their Speculation shall cease. It being equally impossible to
discover our first Production, as for a Child, without Direction, to know the
Midwife that brought him into the World, or the precise part of it whereon he
was born. Wherefore out of the power of any thing but Omnisciency to extend a
Pedigree beyond the Line of ordinary Generation. That related by Moses pointing
more to Obedience, and an exact Observation of the Sabbath (not till long after
the Creation indulged through any revealed Practice) then the fomenting of
Understanding not improperly alleged for the Discoverer if not the Occasion
of Infelicity; Man remaining in a more entire Tranquillity under a Calm
Ignorance then such a turbulent and indeterminable Knowledge. Which like the
Aprons it first produced, is patched up with so many Leaves of Contrary
Operations, Ends, and Applications, that under presence of a Covering for our
Shame, it does daily reveal more Mischief, and is by reason of a Subtilty
learned from the Serpent, able to Conceal greater Malice, Sin and Wickedness
(The Original of Infelicity) then Naked-mankind had ever been Capable of
without it. So as no thanks remains due to it, but what may result from the
Abbreviation of Life. It being an undeniable Truth, That the production of
every Child, is if not an Advancer of the Monarchy of Reason in its own Person,
the doubted Subject of others Deceit, and Oppression. Humane Wisdom being of
little larger Extent, then what it is able to purchase and find room for
through an Incroachment and Advantage made and taken of others Folly and
Defects. And from this the Whole World comes to be so universally Inhabited,
Every Family seeking rest by Evasion. It being as Natural for Strife to abound
where Want is as for Strength to prevail. Wherefore Sin must needs be an Effect
if not of Eating, of Excess: Through which man out of Love, for Himself, came
to Rob others, And to obviate the Differences, could not but arise from
Inequality in Strength, Appetites, and Desires, Government was instituted.
Toward whose Favor all Laws both Civil and Divine are either taught, or do
naturally incline. Yet if any in Curiosity desire to make scrutiny into their
own Original, I cannot but with Solomon send them to the Insects for their
further Satisfaction, and persuade them to be more studious after the Causes of
such Animalls as the Sun does yearly Create or regenerate. And to enquire
whether matter may not be so prepared and adapted by us as it shall be Capable
of Animation through a propensity to that regular and even proportion of Weight
and Measure, naturally required by the First Agents of Life. Nor can any Cause
of Discouragement be well apprehended in the Prosecution of Life's Original,
through a more curious Inspection into the Production of Insects, which once
perfectly surveyed and found out, cannot but open a Window toward the prospect
of Our own beginning. Since he that has discovered the Spring by which a small
Watch is Inlived, not to be denied the neater workmanship, cannot in reason be
far to seek what causes and continues the Operations of a Church-Clock;
Their Motions being one and the same, no less then their Engines, though bound
up in a smaller Volume, and supported by more Legs and Feet. Nor are there
found above one or two considerable Obstructions lying in the way of this
endeavor. And those no further binding then a Commission received from Custom
has power to oblige. Of which the First is an Implicit and blind adhering to
the Votes and Presidents derived to us from Antiqulty, not considering, There
may not unpossibly lie as vast a World of Truth beyond this rotten Bar, as
Experience has shown us of Land and Nations, which never fell within the
Compass of the Old Maps or these Writers Cognizance. And as this renders the
further Endeavor after knowledge, a Lost-Labour in the Conceit of Dunses; So
our Torrify'd. Brayn'd Zealots, through as great a Mistake in Scripture
apprehend it as Damnable. Yet the Reason of the First; no less then the
Consciences of the Latter might receive Satisfaction from Dr. Hackwells
Apology, were they capable of it. To which may be added, That since many Words
and Actions recited of the Patriarchs, do in all Judgments deviate from the
exacter Lines of Morality (The Principal, if not the only End of their
Manifestation) What Caution can be given, or Assurance taken for their
Infallibility in Philosophy? the inculcation of which was never intended, But
what is found said in Relation to it, rather accommodated to the vulgar
Opinion, then any Imperative Truth. From whence may be gathered, That Joshua's
Bidding the Sun stand still, is no more Argument for the Motion of it, Then
Jacob's deluding his Brother may be pleaded in the Justification of Mine.
Wherefore He that out of a venerable Esteem of the Sacred Text, gives Credit
to a Prolongation of the Day, and so a full performance of all the Ends and
Purposes for which the request was made, it matters not in relation to Faith,
whether it resulted from the Sun's or the Earth's Motion. Joshua being the
General of an Army not a professed Philosopher. So no less incapable of a
Mistake in the Mathematics then Elijah was in the Calculation of Gods Servants
whom he summed up in his peculiar Person, till his Arithmetic was better
regulated by the Essence of Number, etc. Nor did our Savior discountenance
this Opinion, when He according to the usual Mode of the Place, Did lift up
his Eyes toward Heaven, Though he did know, and Teach us That the Father was
not only resident in Himself, but together with all Things In and Under the
Earth. As for Other Rubbs lying in the Way of a further Inquisition after
Knowledge (all being readier to cast Reproach and Ink in the Face of a
Projectour, then to assist for the present, or help in the Future, unless
after Death) To Improve to the best Advantage what perhaps he has not strength
alone to produce. I look upon them in Some as a Design to guard their Callings
from Inspection: And in Others as an Obstinate Ignorance engendered out of Shame
to Confess Themselves no less then their Teachers, to have for so many Ages,
been Promoters of, and satisfied With what now does plainly appear to be mere
Figments, etc.

Fancy is the Mould and Pencill that shapes the Form, and casts the Color
upon Man and Beast, according to the Pattern presented to it by the Senses.
Though it may be looked upon in the Schools, under an inferior Notion, where
the Custom is, to be most Fruitful in Terms when they are most Barren of
Understanding, Tying Knot upon Knot, when she finds her Nails too short, for
the unravelling of the First. Especially upon her Endeavors to enlarge The
Excellencies of Man (whom in a high Rant she styles a Little World) above his
Fellow Creatures. And to make this good, places in one part of his Head, a
receptacle for Memory, and others for Invention, Reason, etc. Besides a Number
of Mansions more, Situated in the Heart for Virtues, Passions, and Affections.
Though upon a strict Scrutiny the same Goods may be found in the Beast, and
far more useful, and less Contaminated through a Greasie-Diet, and
Exorbitant Pursuit after Pleasure, by which Men become worse then Beasts,
gratifying their Taste at the Prejudice of all the rest of the Senses, the
Natural Guardes of Safety, yet manifest amongst the more temperate Indians,
reported (Like our English Crows) to Smell Gunpowder at a great Distance,
gayning nothing by the Change but an Imperfect Reason, which with That
Enchanted Horn blown by the Satyr, does terrify more then Confirm or
resolve, such as own and make use of it. Yet we pass over in the Creature,
greater and more certain Advantages, without Notice or under Contempt.
Forgetting, That if we allow them Fancy, which like a Looking-glass does not
only retain the Outward Figures Sense presents us with, But does reverberate
those Censures upon it, as are observed to perplex or quiet the Passions in
both, What huge Advantage is left Man to boast of, more, Then that it may be
Better Situated, or is of a Greater Circumference in Us then Them? Growing
like the Chrystalline Humor in the Eyes quicker from a Variation of Objects.
And hence cannot be denied to result all the Wisdom discernable in both, with
which by reason of Discourse, We are able to make the Louder Noise, though They
are not found Quite silent, and no less ready then able in case of Danger, to
advice one the other, as every Fowler can upon his Knowledge attest. Yet the
whole Extent of both our Capacities lies in no larger a Circle, then that of
Others Follies. Only in Things not yet fallen within the Compass of
Experience and in relation to Prognostication, or Prediction, the Creature has
the Pre-eminence, out of a more accurate Vivacity in Sense.

The World labors of a Double Quartane, wherein the Number of Good Days (if
any be) are far exceeded by The Bad. The Serenity of the Spring being overvoted
through the Scortching Heat in Summer, and the Cold in Winter. Besides the
interruptions met with arising from her own private Distempers. The same
dismal Fatality attends Youth and Age. In which Sickness and other Calamities
suitable to both Seasons causes in all not only a Necessity, but in some a
Desire to put themselves upon The Trial of Death, And return again into the
Lapp of that Earth to and from whence all Things do in a Certain Vicissitude
Go, and Come; Which may authorize a Belief That all things were not Created
for their Own sakes, but the mere Interest of Nature, which abhors to be Idle,
or to leave any in an Impregnant Condition. And from hence may arise another
Conjecture; That The Moon no less then the Stars may be as well replenished
with Inhabitants as the Earth, and subject to the same Changes, in relation to
What it produces Though Stable and so long permanent it Self, as God in his
Eternal Decree has determined they shall remain, Being subject to no
Dissolution, but from the Force of that Command did at first establish them,
together with all things extant. Among which, though some are observed to Wear
out and perish, they are as it were but The External Ornaments and
Household Stuff which within a short Revolution of Time do receive a fresh
Renovation from the Sun, The highest and most splendid result of God's Beauty
our Mortal Eyes (unsupported by Faith) are able to Discern.

Which may afford Cause of Pity for some of the Heathen that made It the
Object of Their Worship, who finding it the Cause of such visible Resurrections
presumed it might be the Original of all Things. Imagining the Power of
Continuance and Preservation equal to that of Creation, not being able to see
higher, for want of the light of The Word of God.

It may be no Improbable Paradox, That where the Earths magneticall Effects
cease, There some other no less Active power begins to operate with a like
Motion another way. Which granted, it can be no Prodigious Conjecture That such
Birds as are observed to Inn or Board in this Clyme only for some certain
months, maintain a like Temporary Commerce with other Planets, as they are
found to do amongst us, according to the respective Advantages Nature has
taught them to make of Times and Seasons. And that their Passage is without
much Difficulty may be asserted from the Punctual Days they keep yearly to
Come and Go in. Not possibly to be observed were they obnoxious to any
Obstruction from Wind and Weather, or the least other Contingency lying in
their Rode: Which the revolution of a shorter Space then Men are found to live
could not choose but discover. And that the Place they come from relates to the
Earth admits the most probable Trial from us, which being an Island may best
observe whether they do appear first by the Seaside or in the Midland: and if
the latter (as I have heard it often affirmed the Cuckoo is universally seen
the Second of April) The Assertion may be allowed, in reason, the Sentence of
Probability, if not of an unquestionable Truth, That Woodcocks are some Years
in great plenty by the Shore in Norfolk cannotbe denied. But yet it is as
manifest, That at the same time their Appearance is as numerous in the most In
Land Counties. Nor is it Necessary that they should all descend in a Line.
Though Thousands of Feldefers and Thrushes have been seen within the Compass
of a mile and none round about. Nor does Wearisomnesse appear about any but
such as come off from the sea; (which may not unpossibly have mistaken their
Way) or any Signs of a New Resurrection, their Plumage being Smooth, and
Bodies plump; So that I my Self have seen both Swallows and Hobbys build and
tred upon their first Appearance, as if they had no other business in this
World then to Ly-in; and produce their Young, as Fishes are noted to change
their Coast upon the like Arrand, etc,

I Believe it possible for Birds not of the same Kind and Plume to Engender
with Success and to an huge Imbellishing of Nature, and as great an Improvement
of her store. And this was by some Acquaintance of mine put under Experiment
before these Wars, that had Large Cages of Wire wherein were put together only
Hens of some sorts, and Cocks of another. How it did answer Expectation I know
not, yet am Confident it might succeed, especially in reference to those
nourished through a like Sustenance, since my Self saw an Hawke owned the Plume
and shape between a Hobby and a Tassel-Gentle. Nor is it contrary to the grain
of Probability to endeavor a Breed betwixt Hares and Coneys, an Ordinary Cat
and a Civet; The Head of which species is by the resemblance of the muscles no
less then all signs and gestures of the Lion. And between whom there remains
less Difference in proportion then an Irish-Grey. Houxd compared with a
Lap-Dog. Animals no less then Plants receiving notorious Changes from the
Climates out of which they were at first transported, proving for the most part
Largest toward the Sun. Nor is it doubted but a Dog-Fox and an Ordinary Bitch
will generate. As I heard the Last Marquess of Hambleton's Father verify he
saw in Scotland. Nor did those Huge and strang-Headed Deer sent for Presents to
King James, fail to Cohabit with Ours and have young. Now he that would observe
the Assinity in the Food and Bigness of Beasts and Birds, and put none but
them together, I doubt not but in the Absence of their own kind they might
easily be drawn to join.

One Day ruminating upon Pride, and the dismal Effects it draws upon Mankind,
I had all the Postures and Evidences brought in against those arraigned for
this Diabolical Passion acted before me by a Turkey-Cock. Who stood priding
himself no less in the Sun and prosperities of the Spring then Nebuchadnezzar
did on the Battlements of his Palace. From whence I began to Conclude it
Natural, and so not radically Evil, No more then Anger or Love. Therefore
under the Notion of an Enquiry into the Advantages God has given us above
Others; A perfect Knowledge of our own good Parts is so far remote from Pride
that it is rather a Spur to Virtue, And so only Depraved not Invented by the
Devil, Who with all his Chimistry is not able to Convert the seed, of a
Natural Effect into the Root of Evil; Though he has perverted This, as Many
things else into Malignity against God. The least of whose Beauty is sufficient
to advance our Thoughts above our selves, in which Case, It is rather a
Rapture, then a sin.

Characters and Letters, etc.
A Character of Honor.
Honor is one of the grand Impostures of the Earth; through whose false
Splendor, unadvised Ambition is, as it were, Trepan'd out of its Life,
Liberty, etc. No Folly transcending theirs, esteem themselves only Happy in a
vain Title, or Syllable; at the beginning pronounced by the Prince, and after
reverberated by the Meager, empty, and hollow Echo, of the insignificant
Rabble; no less ready, upon the Change of Fortune, to Murder, then Father,
all Marks of Desert; to those very Particular ones, their own Indulgence had
informed. Opinion being for the most part printed in such blind Ink, as it
hardly remains legible, to the Second Generation. The Merit of the first
Proprietor becoming mortified by Oblivion, or quite dissipated, and lost in
the Wilder Fields of a no less Numerous, then Vicious Posterity. So remote
from improving any Talents left them by their Ancestors, as like the
improvident Usurer in the Gospel, they do not only expose them to Rust, and
Cankers, but waste the Estate, with all other glorious Endowments in which they
were wrapped.

The Promoter of their Family, becoming by this means, an Occasion of the
Ruin of it. It lying in the Nature, no less then the Custom of Honor, to put
as unreasonable an Excize on the Vices, as the Virtues of its Owners. I never
thought it Prudence, or Discretion, to articulate over-severely on the worst of
Modes I have had the Good, or Ill Fortune to be Born and Bred under; yet it
seems to Cross the Grayn of Wisdom, if not of Candid Charity, to arraign as
guilty of Absurdity, all we find in ordinary Practice abroad, though on the
other side the Pale of Christianity. And for a particular instance; That, used
amongst the Turks: where no Title but what belongs to the Emperor, is made
Hereditary.

Honor being hardly managable within the Compass of Decency, by any are not
perfect in the Steps that lead to it. Splendid Epithets, where there resides no
real Ability in the Party to deserve them, Cheating the Beholders, by an
Expectation of more Virtue, and the Possessour with less, then his Parasites
(a Vermin Capital Fortunes are infested withal) may have possibly insinuated
into his formerly suborned imagination. But to descend to a more exact
Definition of Honor: It is a mere Ray or Beam darted from the Favor of a
Prince, who in one body contains the Abstract of all Delated Dignities. And the
Reward of every Desert is either Real, or by him supposed, in the Nature or
Actions of those he thinks fit to advance: Amongst which none are more
glorious, then they in Turkey; where Worth is always found the Antecedent to
every Reward. Those in Christendom, that relate wholly to the Passions, and
Affections of the Donor, not appearing. so Natural, but further remote from
the purer and unsophisticated Elements of Majesty, then what is found inherent
in the Party. The true Cause of Advancement amongst us, being, commonly so
trivial, and foul, as for Shame, they forbore to recite it in their Patent.
From whence, some may Conclude, those Disparities amongst Men proceeded at
first, like Hills and Dales, from the Deluge of Pride, So long, a Succession of
Government, has powered upon the Face of the Earth. Courts by such Canting
Terms advancing their particular interest; which would be abated, were the
Devourers, in an equal Parallel with those they feed on. The Rabble, for want
of a more elated Prudence, imagining their Governors to proceed, like the
Giants of old, from some Diviner Extraction then their Own. Not wise enough to
apprehend, That Honor has no advantage, really, in it Self, but what it is
able to deduce from the Lower Condition, and basencsse of Others. All Titles,
to Those relating to God Himself, as they were absent, before the Creation; So
Reason informs us, they could not be Present now, were there no Creatures,
endued with so much understanding, as to be able to pronounce them. The most
relucent Honor being Offuscated, and blinded in the Shades of Solitude.
Wherefore, if it had a Name, it wanted an Owner, till something was made
willing to promote it. No Age, ever represented it more Naked to the World,
then This we live in. Whereas the Jews do in Italy, by the Ancient Roman
Coins, So, the Grave Visages of 25 Bishops have been struck off, and put upon
many Thousand Presbyterians; whereupon the Image, and Superscription of the
Primitive Church, is quite defaced, and Obliterated, through the Impresse they
are exchanged for: which ownes no worth, but from the Gravity of the First.
Being it self, of no greater Antiquity, then John Calvin, who did not but with
some Difficulty as Boys do Giggs, whip this Younger Government out of a Word,
taught for many Ages to signify Episcopacy only; making it current in Geneva.
Now, if it be no less frequent in the Practice of Men, then in the Dialect of
the Scriptures, to rob God of his Honor; why should any, but merely Mortal,
place Stability in it? Especially, since the Trash these Earthly Tumors swell
withal, is by the Basest of, etc. rendered so perspicuous.

Valor and Cowardice.
I Should much wonder how Valor and Cowardice, both strangers, if not Contrary
to the Practice of undistracted Nature, could pass so long without the Errata,
in the Place-Book of virtue and vice: But that I find it, The Design of
Policy, to advance, or abate the Credit of all things found Useful or
Destructive to her own, or the General utility: And, where she can bring in
the least Color for it to paint, what is necessary to Commerce, with the
grateful Approbation of Religion; And to render the Contrary in the Dark
Sense, and Black Characters of Hell. Allowing all Supports as Decent and
quadrating with the Beauty of Holiness, though Above or Against the Lights of
Reason, if found, any way requisite, to sustain Government. Of such force is
Custom, that it is able, through the Assistance of Credulity, to stifle, and
trample upon the Senses themselves.

Now, though it may be no Indiscretion in a Patient, to suffer himself for his
Recovery, to be deluded by his Physician; yet out of a Panique Fear, or
effeminate Nicety, to swallow more Drugs, and in greater Quantities then is
unavoydably necessary, may appear a Madness, arising from the more Dreadful,
then Dangerous Phantasmes mustered up by the Fumes of a formerly-suborned
Melancholy; rather then the Substantial Dictates af an unsophisticated
Judgment, which a Wise man may retain, and feast himself with, though for
Manners sake, and to avoid the Danger, no less then Shame, impending
Singularity, he may seem to own the most universal Opinion.

Now to show, how Policy, no less then Religion, imposes upon frail Humanity,
in both the Forementioned Particulars (Though to the apprehension of Sense,
absolutely repugnant one to the other) they are situated as near Damnation,
that appear Overdaring in the prosecution of private Revenge; as such who out
of Remissness, and Fear, betray The Cause of their Country; in Defense of
which, is placed, under all Professions extant, the Highest step of our Duty to
God and our Neighbor. Which cannot be denied to stand further remote in
Nature, then what really Concerns Our selves: found recorded in Job, by the
Devil; a far Ancienter Philosopher then the somuch-venerated Aristotle. From
whence we may Conclude, That Resolution and Dread instituted by Nature at
first, for the Vindication and safety of every respective Individual, are
since Tyranny and Propriety have forced us into Communalties, reduced by Common
Consent of Law, and Convenience into a Publiaue stock, for the Preservation of
All. So as we are suffered, to own no more in reference to our selves, then
Prudence is able to filtch out of the Treasury of the State: and that upon no
slighter a Penalty, then Law does inflict; Which found too dim-sighted to
penetrate further, then External Evidence can reach; Religion, whose Results
(and those no weak ones) lie in Conscience, supplies the place of a
Diviner-Guard; Brandishing like the Angel in Paradise, the flaming sword of
Hell: Which operates more or less, upon the Affections, proportional to the
Tincture, received from Education. Not seldom Proof (as we find in Heretics)
against the Dictates of Reason her Self; Nothing being harder to be lost, or
Convinced of Falsehood then Opinions sucked in with the Nourses Milk. And this
may raise an Use of Caution, in relation to what we call Pusillanimity, and
Valor. Which in a Natural and primitive sense, signify only Evasion. And
where that will not serve in order to our own Preservation, a vigorous and
stout Resistance to the loss of Life it Self, as is manifest in every
Creature, in the absence of hope; and therefore impossible to be found Wanting,
in the pure and unsuborned Nature of Man. And so in the primitive Construction
incapable of any Forreigner Interpretation, then what is deduceable from our
own judgment, without reference to Fame, or Reward. Terms unintelligible,
during the Original Felicity: And before the Thirst after Generation had
swelled the World, into such an Ocean of Inhabitants, as could not be Kept
within the Compass of Moderation, but by Mounds and Bancks; in the making of
which all things are employed that own the power to Terrify or Flatter the
Rabble into Obedience, without bearing any Nicer Respect, to single
Individualls, then through Evading, or Overruling the Law, Power or Prudence
is able to purchase to themselves, by Mastering, Flattering, or Contemning
public Fame. After which, it may be sometimes less policy to run, then not to
be too greedy, to give it welcome when it courts us: Opinion being a Bird oftener
caught by Chance, then Endeavor. Nor shall any one that carries her on his
First, ever want Envy, or Scratching by Others. And he that has but the
Patience, to attend Good or bad Report to the end of the race, shall observe
them like Cocks to change their Odds: one unlucky Blow being able to depresse
more, and draw a greater Concourse of Abettors to the Other side, then Twenty
as strong and probable endeavors, without Success can possibly advance. Or,
if this fail, the Gamesters together with what they strove for, will by the
hand of Time, be laid in Oblivion. Whereas the real Wounds, and sensible
Inconveniences accruing ftom a too Serious Attention, and exact Observance of
the Various Cadences of the Trumpet of Fame, subject to be put out of Tune, by
the Change of every Blast, do not only exceed the Cure of the Chierurgeon, but
all endeavors to that of Wisdom it Self. Nor has Policy any cheaper Trash to
load the opposite Scale withal, then Honor and Titles; which like
Horse-Bells, only affect the Ear, as Diamonds do the Eyes; increasing, rather
then lessening the Burden of Life: which, with its Concomitance Envy, Danger,
and Jealousy signifies nothing, proportionable at least, to what the Purchase
requires; Seldom enjoyed of the Owner long, without Controversy; unless by
dying in Possession he cuts off all contrary Claims. Wherefore such as have the
Dexterity, to pass their Days, at the least Expense of Trouble and
Convenience, may be truly said, to husband Discretion best. Nor are they
likely to be misled, in such a vast number of Fools and Madmen, as are daily
observed, to Sacrifice their own Ease and Content to promote the Ambition and
Small Plots of Others: Grounding their Hopes upon those, that have no Assurance
Themselves. But this runs so contrary to the grain of Practice, as it may not
unpossibly, set such Teeth on Edge, as are able through Detraction, or Power,
to blast the Author of this Advice.

A Letter writ to dissuade Mr. -- from a Duel.
Sir,
I Shall, at this time, conceal, what I apprehend of your Quarrel, and the
Circumstances that did at first produce it: Lest I should fall into a
Physicians indiscretion, who coming to one laboring of a Fever, did consume
the time, In telling the Patient, The Causes of his Distemper were Drink and
Evil Company: which though possibly true, could not but carry the Figure of a
Meager Impertinency, before the party had his Cure; since no place is now Left
for prevention. And as Physic is opposed to the Defects incident to bad Diet,
and Disorder: So Counsel has been observed, to Moderate, and palliate, though
not Cure those of Indiscretion; arising for the most part from an Inexperience
in the exact knowledge of our own Fame, no less then that of Others; And where
it may be, or is Situated, with the smallest prejudice to Conscience, or
giving the least interruption to the Prospect of Selfpreservation, the First
Result in the Intention of Nature, and left as of greatest Intendment, to the
Care of Prudence. From whence I have been taught, that it is possible, for
Physic to be welcome, though Distastefull; but that Counsel seldom meets any
more favorable Construction then Scorn, from the Receiver; and an Opinion of
Presumption in Him that Ventures to give it; especially, if it meets not with a
candid Nature: Which hoping to find in You, I shall so much transgress the
voice of Discretion, as to suffer my Self in Love to become an Arbitrator,
between the Honor and prudence of a Friend, so far, as to maintain, That Such
as animate you to a Formal Revenge, do out of Forgetfulness, or Want of
Religion, forbear to Calculate the Danger, no less then Impiety, that for ever
Cleaves to such hands, as are found once polluted in Blood: And, That those
violate the Dictates of Piety and Discretion, (by Wisdom esteemed the most
Considerable part of Manhood) that Contradict it. For to use their own canting,
(no where to be found in the Dialect of Antiquity) He has given you an
Affront; and such an one, as may not decently be passedby, without a Formal
Satisfaction; which is but the single and wild Opinion of some under-graduates
in the Arts of Living. Yet, admit it a Debt, due in the Court of Honor, may it
not as well be discharged by your Friend or Servant, as Your self? Parties
less agitated by Interest and Passion, and therefore the likelyer, to deal a
Revenge so evenly, as He shall have as little cause to brag as You to repent.
A thing you can never promise your Self, if contrary to the Injunctions of God
and the Examples of the most prudent people you proportion out your
Satisfaction in the Field. Where you cannot but deliver into the Custody of
Blind Fortune, not only your Life but Estate: As justly belonging to
posterity, as ever your Ancestors made it yours. Which by this
Mad-Knight-Errantry you hazard to Undo. I am sure all Wise minds will quadrate
with this. And if the Fools of the present Age, pretend to any Discoveries of
Ways to Honor, New and Untrod, by the Ancients, Let'um follow them, to the
furthest Extent of their Lives or Lunacy. Whilst you hearken, to the Graver
Advice of reason. Which may inform you, He has offered an Abuse already, and
will you hazard upon equal Terms the receiving a Greater? Indeed if a
Requital had been endeavored at the Instant it might have rendered you more
excusable before God and Man: But that opportunity omitted; it were more Wrong
to your Charity, then Vindication of Valor, in cold Blood to call back
Revenge: As if a Worse Christian upon Meditation, then when irritated by Fury
and Passion. Neither is Honor to be purchased, in Single and self-perswading
Combats, because no Marks of them appear in Antiquity; where many are found
Dead, but not one, to my remembrance, upon so impertinent a Quarrel, as Words.
Yet we may conclude from the foul Expressions in Orators, That the Mouths of
the Gentry were then none of the Cleanest. He that Consults former Histories,
may find, That some have gained more repute from a Retreat, then others could
obtain by a Won-Field. And what is a Retreat, I pray you, but a Fine Word for
Running away? Fierceness being proper to Beasts, whereas a Neat Evasion
belongs peculiarly to Men. Of which, I shall instance this, as now fresh in my
Memory. A Gentleman lying, like you, under the repute of an Injury, did meet
his Enemy, and shot him with a Pistol stopped full of Dung, whereupon he cried
He was slain, which set him further back in the Opinion of the World, then his
former Vapouring had advanced him, when the Excrement the Dagge was laden
with, appeared to the Senses of the Standers-by. And for this, the Wit of it is
Deviser was highly commended. Another returned this Answer, with a like
Success, to a Younger Brothers Challenge; That if he could prove his Loss as
great as His, should he Kill or be Killed, he would gladly accept it; Otherwise
he did not think it reason, to venture his Life, against one did want
Necessaries, and so might seek Death, no less out of Discontent, then
Gallantry: which Himself, that wanted nothing, had no cause to do. All that
remains is but your Pardon for this Boldness, which I most seriously Desire.
Remaining in the mean time, no less Your Faithful Friend, Then,

Sir, Your, etc.

A Letter to Mr. -- in hope to dissuade Him from going a Colonel under Count
Mansfield.
SIR,
I Cannot but own it, for a high Presumption, to offer such sudden and crude
Conceptions in a Business where I presume, you have employed, not only your
Own, but the most Serious Advice of Your Friends. To the Abilities and Dignity
of whom, though I am forced to give place, I may not justly be accounted behind
them in Affection to your Self, or Affairs. Wherefore having received so
great an encouragement from your Commands, no less then a Stimulation from my
particular Desire to Serve you, I shall according to my small Experience, and
the meaner Abilities I have found in me, to employ it to the best Labor, to
inform You, These Corrupt times have rendered many things Necessary to the
German Wars, are no ways suitable to your Complexion, or Fortune, which your
General, being a Stranger, cannot in probability, advance, without Offending
his own, and sinning against an Article of Policy, and Nature. Nor shall you,
though laden with the Highest Merit, render your Return more grateful to Your
Natural Prince: King James having always numbered Soldiers amongst those, he
esteems the worst of Men, and most formidable to His Person. The Expedition
being by Him rather Connived at, then Approved, out of Hope, by this means, to
facilitate the two Treaties of a Match with Spain, and the Restitution of the
Pallatinate: which obtained, (according to the Mode of Pusillanimous Princes)
all endeavors will be used to discharge the State of You and Your Companions,
as a Society most superfluous during Peace; the only Thing Our King does study
to promote: To whose Ears a Drum is more terrible then Thunder, and the Report
of a Canon then the voice of God Himself. Which, (if Our Churchmen may be
credited) does at this Day cry for vengeance, against the Cruelty, exercised
upon Christians; especially from England, by an unanimous Consent chosen the
Head of the Protestant League, till his Majesty had forfeited that Honor to
the brisker Assistance given by the French. Now, can you think he should
indulge valor as a virtue in another, when nothing is more manifest, then that
he labors to expunge all Marks, or Occasions for it in Himself, or any about
Him so far, as to Answer my Lo. -- when he came from the Wars, and desired
to Kiss his Hand, That he feared he would bite it, and therefore bad he should
be muffled? Nor is it our Kings mode alone, (that never made use of Soldiers
unless to slight them) But that of Spaigne; under whom the most deserving have
dyed in Disgrace, if not by Poison. And amongst the Catalogue of Those stand
written with great Characters in the Calendar of Fame, few or none, are
registered for Saints, or Happy. It being past Controversy, That, no War can
be called Just, bears not a real Tincture of Defensative. And whosoever has,
or shall have enterprized the Contrary, though his Name be never so richly
enamelled on the Ring of Fortune, and Himself placed at the Top of her Wheel,
yet he is but the Scourge of God: and does for the most part, fall, when he
thinks himself most capable of standing. Like Charles the 5th, that was by the
Duke of Saxony, (a Family of his own raising) beaten over the Alps, by
Torch-light, and himself like the Sword of Goliath, wound up into a High
Contempt of this World, and laid in a Monastery. The Sins and Oversights of
Gods Children are severely punished. But it is as true, That nothing costs
dearer, then the Blood of his Saints. As may appear by such Horse-Leaches, as
have been applied to his Church; from whence a double quantity has been drawn,
by some unexpected means. But if these Reasons savor too much of Theology,
Consider how unpossible it is to do any thing, without the Love of the Common
Soldier abroad, and how unsafe He must needs be at home that enjoyes it;
There being nothing more usual with Princes, then to be jealous of their
Liberators. Manifest in Byron; who, after he had set the Crown upon Henry the
fourths head, lost his own, out of a no more pious reason, then that upon a
Contrary provocation, he might have removed it to another. And to show of what
vile esteem Soldiers are in the days of Peace; I will not say (though I have
heard it) that the Judges, after the Irish Wars, were given it in Charge: yet
can assure you, they hanged Soldiers for Faults, which, Others (thought of
more use in Peace) did escape, or obtained pardon for. If so unhappy, as to
receive a Wound in your Person or Credit, it remains Yours, without the least
Diminution. If Honor, Custom shares it between your Country, and He that
Commands in Chief. Who, being a Forreyner, is not unlikely to rob you of your
due; or by employing you on Desperate Service, to Conclude Fame and your Life
together. I know, your Resolution is too well lyned by Philosophy against the
Storms of Danger, to admit a Parley with any Force but that of Reason: wherefore
I forbear to Paynt them, lest I should seem to scare you with Fears, are for
many years, left to be terrible to my Self. Who have long since thought it
Ridiculous, to Court Sleep by Opiums, and protract Death by Cordialls; which is
but the Head of the same Species, being both the effect of an unavoydable
Lassitude. Yet though Life is imposed upon Mortals without, if not against
their Consent, it cannot be denied the strongest Result of the Highest Wisdom,
to Situate Your Self so, as it may consume at the most ease, and with the
least Perturbation; which is not to be expected from such a Flaring and
intemperate a Course, as that of a Soldier: that can make choice of no Friend
nor Enemy, but what the State assigns Him; or proportion his Pity or Justice,
to his own Morality, but their Ambition and Jealousy, that Command in Chief.
To whom in all things you are bound to obey, though contrary to the Grayn of
Prudence it self. That arbitrary Government you so much complain of at home,
being the best you can in Reason, expect to find, in an Army abroad; Where,
the Stresse of Discipline lies more upon the Administration of Severity, then
Justice. Such as are reported to list themselves under the Black Prince of
Darkn sse, draw Articles before they Consigne their Blood; And have a Circle
enchanted, with a Power to protect them: whereas a Soldier has nothing to
plead for, against actual obedience, but the narrow Circumference of
Protection, that lies in the will of a General. To whom, the Virtue and Valor
of his Officers is no less formidable, in relation to his particular
Jealousies, then the Vices and Cowardice, of his meaner Soldiers, are thought
pernicious to Success in the Field. Wherefore no Prince deserves such
Honorable Attendance as those, that Head their Armies themselves.
Generalissimo's like Stepfathers, carrying no other Natural affection, but for
the Advancement of their own Glory. So as they esteem, all inferior Merit, as
an Intrusion upon Theirs: It being ordinary with Custom, to award Fame to such
as have least deserved it; and asperse with Infamy, those of more Glorious
Merit. I confess Necessity cannot only abate the Edge of these Reasons; but
turn their Points against the Urger. Yet, since it is not impossible, but that
the Electour may have miscarried in his Allegiance toward the Emperor, it
cannot be indiscreet or impertinent to mind you, of the Hazard and small reward
they commonly are capable of, that render themselves Arbitrators of a Foreign
Difference; I do comply with you, in all the Pity, Prayers, and Contributions
can be offered for the Restitution of the Virtuous Lady Elizabeth: yet shall
reserve my Person to bestow upon the Preservation of my Country, in the
quarrel of which, I can only justify, the spilling of my own Blood, or that
of others. The universal employment of a Soldier, not being yet legally made
out to me, by any Injunction either Moral, or Divine. The Practice of the
Switzers in relation to Foreign Quarrels, appearing as remote from Christian
Charity, as Natural Prudence. It cannot be denied, but That Soldiers are
necessary, during the Distracted times of Invasion: So it is as true, That few
Callings are looked upon with more Disdain, when a Nation enjoyes an absolute
Tranquillity. Wherefore it can be no Act of Discretion, to inrole your self,
under a Profession, only in esteem, during the Worser Ages, and not the Best.
Wherein maims are considered rather as marks of an inconsiderate and brutish
Valor, then a temperate and advised Prudence. Were You thrown upon it, by the
Iron Horns of an unavoydable Compulsion, or flattered into it, out of a more
then probable Assurance of an Honorable Advantage; Something might be objected
to the Prayers of Your Friends, and contrary Desires of your Enemies: who may
not unpossibly tempt you, into this uncertain Hope, out of a Design, to rob you
of all you really enjoy. Consider your Education, how much a Stranger it has
been, to the incommodious Treatment the Field does afford: Out of whose Verge,
it is more decent and safe, still to preserve your Self, then, at any time to
retire, though upon the highest Provocation; of whose legitimacy, your Enemies
from whom you part, will be the Arbitrators, and not your Friends, to whom you
return. War being a turbulent and destructive Calling, with more Credit and
Safety always neglected, then at any time for saken. He that never fought,
receiving a fairer Encomium from Charity, then a Captain that has deserted his
Post. Nor does a Colonel stand for more, then a single Wheel, in the Frame of
an Army, where the General remains Heir to all Desert. -- The rest is lost.

A Letter to Mr. W. P.
THe continuance of your Acquaintance is the highest Pinnacle of my Ambition.
And from whence I am not only tempted, but do willingly submit to the lowest
of your Commands. In the pursuance of which, I came on purpose, to meet you at
B. -- laden with the strongest Advice, so weak a judgment is able to man-out.
But I find, Your own Wisdom has given me the Opportunity, to spare my English;
By discovering to you, without the help of a Prospective, or the dearer
prejudice of a Trial, what I found verified through many Years Experience,
viz. That Honorable Persons, like too great Fires, may warm and comfort such
as are Content only to serve them at a Distance: But blast the Parts, and
consume the Fortunes of those are found to attend them in any nearer relations.
Who gayn, for the most part like the Birds that follow the Crocodile, no richer
Reward, then the Reversions of their Teeth. It being usual with these Monsters
in Nature, to esteem none capable of Desert, but such, as Fortune, or Baseness
has made necessary to their Vices, or Power. The First of which, is as much
below the Breeding, as the Other, is the Candor of a Gentleman: To whom, it is
incongruous, to leave the Honor he was born to, at the foot of that Ladder, he
hopes to ascend by, to a greater. Neither, have they that are isntrumental to
their Rapine, a more noble employment, then those Beasts reported of in the
Indies: who hunt the prey for the Lions, and after by his strength they are
subdued, must rest satisfied with what the Covetousness of their Master shall
leave undevour'd.

For my Self, as none can, with Affection, look upon the Gulf, has swallowed
up his Felicity: So I remain in so high a Feud with Greatness, as, if I did
not find [ Lord] in my Daily Prayers, I should not name it (in relation to
Servant) without Detestation. The which Lord, had I served as I ought, The
other would have been no more known to me, then Leopards, Wolves, and Tigers,
seldom, if ever, seen by us, but in Grates and Pictures. Yet how manifest
soever this Truth is, I am not so foolish my Self, or think Others so Wise, as
to esteem any Precept, or Example strong enough to restrain the unsupported
Ignorance of Young men from falling into this Trap; bayted with more Ease,
though far less Assurance, then Law, Physic, etc. For this Course often
neglected, ni which Hundreds perish for One that thrives; who is yet found to
be more imperious then the Master himself. Since the powerful Word of God
assisted by the Rhetoric of Divines, is not of Efficacy sufficient to keep
them from following Pride, Lust, and Drunkenness, though Hell be assigned for
the Conclusion. But, if yo udesire a more full, and elegant prosecution of this
Theme, I refer you to Lucian: Having already exceeded my First intention,
which was only to Kiss your Hands, and in fewer words, to assure you that I am

Sir, Your Servant.

Another to the Same.
Sir,
HAd you not assured me you were not well, I should easily have guessed it my
Self; from the Commendation your Letter gave to mine.

Which cannot but be rather the effect of a Fever, then your Judgment. To
which, though I am so highly obliged for the present, as to gain a more
honorable esteem in your Fancy, then, without the like Mediation, I could
possibly have attained: Yet I do not only abhor this, but all Advantages else,
That own the least semblance of a Prejudice to you. So as I could not have been
thus Romantique, but that the last Line, proved a Cordial to the First; By
expunging all fear of Future Danger, in respect of your Health. And for
Prudence, I find it by the Elegancy of your Style, and the Solidity of Matter,
so far rather increased, then diminished, as I am confident your opinion is, by
this time, altered in reference to my Desert: Though I am willing to flatter my
Self, That your Love continues. But whether the Horse follows the Chariot, or
the Chariot the Horse, Persons of Parts are found to make so great a Descent,
which submit themselves to this Course of Servitude, That they waken the
Admiration of Lookers-on, much more, then the Apprehensions of those, that,
like me, have, so apparently, suffered in their particular Interests: It being
impossible to imagine a greater Lunacy, Then to cast away Time, Freedom, and
Fortune after such, as so little regard it, That they esteem it Reward
sufficient for the most of their Servants, If they have an Opportunity to
observe the Baseness of their Natures, For what is gotten by them, belongs
rather to their own Impudence, or Importunity; then the Bounty, or Goodness of
their Masters: Since he that remains Defective, in one of these Two
Court-Vertues, shall be compelled to make a Third of pure Necessity. Let a man
consume A Prentiship with a Citizen: At the end of the Time, It is his own
Fault, if he be not able to Live. But when a Tradesman (Like one of his
Majesty's Antique Statues) is taken out of a base Cellar or Vault, (no Prodigy
in our Days) and set up at Court; It is his least care to provide for his
Servants, unless necessary to his Vices, or the Infirmities that proceed from
them. Such being able to Ride him where they please; either, over their
Fellows, or Strangers, by way of Terror, or Disdain: Or Curvet, and prance
with his Complements, in token of Respect. They resembling, for the most part,
Oranges, that yield nothing but upon squeezing. I confess, the Dependence on a
Monster of this kind, may be of excellent use for Protection, in these Fat all
Times, where Innocence is found too weak for Deceit: Could it be obtained
without a greater Loss. But as in a Contract with the Devil, the First thing
parted with, is Hope of Future Felicity: So a Secretary must quit his Freedom,
or Employment; being tied to so strict an Attendance, as his Lord is no more
able to spare him, then his own Brains, or Thumbs. By which, the Slavery
becomes so great, as it can receive no Compensation from Profit. Wherefore such
as are wisest, retain only The Acquaintance of Great men: whom I have observed
to thrive better then their Meniall Servants. It being usual with them, to
bestow benefits on those that least deserve. And to him, they have injured by
denying a just Reward, it is their mode, to become an Enemy. As I have found
most certainly true, who am

Sir, Your Servant.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have sent you this to serve as a Black-Patch, or Foil; to set out the
Beauty of your Virgil. And therein you may observe the strength of Affection:
which for your sake is able to raise in me the Enthusiasmes of a Poet; from
whose Inspiration, this Oracle is pronounced.

THis Work is finished so, as no Supply
Can be expected from Posterity.
Nor could thy Author's Laurel match thy Btyes,
Had thou appeared with him, in Caesar's days.
Yet, he that this Translation dares to slight,
Must not admire to see a Moore washed white,
And chan'gd to English-Beauty: losing none
Of what was Hers; But adding of his own.
If that our Northern Paint be not so good,
It Is not thy Fault: whose Pencil understood
No less then any Roman's. And this shall
Struggle for Fame with the Original:
And waste more Blood, and Inck, then in the strife
Between those States who first gave Homer Life,
Which will be Justice. For he did undo
By writing then, what Wit entayl'd thee to.
Like to an Elder-Brother that is Cursed
In all things else: yet prized for coming First.
But to Conclude the wishes of my Heart,
Oh that my Praise could equal thy Desert,
A Letter persuading --. -- to marry.
THough your Contexture makes me confident, you will not hazard the Dansing
Couranios with Apes in Hell: yet it is none of the least Modern Miracles, why
you stay so long unmarried. As if you had an Antidote to repel Age, and were
proof against the Weapons of Time; or had a Receipt to recover his Locks worn
off, by such, as neglect to lay hold on the present Occasion: which you would
never do, had you seriously considered the present Condition of your Mother;
(whose youth is said, so blasphemous is Tradition, rather to have exceeded,
then come short of your present Beauty:) How a few Years has changed
Alabaster into Wainscot, and ruffled her Neck like a walking Buskin: So that
such, as would once have crossed Seas, but for an apparition of her, cannot but
now think it Ominous, to meet her Fasting. If you resolve upon none, till you
pattern the Character your Fancy presented me, (when I had last the Honor to
kiss your Hands, and heard the Scorn wherewith you received the Offer of -- I
must be bold to tell you, I took it rather as a Copy of your Countenance, then
any thought could take its Original from the Discretion I ever owned you Lady
of) you may as well expect a New Creation. Since, so much perfection, as your
Language did then paynt, is not to be found out of a Romance; or the short
Entertainment, during a Lovers Passion; which once, thoroughly cured, by
Fruition, is not found rarely to recoyle into as great, a Contrary Extreme. I
confess, Wise, Constant, and Complete Servants may be had; but few such
Husbands, whose minds are no less altered by Marriage, then Drunken Men are
by Sleep: but become like them, weary and sick, of what they formerly took
delight in; upon the Apprehension, That he which yokes himself to a Woman,
forfeits his Prudence, no less, then She does hazard her Repute, who incircles
a Man in her Arms before Enchanted by the Priest, through Custom and Shame
made far more necessary to you, then Men. Wherefore finding that Time is
uncessantly nibling at youth, and Beauty the bait of your Trap: And that it is
unlikely with no stronger Engines, To catch one that is Wise: Be nimble, and
lay hold on this that is Rich. Who is confessed none of the Seven Wise Masters;
and therefore with more Ease to be Governed. The Felicities of Marriage,
perishing in the Conflict arising between Man and Wife, Of equal Spirits and
understanding. It being impossible there should want Contests, where both lay
claym to a Capacity fit only to be obeyed. Which, if you have him, will by
all, be conceded on your side. So that, instead of being a Ward, (a Tenure
every Married Woman holds from the Award of her Maker) you shall be Guardian of
the Person and Estate of your Husband. Now, in relation to other things, upon
the Score of which you may reckon stronger Felicities; They will be found,
after enjoyment, to vanish into Ciphers. Learning becoming as unsociable for
Ladies, as Half-witted Men are Wilful and Jealous; Rocks that the softness of
his Head gives sufficient caution for, So that, under this Conjunction, you
may, without interruption, follow what Inclinations you please. Wherefore, if
you resolve to marry, no Husband is more proper; whose Folly you may Exchange
for Wisdom, when you please. And to renounce it quite, were, besides burying
your Talent in the Ground, and robbing of the World, which you ought to leave
as Rich as you found it: You should fall into the Condition of an old Maid,
then which nothing is more Despicable: who is acceptable in no Company. Not
daring to come amongst Women, for fear of declaring more Knowledge then she
can, with reference to Honesty own: Or approach Men out of the danger of
Contempt. The Moral of Andromeda, is a History of your present Condition.
Where, the Barren Rock She was tide too, is Virginity. The Monster that came to
devour her, Time. And he reported to deliver her, some witty-Spark, that
persuaded her, to take a Rich -- -etc. to her Husband, might warrant the
Access of one more acceptable. Oh, let Him have this Honor Fair Lady, who is

Madam, Your Servant.

On a Looking-glass.
DEar Glass, tell me, by what Art,
Thou bean'st Her Image without break-
When the same does crack my Heart, (ing?
Just as I am now a speaking.
On another which she said did Flatter.
BLame not your Glass, that does her Duty.
Nor can it Flatter so much Beauty.
But for the rest, in Policy,
It shows them Fairer then they be.
Since if they saw their Faces true,
This, would be broke; and envied you.
Another.
DEar Glass, join with her Eyes; and both (concur
To Note more worth in me, and less in Her,
A Song.
THe Graces are, by Custom, bound
Once in an Age, All to be sound
In One creature: There to show
All the Beauties they do owe,
And now having fixed on Thee
Be not Proud: Since, you may see,
Time allows them not to stay,
But to meet, and go away.
Yet though whilst these Guests be here,
You do rate their Lodging dear:
If you suffer me to take it,
I Will not break, when they forsake it.
The terms, of Fair and Good, do not express
Thy Worth, no more, then theirs, call Princes fine,
When decked in Diamonds, like the Stars they shine:
Nay, I Will maintain Their folly to be less;
Since such a Sight has often before been seen:
Whilst he that would inform a shape like thine,
Prometheus-like must filtch from things Divine.
On a Picture.
THough this be drawn exactly forth,
It does no more retain her Worth,
Then the Shadow of a Rose
Can the Scent of one that grows.
Another.
BEtween This, and her Mind, there is that odds,
As is in Man's frail-workmanship and Gods.
A Letter to two Sisters the one Black the other Fair.
Ladies,
IT is Design, and, I hope, no Presumption in me, to join you in one: That,
besides the opportunity of presenting the highest of my Respects, I might
comprize in a single Letter, the total Sum of all the perfection extant in
Womankind. Black and White, being the unquestioned Original, of that infinite
Variety of Beauty, (the mint of Nature) through which is maintained her
Necessary Commerce of Generation. And, in this equal Distribution, Fortune
has shown no small Ingenuity, (who is more Wanton, and Inexorable, then Blind
or Careless) in assigning, that of least Duration, the Fewest Years. For if
you did not Wither alike, Art and Opinion (the Limmers and Carvers of all
Excellency,) would have tempted, if not Constrained every one, to serve, and
adore that Sister only, whose beauty had survived. By which, sweet Variety had
been lost; and Perfection reduced into one Monarchy, Which, now, martch in your
Two glorious Regiments. To both which, I remain an Equal Captive. Being,

Ladies, etc.
BEauty is writ in several Characters; (All?
None but are skilled in some: Who finds out
Which votes them mad, do say, that this man errs
Because his choice is Black, or Low, or Tall;
Nature would have all pleased: And such as fall
On Ordinary Features, are less learned:
The Indian Beauties are as plain discerned
By those do know their Figure, as the White.
Nor can Expression render it so right,
As may force others to approve the Text.
Reason with Taste, and Love, should not be vexed.
A Letter to -- -- After the Death of his Lady.
SIR,
I Know, I need not mind you, That all Sublunary things are Transitory:
Dansing like the Atoms (the ancient Philosophers imagined the World not only
to be made of, but stuffed withal) between one Condition, and another. Life
seeming to be lent, to keep Death in Employment. And Generation, to serve only
for the production of Bodies; that the Fatal Sisters might not weave in vain,
or want Creatures to vayl with their Garments of Mortality. But it is time to
give over, at least, to turn down a Leaf; and refer the Inculcation of this
Morality, till some fitter time; For fear of falling into their Indiscretion,
are found to wake a Sick Friend, by an Impertinent Inquisition after his
Condition, or the unseasonable Administration of a Direction which way to
dispose of his Body. Since none can Calculate his Ease better, then the
Patient: Sorrow it self not being destitute of its Voluptuousness. Which,
hoping you will not, too far exceed: Give me leave, to Conclude That Manners
exacted this; and Discretion no more but to assure you,

I am, etc.
AN EPITAPH.
STone, so long as thou do last,
Let the Reader know thou have
The Dross of Her, once owned a Mind
Contayn'd the worth of Womankind.
But no more: Who speaks her Glory,
Must have for every Dust a Story.
The Authors EPITAPH upon Himself.
I Envy not such Graves as take up room,
Merely with Jet and Porphyry; since a Tomb
Adds no Desert: Wisdom, thou thing divine:
Convert my humble Soul into thy Shrine.
And then this Body though it want a Store,
Shall dignifie all places where it is thrown.
A Letter to dissuade -- from Marrying a Rich, but ugly and deformed, etc.
When I heard at first, you went a Wooing to -- I thought it a Trick put upon
you by Enemies: but finding it Seconded, And seeing the fearful Examples of
Those, who out of Discontent, and a Desire to Change their present Condition,
are found to Cast away Themselves; I begin to take your Danger to Heart. And do
here, in the Sincerity of Affection, offer my Hand, to stay the Tying of that
Knot, with which you go about to strangle your future Felicity. For, though I
confess the Party may not unpossibly be very Rich, yet it is as likely, The
Things required to Dead the Apprehension of such A Loathsome Companion, will
prove So Chargeable, as in a short time, Her Gold will be spent, and nothing
left, but The Foul Beast that brought it.

Yet suppose you find so much, as may bear the Expense of Mad Company, Whores
and Drink, (Wicked Cordialls, though Generally used, to Correct such Poison)
Can you Divest Humanity so far, as to make Her Partner in a Bed, is able to
render you so much an Enemy to Womankind, as to exchange it for Sodomy? if not
Bestiality it self? For though you may not be punished by Law, The Act will be
severely Condemned, and esteemed Brutish, by all the Rational part of the
World; It not lying in the Gender or Kind, but Form, to render a Creature
Monstrous and Abominable to the Nature of Commerce. -- I am so Charitable, (yet
in Confidence of Others Virtue, rather then Her own) as to believe She is a
Virgin, in reference to Man: Who in that Action, might with more Justice, be
punished for a Deflowrer of Himself, then Her. Wherefore you will have no more
reason, to Brag of this Privilege, Then He, that First Descended into Hell. Of
whose Superlative Ugliness (though her Body be so composed, As the Devil need
not alter the Best of her Features, to make her resemble the Foulest of his
Fiends; yet) it may be Numbered amongst the Questions, least Capable of
Decision; Whether, That, or Her Mind, be most Crooked? And to cover this, (yet
none of the worst of her Imperfections,) She is supported, like Tyranny, by
Steel. From whence, her Breath is become so Noisome, as no Venomous thing can
live, in her Presence: Nor any Person sick of the Mother, miscarry. Now what
Effects her Embraces will work upon your Self, may be guessed, by Grooms: --
who in a small time, come to Outstink the very Beasts they are Conversant with.
-- And what is said, is so far, from Hyperbolicall, As, it resembles Truth
more then she does a Woman. Yet all this, is but a slender Security, to warrant
Posterity upon, should such a Monster Confute Philosophy, in producing her
Like, For;

If Money be so prevalent, as to make you sell your Liberty; why may it not
Hire another, to become so much a Slave, as to do your Drudgery? Who, cannot
be, upon serious thoughts, thus Singular; As, to prefer, The absolute
Possession of a Dung-Boat, before, The having a Partner in a Tall Ship. But if
so fond of Wealth, as to break through these Considerations: Teach Her to Cover
her Face, and not Salute your Friends. Or, if she must be Kissed, (The
Strongest Complement was ever used) Let her Disrobe Her -- not possible to be
more Noisome, then her Mouth. If Prose be not Tart enough, to weane you, from
so Childish a Resolution; For the Fear of Poetry desist: which may make you
the Subject of a Comedy. And Guess by these Verses of a Friend, what Enemies
may say.

CAn you but think, the Ancient Blindness Great,
When Men made Gods, of that which we make
Or wonder those by Nile, could offer Fat (Meat?
And goodly Oxen, to an ugly Cat?
Yet you ( no less advised) to a Witch
Will sell your Fate, in hope for to be Rich.
Who like the Idols, in a Pagan Feast,
Carries a Monkeys Face, upon her Breast,
Shadowed with Shoulders: under which, does stay
A Bonnet crouching, like a Hill at Sea.
Nor may her Bosom fail of a Device,
To hatch an Egg into a Cockatrice.
Or turn Men Atheists, who believe no Elves
Can now be found, but what we make our Selves.
Were She in India, where they serve the Devil,
Not out of Hope of Good, but Fear of Evil,
They would adore Her: Lest her Sun-like Nose
Should Burn, and Smoke Tobacco, as it grows.
Or, lest the Venom of her loathsome Breath,
Might blow some soul Contagion ore the Earth.
Or, That the Spaniards, by her malice taught,
Might learn more Cruelty, then ere they thought.
Yet amongst all the People, worst misted,
None ever took a Fiend into his Bed.
Which proves, that Nature does abhor your Deed
In offering to a Demon, Human Seed.
And what will be your Issue, joined with Her,
None can resolve you, but a Conjurer.
For while She is in Labor, You may hear
The Good-wives skreak: and some Physician swear
It is a Child. And that he finds in writ,
Such Births; Before, the Priest dares Christen it.
Now if this cannot Move you, May your Task,
Be to beget a Complete Anti-Mask.
A Letter in Reference to a Coy LADY.
THough I confess, The Lady you recommended, may prove a Pleasure to Others,
are at Leisure wholly to intend Making Love: (No Hare being better provided of
Muces and Shifts to put off Followers then She) yet, so Dull a Soul as mine, in
the Apprehension of the Difference, between One Individual Beauty, and
Another, is still ready, with the Mayor of London to Lose all the Pleasure of
Hunting, in the Insignificant (though perhaps to Others Ears pleasant) Cry of
the Hounds. Catching of Larkes and Sparrowes less Chargeable and Troublesome,
being more Acceptable and grateful to some Complexions, then Hawking at the
Heron. The latter being too full of Splendor, Noise, Delays, and Impertinent
Complements for a Person, that like me, is not born with the Patience To run
after A Flying Beauty; Or spend time in Beating for that, another will Find to
^^y Hand, for a Smaller Sum, then may Compense, The tearing my Repute, or
Burthening my Conscience with Vain and Fallacious Oaths and Covenants. In the
Administration of which, She is as Punctual, as the Calydonian Commissioners.

Yet I cannot deny, but That, She is richly Worth the Purchase, of any that Own
the Knack of such Amorous Zelots, as have The Patience, to continue still
Whining, where they Know, through the Consciousnesse of their own
Unworthiness, That they are not Likely to be Heard. Making a Sincere
profession of Love and Respect, when Their Chiefest Intent is only to plunder,
What I fear, This Lady, is to Seek of, already; or else foully belied. None
Keeping Their Avenues more strictly Barred, then Such as have been Robbed
already in this Kind. Wherefore having Cast up by my Self the whole Value of
the Adventure; I find it no more then I can truck for, nearer home, and with
greater Ease, and Convenience to my Self.

Yet, before I break out into an Open Rebellion against so Sovereign and
Absolute a Beauty, I will Present her with This enclosed Petition. To which, If
she gives not a Satisfactory and Full Answer, I am resolved to break off all
further Address. And to proclaim Her a Tyrant. And her Subjects absolved from
their Oaths and Obedience. So, as for the Future it may be lawful for them,
to inrole Themselves under the Red and White Colors of any Other Mistress
they esteem more Debonaire.

The Petition.
I Pray Dispatch my Suit, or else Deny it;
For if I spend more Time, I dearly Buy it:
If you distrust my Truth, I do protest,
By That which binds Men most, I Love you best.
-- It is not our of Fear, That I should Tell.
You never heard me Brag, when I did well.
Or is it t'engage Me more, that you delay it?
None better knows the Grant, nor how to pay it.
Is it the Sin you fear Which None can Guess?
Cutting off Oaths, and Time, you make it Less.
Nay'tis no Fault in you, to lessen Mine.
Better once Drunk, then still to thirst for wine.
-- Has Nature made a ^^ot below your Z^ne?
My Love would cover it, and count it None.
Have you a Servant, that you think, is true?
I have a Mistress too: And yet, Love you.
I you can add to these Objections more,
Pay Me for what is past, and I Will give over.
A Character on a deboshed Soldier.
HE carries no Sign of Reputation but in his Mouth; and that he suffers to run
over, with tedious Stories of his own Valor: to justify which, he has wished
his Damnation so often, as it is now sure; rendering him incapable of any other
Peace of Conscience, but what he finds in Drink, or the operation of no
Diviner Spirit, then that incites to Lust and Revenge; his Religion being so
far of his own making, as he imagines God, like his Old Host, best pleased,
by the Largest Reckonings. With his Tongue he desires Wars, but is in Heart
at peace with All, but his Maker. He had rather be thought behind-hand for
Money, then Word: and will sooner, satisfy an Enemy, then a Friend, being
readier to requite, what he receives in Anger, then Love; Injuries, then Good
Turns. Rendering himself a Slave to Martial and arbitrary Justice for a small
Salary, under the improbable pretense of Freeing Others. Nor dares this
Gladiatour, that rants so high in Taverns, and on the Ale-bench, oppose any
thing but Patience, to the highest Affront, a Superior Officer is pleased to
put upon him. Though no Papist, he abhorres the Church. And like some of our
Reformists, carries no more Marks of a Protestant, then what is legible in
Perjury, etc. yet brags more of his Whoring and Drinking, then any Catholic
does of his Good Works. Who is thus far Happy, that though he wants Faith to
make him a True Saint, he ownes not so much Hypocrisy, as to appear so. And
therefore more capable of Repentance, then those that Plunder and Murder
others, under a secret Pretense, of Honoring that God, he openly prophanes. He
brags much of his Scarres, which truly examined, prove rather the Effects of
Intemperance, then Marks of Valor: his Face bearing the Hideous Impresse of
Pots and Glasses, received not in the Fields of Mars, but the easier-entred
Sconces of Bacchus. Whose Discourse, though it traveled still betwixt one
besieged place, or Leaguer, to another, yet it was always Tedious. And if you
altered the Subject, his understanding appeared proof against all Sense. After
whom followed this Epitaph.

At the Saracens Head Tom powered in Ale and (Wine,
Until his Face did represent the Sign.
To Dr. Chapter Chaplain to W. E. of Pem.
SIR,
Whilst it pleased you to Communicate with me, in a Style suitable to the
frailty of my understanding, I took infinite content in the Converse; but since
you have clothed your Letters in the Thundering and Glorious Ornaments of
Learning, I am not able to cope with you: Wherefore let me implore your favor
so far as to lay these advantages by, and not render your Love terrible to me,
who did never question your Power, but own you in the highest sublimity the
world has (being prompted by so much desert) advanced you to. And on such
terms I may enjoy your Acquaintance, whereas otherwise I shall be forced to
take sanctuary in a perpetual silence. Lest I should lose that little Reason I
have, in seeking to Comprehend the infinitness of yours. And to avoid any
misinformation of the Quarrel at -- - between my Lo -- - and the E. of C -- -
It was teally thus. The K -- - having though against his will, prevailed with
my L. to go into the West, by reason of his Interest in those parts, with the
other Counselors of State, in hope to facilitate the payment of the five
Subsidies voted, but not given by Parliament, and now Christened a Royal ^^ne;
The Commissioners being by the fire, A dispute arose between the two former
Lords, whether it was possible for one had never been upon the place, to speak
and understand French perfectly. The L -- - of -- - who you know never set foot
out of England, maintained the Affirmative with so much eagerness, that the
other who had not only more Reason on his side, but the approbation of the
Company, said my L. -- - best Argument was noise; a speech my L. replied was
undecent for an Ea. of Complements. And upon this, The other returned the Lie.
To which my L -- made him such a Manual Answer, as the L. C. being penned up
in his clothes, fell down, whereupon they were parted, and reconciled; shame,
and the title of his Majest. gravest Privy Counselors facilitating the
Composition. It is already arrived at the Spanish Ambassadors, who according to
his facetious mode, put it upon the score of our English Valor; which the
Gravest relations cannot make them to forget. I am still haunted for verses
from our French Coriot, who is resolved to print his Book in English: Those I
made are these.

WHat do thou mean my friend, in this bad time,
To write of Virtue, when it is thought a Crime
Not to be Vicious? such a Book would sell,
Could prove all Damned, did offer to do well:
Or find that Pimping is a lawful trade,
Because that Sarah brought her Lord a Maid;
Or vindicate what Origin has cast, ( last;
That Court and Hell shall meet in Heaven at
Or prove that Incest is a Venial Sin,
Because that Lot defiled his nearest Kin.
O could thou maintain this, then thou should be
Raised to high place for thy Divinity.
Then lose no time, let Goodness take her chance,
Whilst you comply with Sin and Ignorance.
On a Cook.
A Cook is a Baud to the Mouth. That Kills his own Stomach, to quicken his
Master's. Who Lives like a Bear by licking his Fingers. Before a Feast, he in
his White sleeves, and Apron resembles the Ephod of a Priest; and seems to be
preparing rather a Sacrifice, then a Supper. In which, the Grand-Sallat may
justly be thought to personate an Idol. His office is a representation of
hell: where all sorts of Creatures are tormented in Flames, to satisfy the
depraved and Various Nature of the Tastes of men. Whose Pleasures, and highest
Contentments, are no otherwise to be completed, but at the prejudice of their
Fellow Animalls: Over which, Reason, not Strength, has purchased them the
Sovereignty, So much abused in this world, as may render the worst of
punishments, just, in the next. His profession something quadrates with
Heraldry: Varying no less in Sawces, then they do in Colors, Bendes, Fesses
and metalls; And are as much puz'led about marshalling the Dishes, and
calculating the precedence, at the Table, of a Wood-Coek, or Wigeon; a Gull, or
Gosling, as, the other are, in placing Lords, and Ladies. But this, and all the
rest of his Learning, and Industry, concludes as I do, in an Excrement: which I
wish in his -- etc. And so, leave him to Blaspheme in the Kitchen: or Cooling
his Tongue in the Cellar.

A Character of an Host.
AN Host is one who Thrives with Drinking, and grows Rich by Entertainments.
He is of vast Acquaintance, but can number Few Friends: besides Those resulting
from Travail, or Necessity. His Conversation is alike to All men, that he may
gain the more Money. Being, equally Hospitable, to every Religion he can save
by. Giving his Guest the best Content over Night, out of hope to please himself
in the morning. The Government of his house is Tyrannical, all Taxes being
Arbitrary, at the will of his Wife, who sits Regent in the Kitchen. Yet every
one that enters, takes his Chamber, for the time he stays, as his own, With no
less assurance, then Don Quixot did the whole Mansion, for an Enchanted
Castle. He ventures, that reason he has, in all Companyes. And in Defiance of
any Drink the weary Travelour pleases to call for, which if said to be
mingled, or adulterate, He calls the Name of God, and the person of the Drawer
to attest the Contrary. The Sign is the Scheme, by which, you may take the
Ascendent of his Understanding. And his Half-peck, the Measure of his
Conscience; of which his Osteler is Chancellor, and keeps the Key: Making no
more of Cheating a Strangers Horse, then his Mistress does in Overreaching
both. If her Husband be grown into his perfect Symmetry, his Belly bears the
exact proportion, of the biggest Jugg. And his Face of That, in the First
Edition of Friar Bacon's Works. He suits his Discourse, as Fiddlers do their
songs, to the Ears of the Hearers: choosing rather to offend Truth, then his
Company. And, in case, any ride double, he proclaims them Man and Wife: as far
more willing to foment Bawdery, then foul two pair of sheets. He is seldom
far out of the way, though Drunk or Hanged: The First, being as near the Road
of his Profession, as the Latter is of that of his Desert.

YOuth, wit, and Beauty, like a painted Sign
May stay a Stranger: but it is sprightfull
wine,
And decent welcome makes him 'light and Dine;
For who will pass his time in such a place,
Where naught appears, of moment, but a
Face?
Deductions from the History of the Earl of Essex, who was executed for
Treason, under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; with a modest Answer to Sir Henry
Wotton.
THe Love of a People, may be observed, of no less dangerous a consequence for
a Subject to trust to, then their hatred proves to such Princes as are so
unwary as to neglect it. For after that Sir Robert Cecil had prevailed so far
upon his own Brother, the Earl of Exceter (most else refusing the employment,
out of Love or fear) as to proclaim Essex Traitor: He appeared, deserted by
all, but some few unfortunate Gentlemen, whose Lives out of Gratitude, or Want,
depended wholly on his.

Nor is the Affection of a Prince, less permanent, then their Anger deadly.
And in the first of these the Queen was unconstant, in the latter inexorable.
Wherefore, if during so long a reign, no great quantity of Blood was spilt, it
rather resulted from her Subjects Innocence, then any propensity to
forgiveness, inherent in her Nature. Nothing coming so hardly from her, as a
pardon; I mean of such faults, as concerned her self. And in this she showed a
rare prudence, in becoming able to raise a prositable use out of a Natural
defect, for (born of that sex, allowed by all as the weakest in Judgment) she
lay more obnoxious to a Censure of insufficiency, then that of Tyranny: the
sternnesse of whose looks, has in all ages scared away contempt, the
inseparable Companion of a cheap and effeminate Nature.

So as neither Leicester, Hatton, nor any other Minion, could ever extract so
much favor from her, as might serve their Lands or Heirs, from refunding what
their Fathers had misspent: Her favors keeping no Servant company, beyond the
Land of the Living. The most apparent reason why the Lady Elizabeth Hatton cast
her self into the contaminated arms of Atturny Cook Nor could her disposition
to severlty be in any thing more manifest, then the extraordinary means used
but to defer the execution of the Earl of Southampton, who had besides pity,
the enemies of Essex to plead for him: yet she continued inflexible toward
mercy, till the same hand that led her into the temptation, did like the
Devils, show her the glory she was fallen from already, in her Subjects
opinion, by quenching his, and their enemies malice with the Blood of their
Darling. Nor was this hard-extracted Mercy unsuitable to the emergency of the
present occasion, for (as I have been often told) not only those that did in
the peoples opinion, contribute to the murder (as many called it) of the
Earl: But the Queen herself, was exposed to some public affronts. The
spectators she passed through in every town, (especially in London) becoming
far thinner and muter then formerly they were.

Some Princes love not that Child is in order to succeed them: but all
abominate a stranger lies under that notion; the cause that she, contrary to
the well-being of the Subject, no less then the privilege of Parliament,
Committed Pigot and Wentworth, for moving to know the Man, and beheaded Essex,
but for making a small demonstration of offering himself: Though the later Roman
Tyrants took that little security they did enjoy, from a quite contrary course.
But this was at a time when the blood Royal lay extinct, and the possession of
the crown fell to his share had the Keenest Sword and strongest headpiece: In
which case the most probable way to secure the Prince, was the declaring his
Successor, who to preserve his own dignity, was likely to take revenge on any
should assassinate him in the throne before, a thing very ordinary in those
depraved times; not so in England, where during her Reign, there were no less
then fourteen titles, good and bad, which by her Silence were all kept quiet.
For till she made a public declaration, none had a just cause to complain.
And in case any endeavored to have succeeded by force, she had a fair choice
out of the rest to make opposition, none being free from some considerable
defect or other. The Parliament remaining wholly at her devotion, and no
Ill-willers to Essex; The Commons being as fearful of the Regiment of a
Stranger, as the Peerage were jealous of the house of Harford, or any else
deducible out of their own Body. Fortune appearing then in all particulars so
strong on Essex side, as she seemed rather unable, then unwilling to bear out
the charge of his folly, who put her upon such Impertinent errands, as the
Dutch youth do fools on the second of April: Through which she became so far
tired, as she was forced at last to return him a Block and a Hatchet. This
unconstant Deity, being in the number of such giddy Auxiliaries, as none can be
sure what side she will take, and therefore not to be trusted by a wise man.
The most steady if not signal events, having been brought about without any
other mediation of hers, but what is unpossible to be avoided; in which sense
she is rather capable of the title of Providence, then Luck. Fortune resembling
a cane, which no wise man, but in an unavoidable necessity will hazard the
weight of his whole rest upon. Wherefore the Earl of Essex, if he had not been
befated with a strong Opinion of success in all his actions, (though built on
the weakest foundation) would never have referred his life and future
well-being to the sole arbitration of Chance, and the unconstant guidance of a
Woman's Affection: which being only skin-deep, could not but in a Court,
furnish a person of far less magnitude then a Sovereign power with choice
enough: Especially after his enemies, for their own security, had so far
Indulged his, as to furnish him with an Army paid by the Queen, and chosen by
himself. Nor were the greatest families then in Rebellion in Ireland, (rendered
by the most probable reports) less obedient to him then his respective
Officers: And if these advantages had been too little to have set the Crown
upon his head, after the decease of his Mistrisse, he might have had any men,
or money from the most Catholic King; who would have advanced his designs, or
any natural English Subjects else, that had but opposed the Scottish
Succession. Which was formerly projected by Leicester, and the only visible
occasion he managed the English force in the Netherlands with so little care,
and worse success, who immediately began to prosper upon his remove. But Essex
had Religion and Fidelity, inherent in his Nature, Humors known so
Incompatible with Ambition, as it was no less unsafe for him to court a Crown,
then it did after prove Incongruous and mis-becomming, for his more frigid Son
to make Love, and Importune Ladies. Nor is this a conjecture of my own, but
what I have often heard averred by the friends of Sir Charles Danvers, whose
youngest Sister married my eldest Brother. And that the Honesty of Essex (never
denied to exceed his Discretion) might for the present moderate his Ambition:
But how he would have behaved himself in the company of an absolute power, may
be safer now disputed by us, then at that time experimented by the Queen.
Success in those that wear it, expunging like Aqua Fortis all former marks of
Allegiance or Probity. For though his first thoughts might be of no larger
extent, then to remove Cecil, and other declared enemies, under the notion of
evil Counselors, that powered into her Ears such tales as were disadvantagious
to the true Religion, and Policy of the State: Yet that point gained, he could
not from a lower Station then a Throne, have satisfied so many, wiser men then
himself, whose clearer insight into the advantages he was then in possession
of, had tempted to be adventurers with him. So as all the favor could have
accrued to his Mistress from a more happy success then befell the Earl, exceeded
not the Complement of continuing her in his lap, (a place not likely to suit
long with her Age, or his occasions.) Queen Elizabeth's Reign, having been too
reserved, quietly to have endured from an Administrator (she remaining yet in
being) so profuse an expense of honor and Riches, as was expedient to be
thrown to such a needy party, as had already Imbarqued themselves in his
service, whose fidelity and strength (the Nurslings of hope, reward and
preferment) was requisite to maintain him on the Stage. For though possibly,
his desires might terminate in a removal of his Enemies; They had no honester
design then to raise themselves, without much reference had to the means. From
whence it is easy to contemplate the prodigious Disparities in Rebellion;
which though begun upon never so just, moderate, or Religious pretenses,
necessity, ambition, and Humane frailty will interject so many new and
unexpected pretenses, and events, as it rarely concludes, without the ruin of
it self, or the Commonwealth; which once suffered to grow intemperate and run
over, it does like a Pot consume its own fat, and loses its former strength
and Glory, by raising the dross and dregs of her Subjects, uppermost.

One cause of his presumption was, The fond Opinion he had, that she would not
rob her eyes of the great delight she took in his Person. A fantastical
overweening of himself, and woman's Affection, to whom, no single man's
perfections was ever yet found continually Grateful.

Now such as wonder, how she durst bring him to the Scaffold, for fear of her
own Honor, are not thoroughly studied in the boldness of Princes (whose faces
are continually steeled with the varnish of a gross Flattery, put upon their
worst Actions) no more then the compunctions of Dying Men, who desire rather to
clear themselves toward God, and the world, then impertinently to accuse
others: Besides, a hope of Pardon, not to be cut off but with his Head, was a
sufficient Reason to restrain him from breaking out into any intemperate
ranting against his Prince: As Biron of France, did not long after, most
Imprudently fall into, in reference to his King, Henry the Fourth, Dying in the
opinion of the generality, rather like a mad man, then a Christian. Yet had
Essex unloaded his bosom of all it did contain, it might possibly not have
swelled to so great a bulk, as did then appear in the Opinion of the most: or
that it may after be blown up to by flatulent Posterity (seldom endued with so
even a fortune, as to have truth and falsehood weighed to it in an equal
Balance) manisest in a number of Relations extant at home, and abroad. The
Blood she inherited, no less then her Father's humor, having procured her no
good opinion from the Church, according to whose Dialect the generality did
heretofore, out of Ignorance, or reverence, tune their belief.

Had he been true to his first Principles, molded by some more dexterous heads
then his own, which was to spin out his time, together with the Irish war, till
a certain report of the Queen's sickness, or death had come to him, from such
an unquestioned number of his own Confidents, as were able to have assured
belief; It might in reason have presented him with his wish, or at worst so
much power, as would have made him arbitrator of the next succession. But have,
proceeding from a Natural Impatience to live out of England, and the contrary
advice received from some near about him ( suborned to destroy him) rendered
all addle: By persuading his return without an Army, upon a false report raised
of her Majesty's Death, the time assigned, wherein to show himself. And to this
end, the Wars in Ireland were prolonged, with no weaker endeavors, then
Montjoy used after to conclude them, Owner of no other project but the reducing
of that Province unto obedience: Essex presuming so far upon the peoples
affections, that he thought the sound of his coming able to raise an Army
wherever he came.

Essex, if he had been master of parts strong enough to have mounted him into
the Saddle of Sovereignty, might have found by the beating of the Parliament (a
true pulse of the Nation) That there was no probability to raise any
advantageous distemper for him, during the life of the Queen: The people
apprehending little other cause of discontent, but what might arise from the
thought, that their present felicity depended only on the continuance of an Old
Lady; After whom, they expected more dismal days, then their Love could ever
have imagined from the Government of Essex.

Wherefore to lay the Scene of any thing carried but the vizard of a Rebellion
in London (at that time abounding with riches and felicity) was an act
savouring of so great Imprudence, as I wonder his enemies should bring him to
it, or his Friends suffer him to prosecute: As I have often told some at that
time near about him, who made me no other answer, but that he perished between
his own presumption, and others Infidelity. His security might have been more,
and loss less, had he gone into Wales, when he passed through London, where
he had great love both by Inheritance from his Father (a good Landlord) and his
own purchase, always of a liberal Nature. Nor did he fail to wear a Leek on
St. David's day, but besides, would upon all occasions vindicate the Wetch
Inhabitants, and own them for his Countrymen, as Queen Elizabeth usually was
wont, upon the first of March. And by this the Earl grew so popular amongst
these people (especially such as had little to lose,) that without all
question, so many would have appeared in his favor, as might have procured him
audience from her Majesty, and not improbably the removal of his enemies,
under that notion hated by the generality, no less then those linked to him,
under a more strict friendship. Or if this had been too hard a task, their
strength and means was not likely to want power, to land him again in Ireland,
from whence he had been drawn by his own folly, and the wisdom of his
maligners; where not only the English, but the natives (to those in actual
Rebellion) were his reported servants. The Catholics, till they were better
Cajoled by the Scottish Kings Confidents, not obstructing his Designs. And how
secure he would have been, in that Province, may be guessed by Tyrone, the
Capital Rebel, who notwithstanding more impartial endeavors then the Lord
Lieutenant Essex had used, did obtain his Pardon, in a manner maugre the
English forces.

Essex was too honest to have removed every Impediment lying in the way to
Sovereignty, nothing but death being able to gagg a person robbed of a Crown.
Yet her Successor met with no opposition, though bred in an air ever
Pestiferous to this Nation; which wisely considered, might have tempted a
people to have disputed his entrance, till caution given. But the Riches and
felicities enjoyed, during the incomparable Reign of Queen Elizabeth, hung yet
like holy days at their fingers ends, by which they were become so effeminate,
and unadvised, as to choose rather to fall into an Incurable Consumption, then
hazard a little the shaking by a few fits of a Fever; which if chosen, might
not unlikely have proved as wholesome Physic for King James as England; Who
wanting a Legal pretext, had nothing left him in safety strong enough to
refell the Brazen-faced Impudence of his Countrymens Importunity. But the last
Scene of Princes, like the Catastrophe of a Play, is so hudled up, and every
one so intent upon his own particular Interest, (being muffled by hope or fear)
as that is left merely to the disposition of Fortune, which ought only to be
entrusted with Prudence her self. Nor did the readiness of the Scots to Arm,
(in hope of so much plunder, as this Nation might afford, shrouded under the
specious pretense of Henry the 7s. eldest daughter) portend less in the ears of
the unresolved, then a possibility of Conquest, the most ungrateful sound to
the formerly free People of England. Neither did these conjectures receive
small aggravation from those formerly suborned, to promote the entrance of the
Stuarts, who if Essex had remained true to his principles, might have been
saluted on the borders, by an Army strong enough to have moderated the Scots
conditions, or advanced his own. Though it was the universal Opinion, that
Essex's Ambition, did like the great Earl of Warwick's, terminate in a desire
to bring in James on his own score.

It is not probable the Earl carried any evil meaning toward the
Commonwealth, because neither his enemies, nor friends are found to mention
any endeavor in him to call in a Forreigner: Wherefore if the Crown was his
Mistress, he used the most decent way of wooing her, which was only through
the Mediation of her native Subjects. Yet I doubt whether he had justly
calculated the weight of this Circumstance, That Conscience is as dangerous in
an Usurper, as Cruelty, and excess is deadly, and undecent, in him does
Legally succeed.

I have heard it, though looked upon by me as a Paradox, that Essex would have
vindicated the English freedom, by reviving such ancient Privileges as had
been pretermitted, during the Tyrannical reigns of the two last Henry's; And
no ways indulged by Queen Elizabeth, which not extending all her time beyond a
few particulars, was then less discernable. No act of hers being registered so
contrary to the grain of her own people, as the death of this man; the Queen of
Scots being looked upon as a Catholic, which in the general dialect of
England at that time, signified no less then a sworn enemy to God and the
Prince, (so zealous, if I may not say surious, are all changes) that it was
passed over, without any apprehension of honor, or pity, as justified by the
cruel Massacre committed not long before upon the French Hugenots, at the
instigation of that Kings Mother. An Act through which the Integrity of Princes
was much ahated. But whether his nation by reason of her diverse titles, and
disparity in estates, was capable of that absolute freedom, has since been
fancied by some, I leave to the Arbitration of greater Politicians.

Only this I am confident of, that no fair capitulation could have disobliged
King James, who lay under too many doubts, and strong desires, to have refused
so peaceable an entry as he found, upon any lawful limitations; manifest in
the advice given to his Son; Wherein are more Popular rules, then himself was
ever observed to follow.

By the vast quantity of tears let fall from the Multitude upon his Grave, may
be noted, how far easier it is to find pity, then protection, Though his
friends if united, would have proved the major part. Who for want of a good
headpiece to follow, this universal affection, like floting Atoms, made
only a world of Calamity for himself and his party. But this blow past
recalling, set the peoples teeth so much an edge, as all the Queen did after,
was thought bitter, and her Government too peevish and effeminate for so
warlike a Nation: Nor did she decline less in the opinion of the Court it
self, no counsel daring after to appear, but what was suitable to the Cecilian
gusto.

Here may be noted, with what Circumspection Princes ought to play their Game,
since Counselors, their Card-holders, are not seldom Cheaters, and intend more
particular Interests then their Masters: As appeared in the remove of Essex, a
man thought far more necessary to the Queen's Service, and Englands safety,
then such as purchased his ruin. The banding of two factions, being the most
probable way to keep, this already superannuated Princes from falling into
contempt. For such Commands, as under both parties would have been readily
obeyed, were after one had got the absolute disposure of affairs, wholly
neglected. Essex's return (which no question would have been endeavored, upon
the least discontent of her Majesty) appearing of so dismal a consequence to
his enemies, as nothing might procure it, was thought safe, or what did
obstruct it, dangerous. Nor was it possible for this planet, so near its
declension, to Influence another party: None daring to run the Hazard of an
unavoydable future Ruin upon the contemplation of a year or two's power; which
was more then her age, and present weakness did in any probability promise.

This proves, it had been the Queen's better policy, to have conceded the Life
of the Earl to the tears, and vows of the people, through which their Love
had not only been preserved entire, but (what was next considerable) so great
a restraint put upon the contrary Cabal, as might contain them within the
compass of Obedience; out of fear she should have let loose this Lion, who to
that end she might have kept in the Tower, his death not being probable, as her
Subjects stood affected, to have countervalued the advantage of his Life. And
this oversight was the more inexcusable, because the Ancestors of the Earl's
chiefest enemies had by the same arts rendered her ungrateful to the People of
England, in a like case of severity toward the Duke of Norfolk.

Nor did she apprehend till it was too late, the wound given her own Power,
through the mediation of the Hangman in the death of Essex; Not being able ever
after, to moderate the Insolency of those, that now did not stick to slight
her, and story openly in her ears the necessity she lay under, to declare the
Scotch King her Successor, lest the Parl. should be (for their own safety)
compelled to do it themselves; which had not been omitted, but (as I have been
told) to endear King James more to some particular families, of which the most
noble for birth, found afterward little cause to applaud their Design.
Neither were other reports wanting, which being usual at the Death of all
Princes, I shall here wilfully omit, as quite unsatisfied of their truth. Nor
had I said this, but that there has been from the beginning of the uncivil
wars (wherein none were masters of what they had) diverse imperfect Copies of
my own hand left in the custody of one did print some of them, under a
namelesse Author, though very false, And might have done this, if not timely
prevented.

Nor did this blow terminate only in the ruin of the Earls friends, but
extended to the disadvantage of his Maligners themselves, apparent in Sir
Walter Raleigh, who wanting Strength, though not Wit to be the treasurers
Corrivall, Perished because not thought to own humility enough to be his
Servant: it being more safe at Court to have many Enemies of equal power, then
one false ambitious friend, that has attained to the absoluteness of Command.
The agitations and tempests, arising from considerable factions in the houses
of Princes, (resembling some winds at sea, by which men are driven though by
contrary means, to one and the same end) would of necessity have miscarried, or
perished, had any single party prevailed. The one still thinking it honorable
to preserve and advance what the other esteems safe to suppress and destroy.
And this Raleigh was often heard to say, he did not apprehend, Before his
Genius had dictated it to him, as he came in a Boat from the execution of the
Earl of Essex, which was done at the Tower. Nor could the wisest of his
endeavors free him from the dire effects of this Portent, or to name it more
properly, a necessary cause of such events, as did after befall him.

The Death of Essex like a Melancholy cloud, did shade the prospect of her
peoples affection, from being so discernable at the shutting of her days, as
it was during the Dawning and Meridian of her reign. Yet if Essex had been
tried by a Peerage of Angels, they would have passed a like sentence upon him,
or exposed Monarchy to contempt. Wherefore Prudence cannot lay the fault at the
door of her Justice, but the ill-management of her Mercy, as not knowing how to
employ it, toward the best advantage of her future Affairs. But after an
Impartial Reflection made, in reference to private persons averseness toward
any apprehension of defect, we may possibly learn to wonder, why she made no
better provision against contempt, till that hour a mere stranger to this
Princess, who had all her sails continually filled with flattery or success.

Now to vindicate her Majesty from the obvious aspersion I have so often heard
her prudence upbraided withal, (for neglecting the Italian mode quite, in the
removal of Mary the Scottish Queen, and Dowager of France, so much the more
undecent, as the hand of a Hangman is less honorable then that of a
Physician.) I may say, That since those, who for their own sakes as well as
their Sovereigns, thought it not safe to be left undone, wanted the skill or
spirit to do it a clandestine way, i was more discretion then folly to refuse
ejecting one so uncouth herself; such a lesson being easier learned then
forgotten, and might have been afterward practiced to her personal
disadvantage.

And if reports on all hands were not mistaken, little thanks is due to those
who made the Nation accessory through this solemn Try all to the Death of her
mother they meant next to set up. Nor can an undoubted desire in the Scots to
have her removed, the better to facilitate the Succession of their King (who
did more indulge his Patience then Honor, in passing unrevenged those houses,
sprinkled by her blood) justify their discretions, that could not but know all
Obligation was more likely to be lost in the shame, then found in any grateful
acknowledgment of such actions as these. And if their Posterity taste of the
like Justice, they may sacrifice repentance to such nets, as themselves spread
to ensnare this Queen first, and then Essex; the fault of the last being in
reference to the Innocent driving on the design, as far below such severity,
as the majesty of the other was above it.

Nothing commends the goodness of Queen Elizabeth's reign more, then that she
and her Subjects should have one and the same Minion, as happened in Essex:
whereas the hatred of the people, proved after an undoubted consequence of her
Successor's Love, remaining no less confident of the choice of the one, than
diffident of the others. The Queen wanting no medium to nterpose between her
and their fury: from whence grew a confidence, that she would not countenance
an unworthy man. Neither was it a small advancement to this general compliance,
that the people appeared not at the cost to raise him. It being the custom of
this thrifty Prince, to let her Favorites taste, not surfeit, on the wealth of
the Nation, conveying her Largesses by Spoons, not Buckets: The names of
Monopolies, and extrajudiciall Taxes, not being intelligible to experience all
her days. Neither were her ears stopped against her peoples complaints, ever
thought by her just, and so fit to receive a present redress; the cause her
Parliaments were no further inquisitive then she was pleased to inform them.

Had her Successor retained the like Moderation, the power of our
Representative had never fallen under the malleation of so extensive a dispute,
which has raised men's minds up to so impetuous a Billow, as it is
questioneble, whether that which supported her power, may not through a
contrary application utterly ruin those may succeed. Queen Elizabeth being not
only fortunate in her conduct at home, but able to diffuse peace and plenty
over such Neighbour-Nations, as she was advised by true Reason of State, to
maintain in strength and good plight. Not suitable to the late practice of a
Prince, that first brake with Spain, then France, and after was hardly
restrained from kindling a fire in the Netherlands, which lies in a manner in
the bosom of England.

Now I should conclude here, but that I find Sir Henry Wotton (late Provost of
Eaton, and a long time before Ambassador with the most Illustrious State of
Venice) has published a Manuscript amongst his friends, and may since be made
more general; where he offers to compare the Duke of Buckingham with the Earl
of Essex; much to the disadvantage of the latter, who laying this action by,
did never own the doing any thing so ungrateful, as might make him fear the
Anger, or beg the favor of a Parliament, much less owe his Life to the
dissolution of one already called. He is not charged with many deeds of
Improbity, unless Women be cast upon his account, not in Justice to be done,
the other standing by. The awe he bare to the Religion then Professed was
discernable by his Death, which in the Opinion of many, reached something below
the Garb of a Soldier; so busy are Critics (that like Flies spare nothing
savours of Fame or Infamy) to the Grave it self.

That he was thought no instrument of Tyranny or Oppression, appears manifest,
in the Monument of Love, remains still undemolished in the hearts of most
Englishmen: whereas the Duke retains the general tincture of, etc. Nor can his
well-known bounty to Friends and Servants expunge it, because drained from the
people, or taken out of the public Treasure, if not from the general safety
of the Nation. Whereas Essex obliged his Confidents out of his own store, or by
other so innocent ways, as the Subject had no just cause to be scandalized at
it.

The Earls Natural parts were as good as the Dukes, his Learning and Birth
higher, the one being of an honorable, the other at best but of a Gentile
extraction. Nor can so inconsiderate an Action, that in charity rather deserves
the title of a Riot then of a Treason, come up to so great an Ingratitude and
Indignity to the Nation, as Buckinghams proceedings at Rochell, calculated
after the French account, the sum of which I leave for more voluminous Pens
to cast up; only I shall assume the boldness to say, That the Duke showed no
less folly in accumulating so great a hatred of the people, then Essex did in
mis-applying their Love. And if his shadows were left exact to posterity, he
was not behind him in handsomness, the sole and primary cause of Villers
advancement. Only in this Essex came short, in having a Mistress would be
attentive to Reason, from whence soever it came, whether through the Organs of
Friendship or Malice. Whereas the Dukes fortune depended on two Princes, That
in reference to their own weakness or his strength, remained deaf to all
complaints else, but what were presented through his own mediation, or those of
his Creatures, with which he was ever made first acquainted, under no slighter
a penalty then his displeasure, so much more heavier then the Kings, as his
memory was better, and Interest more.

Concerning their Deaths, I can attest, the Dukes did occasion no less joy,
then the other did sorrow, not matched by the saddest accident did happen in
Queen Elizabeth's reign; No not if her Death be cast in, though deplorable
enough, as I have often been informed by those did approve the Sentence, but
not the so sudden execution of it. Nor was the Hangman reported to be
willingly hired to do it, whereas Felton seemed to be Inspired by some Demon,
if not the Genius of our Nation.

This had not been said, but in vindication of that, I never found cause yet to
question the truth of, and to unwarp their judgments (if any such be) that may
be drawn aside, by the goodness of Sir Henry Woottons parts, in knowing men's
opinions, much contaminated by his too over-zealous celebration of this Man, as
may be easily found in the Records of Parliament, to which I refer the Reader,
together with what I have in this behalf written.

Some Advantages may be deduceable from Court-Factions.
IT may be thought I hope no less impertinent, then what went before, if
according to my rambling Method, I shall drop some conjectures in reference to
a benefit may redound to the Subject from Court-factions: All which in
conclusion will reach the Prince, who cannot be safe and happy, if his people
live miserably; Not likely to be avoided, where preferments depend wholly upon
the mediation of a single and uncontrollable party. In which case the oppressed
have no power for the present to appeal to. The cause our later Parliaments
have been pestered with Clamours and Complaints, seldom, if ever heard of in
the Golden days of Queen Elizabeth. And from whose root sprung those branches
of misery, by which the greatest felicity any nation ever enjoyed, is become
over-shadowed, so that the detection of corruption in Officers, and the
gratification of the malice of some, and Ambition of others, in their
expulsions and Punishments, gave them at last the boldness to question the
integrity of the Crown.

Diverse persons of equal authority, though both wicked, do in experience
produced more justice then a greater probity in a single Individual, has been
(at least in these depraved ages) heard to pronounce: For though Bribery cannot
be denied a deflourer of equity; yet remaining more palpable in referencd to
detection, it may not happily be of so bad a consequence, as the effects of the
more uneasily detected propensities, found to follow the inclinations of love,
fear, or hope: as it is easily deduced from the practice usual in private
families, where a great advantage accrues to the first Delator, and prejudice
to the party accused; It not lying in the strength of virtue, if in any agility
of defense, to keep a person immaculate from the blurs of Calumny, for want of
proof, or an indifferent ear, which superlative powers cannot be at leisure to
afford. Nor is the advantage to be drawn from two equal Cabals, better
discerned, then by comparing the tempers of King James his Parliaments with
those holden under the Queen; for the first, being wholly led by a single and
passionate affection to one Minion, lived to see: never a tolerable Minister
relating to the Crown, or any in Authority so resolute, as not to prefer the
Favorites Command before his Masters, as esteeming the frown of the last more
deadly. Now the huge rate set upon places of Judicature, taught Judges to sell
their votes, and people to complain: Who by devouring of Instruments, came at
last so well acquainted with their own strength, as not to spare the
principal, and first cause. One Concession ever crouding room for a greater,
if not a more unreasonable demand. Whereas such instruments of State as Queen
Eli^beth had use of, being strained through the double and contrary Interests
of a divided party, no virtue was excluded, or vice admitted, any way
beneficial, or of prejudice to Prince or people; contrary to the custom of
later times, wherein the most probable designs were pinched and miscarried,
through the smalnesse of their parts were employed to keep them on foot. No
more solid Reason appearing in the advancement of the most, but Money or favor;
As no question will be found instanced in a prodigious number of examples, when
time shall have purchased impunity, for the manifestation of truth; not so
likely to have proved the result of a divided Court, where the creatures of one
were the enemies of an other, no less powerful; and so they both became
liable to accusation, or capable of defense. And from the sparkles of this
clashing, not only persons and actions, but the Queens Councils came to be
refined from the rust and Cankers, that after grew through the corruption of
foreign coin, no less current at Court all my time, then pieces of two and
twenty shillings, Jacobuses themselves. Now though Monarchy may (whether out of
perfection or defect I shall not here dispute) make use of this Recipe, it
seems dangerous, if not mortal, in reference to a freer Government, where the
least siding is a step toward Tyranny: the weakest part being as apt to call,
as a potent neighbor may be to come and assist, upon so advantageous an
errand. All disparities or contentions, but merely rational and in reference
to an universal welfare, tending to popularity and disunion, wherefore above
all things to be avoided. Nor is any near dependence upon a foreign Prince,
more mighty then themselves, compatible with Liberty: Which renders lending of
vast Sums little less dangerous then borrowing. And through which the
Catholic King may one day attain Genoa; it being natural to all Creditors to
favor their designs that owe them money, in hope of Payment; and so become
Traitors to the generality, out of the desire of a particular reimbursement.
Such folly lies in many Citizens, as they prefer destruction in gross,
before the hazard of their private Interests.

But when Power is Monopolized in a single person, Faction can be no more
spared, then an eye or an ear. Kings for the generality, out of Ignorance in
the world, if not for want of wit, or too much Flattery, being unable to value
what they give or receive; or whether they gratisie or depresse virtue or vice,
especially if they have no other information, but what is deduced from a
Minion, whose judgment is no less clouded through Pride, then his is by
affection, and a supposition of worth and abilities not really present; Such
Servants owning contrary interests to their Masters, who by bearing the charges
of those follies they daily commit, do not seldom prove Banckrupts themselves
of all ought to be esteemed dear in Sovereignty.

Nor are those single Trustees of the Royal assent, found by practice so
impartial in the distribution of rewards and punishments, but that they
diminish by the first, no less their Princes Love, then they augment in the
latter the peoples hatred; which an even debate would so far Moderate, as to
give such satisfaction as might preserve the generality in obedience, by
nothing so soon forseited, as a continued succession of cruel punishments, and
unjust Censures. I remember after Felton had given the fatal blow to George
Duke of Buckingham, one Savil, a lusty fellow, formerly burnt in the Shoulder
for a Rogue (finding how acceptable the news was, where ever it came) gave out,
he was the man that did it: And that though an honorable persons brother, he
wanted money to convey him away; upon which he was apprehended, and though not
worth a groat, fined a considerable sum in the Star Chamber, to which, the
wisdom, equity and justice of that Court, added (because they wanted power to
hang him) this Corporal punishment, viz. That he should be whipped from the
Fleet where he lay prisoner, to the Pilory in Westminster-palace-yard, there to
be for two hours nailed, and after to lose one ear, have his nose slit, and
then to be branded in the forehead; all which, as long as the bowels of
humanity would give me leave, I looked upon: Nor was this more then half his
punishment, as much being to be done to him in Cheapside, but that (as I heard)
the King more charitable then his Judges, did pardon it; Though his perpetual
residence in Bridewell was not remitted, till for another thing (some thought
unlikely to be done under such a restraint) he was hanged at Tiburn. I had not
touched upon this, as relating to a time which none can remember without being
agitated by envy, or grief: but to acquaint posterity, with the opinion of a
Lord, looked upon as the wisest for counsel, (however he might have failed in
reference to execution) in his time: Who at dinner that day with some of the
promoters of the forementioned Sentence, said, that though he hoped it would
never be executed, yet it grieved him, a president of that high nature should
remain upon record, no less to the dishonor of their Mercy, then the Justice
of his Majesty, upon whose scoreit might not unpossibly one day lie heavy: Nor
did it escape the notice of the next Parl. as any may find, can procure a sight
of a book written by Regal authority, wherein the Subject was prohibited so
much as to name a Parliament, etc. But the conclusion of the forementioned
prudent Lord, was to prove, that of all punishments death was soonest
forgotten; whereas Whipping and Pilory were always remembered: from whence
Governors may observe, That the greatest Cruelty is exercised by Subjects have
had their foundations laid in pity. Nor can this digression be thought
impertinent, by those shall consider, that such exorbitant and unnatural
repetitions of Punishments, were strangers during the domination of two equal
factions. Through the percussion of which, like Flint and Steel, all things
came to light, which these pleas might advance, or Eclipse the glory of the
Prince.

Nor should I prosecute this Epidemicall mischief of Favorites, at this time
common with France and Spain, but to answer such as plead for it: Whom I have
heard so impudent, as to allege the example of our blessed Savior; and no
less foolish in citing the authority due to the Prudence of Italy, where no
Pope lives without a Nephew: Forgetting the whole management of the Church was
not left to Saint John; nor the wise Conclave swayed by his Holiness Kindred,
who being incircled on all sides with enemies, and destitute by reason of his
elective honor, of any hereditary friendship, cannot in Reason provide better
for his safety, against the dangers have for many Ages waited upon the Table
and Cup of the Pope, then by raising a person to so high a dignity about him,
as may transcend any preferments likely to be offered by an enemy. The cause he
that is styled his Nephew, values his preservation equally with his own. And
he that shall yet seek further satisfaction, may find it in the unhappy
management of such Princes affairs, as have suffered themselves to be engrossed
by Minions, taken only upon the bare recommendations of their private
Affections.

It is the condition of those in Power to be guided by Servants.
THey say of the Whale that she is steered in her course through the guidance
of a far smaller Fish, and a lesser then that is reported to alter the Natural
gale of a Ship; looked upon as wonders in the deep, though few things are more
usual and Familiar upon Land. All our State- Leviathans being so far guided by
their Servants, Wives, Mistresses or Favorites, that in a true sense there is
no Monarchy, all things for the most part succeeding according to the
persuasions of others, if not contrary to the will of the Prince: A Mischief
not to be quite obviated, but at the peril of falling into Obstinacy, (as
great if not a more prejudicial extreme) nor has any King under my
experience, been able to drive on his Affairs, without grating upon one of
these excesses. So as a Nation like that of Egypt, is not seldom governed by a
Stranger or a Jew. There being no such thing in an unlimited sense, as an
Absolute Government, or if possible to be found, it must be in that as
improperly styled Free. Which proves there is no real Liberty, or Power
totally Arbitrary, in the nature of Things. For though the Incomparable
Prudence of the State of Venice, has compounded for most of the errors
committed by the Senators of Carthage; And Queen-Elizabeth shunned the greatest
Rocks of Tyranny (though as free from compulsion, as ever any Prince stood;)
yet the Jurisdiction of either was as remote from being purely or totally
Absolute, as the condition of their Subjects is incapable of the name of
Freedom. They being both too inestimable Jewels to be entrusted with passion,
single, and without any mediation from Counsel or Law. I confess the Grand
Signior can strangle whom he please; but it is seldom done at his own suit, no
more then any desert is gratified: I my self have known many, so far Strangers
to what was convenient, as they would scarce concede or deny any thing, out of
the presence of their Secretary. And this proceeded not seldom from a distrust
there was no cause for: Manifest in the Earl of Somerset, who though himself
owner of a competent sufficiency, was so Enchanted with an opinion of Sir
Thomas Overburies parts, that he preferred him from a Servant to such an
intimate friendship, as he could think nothing well-educated for employment in
his Office, that had not passed his Correction, nor secret safe laid up, but in
his Bosom: which swelled him to such a Monstrosity in pride, that I have heard
(not being my self then near the English Court) how he offered to rant at his
Servants, and did once beat the Coachman; for putting his Commands under an
inferior expostulation to his Masters. And through this intolerable arrogance
in him, and remissness in the Earl, the sparks first flew, that kindled the
ruin of them both: friendship being no more able to maintain its interest
against a feminine Affection, then so great a Pride was to confine it self
within the tedder of Moderation. The Minions of my time (an epidemicall
mischief over all the great Nations of Christendom where Monarchy swayes) did,
during that Fortune, so far transcend their Patrons felicity, as they could
gratify all the rest of their Passions (quite exempt from fear or danger)
being screened from both by the person of their Prince, whom in reason they
ought to defend; It having been often averred in my experience, that all the
Kings I have known, were found to do more for their Favorites, then they could
be tempted to have done for themselves. Which may serve for a proof of this
Assertion, that the greatest are not Free, but led intriumph by the Affections
of others, through the mediation of their own, by which means Women come to
Govern, and Children to dispose of Commonwealths. And thus the hand of
Providence, though steady in it self, does out of a desire to appear various
(and so more beautiful) not only remove the great men, but the paunes so
occultly, in this huge Chesse-board of the world, as they seem to our giddy
apprehensions, to be dandled in the Lap of a contingent Success. Though good
or bad Luck are merely Imaginary, like the Articke and Antarticke Poles, on
which the world, as on the two ends of an Axletree, are feigned to depend.
Wherefore the apparent Reason why great men are ruled by more obscure fools, is
want of Judgment or Sufficiency. The hidden Justice of God upon the Nation in
general, or persons in particular, who are naturally unworthy through
disobedience, or have rendered themselves so, by a Maladministration of
Affairs: The cause their Power is shared with meaner People, first sought to in
all Suits incident to their Places. And this Custom has brought into such
credit amongst men, as forgetting how much it savours of weakness, they labor
to make it Necessary in the Court of Heaven. As if God were more Importuned, or
less affected by our immediate Addresses, then when we offered our Prayers
through the intercession of the blessed Virgin, or some other Saint: Consonant
to a Memorable Answer to a Catholic, made by King James, That the Ruler of all
things was not subject to dote like him.

Yet wise men Govern in their own persons, as Joseph is said to rule Egypt; for
had not his Servants used to afford more obedience then advice, so dishonest an
action in outward appearance, could never have passed without expostulation, as
the putting the Cup in Benjamins Sack. To end this Discourse, nothing plausible
ought to be referred to a Servant's dispatch, nor that whichis less Popular
done by a Master; since he that is used to rake in dirt must employ an
Instrument, lest the filth should stick too apparently on his fingers. Thus
Princes juggle by Confederacy, whilst meaner men rule in their own persons.

FINIS.

