Dr Oatss last Legacy's and his Farewell SERMON. He being sent for to be high
Priest to the Grand Turk.
TRuly my Friends you know my Ability comes short of what it was three or four
years a gone, but what is left except ready money, and my necessary Bums, I
shall freely give and bequeath amongst you: For you know, as sure as there was
a Popish-Plot, I am seven hundred pounds the worse for the Court.

Imprimis, I give and bequeath to his Grace the two Bastards that some of our
Sister- Hood laid at my door, four years a gone, perhaps he may manage them to
be as fit for Kings as himself. The L. B-ll -- s Commission, which I gave him I
Recall and give it unto Bully Tom, for the good service he has done his Grace,
provided he do not presume to the Crown himself.

The Commission which I gave to the L. P -- w -- ss, to be High-Treasurer, to
the Popish invisible Army, I Recall, and give it to Ch -- a -- l -- n with the
wooden Leg. The L. P -- t -- s Commission I give to Wildman: he was ever true
to the Cause.

R -- t -- i -- ffs Commission I give to Brandon G -- d he has been Vigilant
all a long. The L. A -- u-d -- s Place and Commission, I give to H -- d -- n in
the Tower for his Father was Olivers own Cozen, and a Ld. of his creating. The
L. Castlemains Commission I give to T -- e -- h -- d. What a plague am I a
doing: I shall never have done with those forty Damned Commissions; dispose of
the rest at your Discretion. Rot 'em, they do not deserve all this kindness
from me, because they durst not trust me with the right Plot. There Is an Old
Meal-tub behind the door there; I leave that to Sr. W -- m- W -- r, and that
flogging bed in the Corner there, and that Hearts Horn to hang his Hat on, when
he comes to Town, hels the honestest man in all the party; ah, that good man, I
wonder wat's become of him, that I never heard from him, but he was always so
Zealous in hunting after the plaguey Jesuits, and turning up the Old Women's
Smock, for fear the Priests should escape under that disguise; and being
purblind, was forced to thrust his Nose so near the Crevices, that I am afraid
the poor little Knight is snapt up, and lost in some of those dark Quarters of
the World: and here is an Old Geneva Bible, and the rest of my Liberies, that
treats of their Crucified God. I leave 'em to Sr. W -- m: if e're he comes to
see his almost virtuous L -- die, that he may burn 'em all: for he is mighty
ingenious at it: but for my Narrative, the Alcoran, Tom-Thum, Jack-Straw, the
growth of Popery Care's Pacquets, Baxters Call, Bedlows Narrative, Dugdals
Narrative, etc. Let him keep them for the benefit of the Mohammedan Saints, my
Lord Russels Speech must be kept till he is cannonized for a Saint.

My swearing Office and all the Right; and Privileges, thereunto belonging, I
leave to Mr. D -- d -- and Mr. P -- r -- c -- for they are just Men like my
self.

My Ears I leave to Sr. P -- t -- e -- c -- for I am sure heel have occasion
for them, when he appears in public, my Jack-Spit and long Spoon, I leave to
Sidny, to carry with him down into the Country, where the Cabals are now kept,
by Noll, Bradshaw, Tap, and the rest for I hear there would be a great many
more Roasted in that Large, Black Kittle if they had but fruits enough.

The Hangings of my Room (...) Jack (...) for his mouth he shamker'd and hanged
after me this long time and now at last like Old Tapski, I intend to run away,
and Cheat him of our Job. My sweet sanctified Slipers, I leave to Sr. Thomas P
-- to drink a C^^^^ling health to his Whore in, My long shooing Horn, I leave
to Sr. Robert -- C-for his Shoos are apt to pinch, since the Charter was lost,
not but that he has two lovely Antlers of his own, would make better shooing
Horns; but that he is so proud of them he will not suffer them to be cut off;
Zounds, I had like to forgo poor Eustice Cumins, let me see, Oh! you Varlet, go
fetch me that Old Bundle of Tatterdimallions from under my bed; that I came
Mumping from (...) Omers in. Come, come, let me see 'um, Heart and Blood of
Mahomet; what a live yet? Ha, ha, ha, why, they are ten thousand strong, and as
Rampant in their Country gray Liveries, marching in Battle Array, like the
Grand Turks at Vienna, well let him have 'em, he will have as strong a guard as
ever I had; they will incamp in the red Rug he wears about his shoulders for this
W^nte^ Well, I have no more to dispose of, come, come, clear the Room, turn
out, Varlets, Bums and Loobies, march a Board the Ship, in triangle Order that
I may see the Number of fourscore, well Right, go see my Cabin, and all things
be ready, I Will be of the bones on you presently.

MY Friends I imagine you expect a Lecture, or a short Exhortation at parting
and as I am not over stockt with Rethorick unless my infallible Tallent of
swearing, I Will be short with you: for my Text, I will not look for it, for I am
almost as great a stranger to the Alcoran, as yet, as to the Bible, I preach
all by Inspiration. Oh! Popery, Popery's coming in upon you, have a care I say,
of Ant-Christ, and Popery, Remember my words when I am gone. Bind your Nobles
in Fetters, and your Princes in Chains stand up for your Liberties, and
Properties and the good old Cause, for the Liturgy of the English Church is
nothing but Superstition and Popery; the Bishops are all Popes, and the
Clergemen are all Jesuits: Nay the Bible it self, if you search it from one end
to the other: is little better then Popery, it was Popery that brought in the
Bible and as long as there is a Bible in the Nation: You Will nr'e be free from
Popery. Leave the use of Women as I do, least your Children turn Papists and
swear, Blaspheme, Whore, commit Bugggery, Cheat, be Drunk, Lie, Steal, Whine,
Flear, Grin, Houl, Cant, snivel, snarl, scratch, Bite, cut throats and Rebel,
be Damned or any thing to prevent Popery, but I am almost spent,

My Benedicteon on you all, I leave you to the protection of Mahomet and the D
-- l, and so Farewell.
LONDON, Printed for J. Dean 1683


