AN Exact Relation OF THE Persecutions, Robberies, and Losses, sustained by the
Protestants of Killmare, in Ireland.

AN Exact Relation OF THE Persecutions, Robberies, and Losses, sustained by the
Protestants of Killmare, in Ireland.

WITH An Account of their Erecting a Fortress to Defend themselves against the
Bloody Insolences of the Papists.

ALSO, The way and manner of their Happy Escape into England: Together with the
Reasons why the Protestants there did not Regiment themselves, and take the
Field, or make their Flight sooner.

As likewise, Some Natural Conclusions that Plague and Famine will arise
forthwith in that Kingdom.

By a Principal Manager in that Action.

By Authority.

London, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon, in St. Paul's Churchyard;
and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1689:

AN Exact Relation OF THE Persecutions, Robberies, and Losses, sustained by the
Protestants of Killmare, in Ireland.
FInding that most People do admire why so many of the Protestants have left
the Kingdom of Ireland, and why they did not rather choose to get together into
some strong Hold, (like those of Londonderry) and there Defend themselves,
until such time as they could receive Relief out of England, now I have writ
the following Narrative to satisfy all People, that, such of the Protestants
there as were concerned, did what was possible for them to do; which, I hope,
will plainly appear by the following Account.

In the Parish of Killmare, in the County of Kerry, in the Province of Munster,
and Kingdom of Ireland, situate in some of the West, and worst part of that
Kingdom, for Natural Barrenness, environed with Rocky, Boggy, and Woody
fastnesses, ten, twenty, and in some places thirty Miles round; there was a
Colony of Protestants planted by Sir William Petty, in part of his Estate,
which were usually employed upon an Iron-works, and Fishings of Herring,
Pilchard, Mackarel and Salmon, set up there about the year 1670, at his Expense
of above 10000 l. where it appeared by the right numbering of the People, that
there were living about them, upwards of 500 Papists for one of these
Protestants. They very much improved the unfertile Country where they
Inhabited, and lived plentifully (under care of one T -- P --, their Minister,
one of the Justices of the Peace for that County, sometime Judge of the
Ecclesiastical Court, and of the High Court of Admiralty, for some those
Western Parts; and under one R -- O --, Gentleman, Agent for the Lady Petty
(now Baronness of Shelborne) her Son the Lord Baron of Shelborne, and James
Waller, Esquire, until the year 1685, when the general Calamity by taking the
Sword, the Law, and in a manner, all kind of Power and Magistracy whatever, out
of the Hands of the Protestants, began throughout that Kingdom; or in such
places, where it was not wholly taken from them, they were so heavily pressed
upon by Popish Judges, Sheriffs, Mayors, Sovereigns, Provosts, Coroners, and an
over-mixture of Aldermen, Lawyers, and Justices of the Peace, that they
signified very little in Court or Country. Since which time the Protestant
Inhabitants of the Parish of Killmare (a place where the Natives were very
Rebellious, even in the most peaceable times) have been great sufferers through
the many Incursions and Insolences of the Neighboring Papists, and the Evil
Administration of the Laws; the Judges, and all those in Seats of Judicature,
and Places of Authority, not only denying them Justice, but encouraging the
Natives in their Outrages, and wicked behavior toward them, insomuch, that
it grew almost impossible for a Protestant in that Parish, to recover any Debt
or Right from a Papist. These Miseries and Wrongs they underwent patiently,
which ever since November last, were poured forth with more cruelty upon them:
The Officers of the new raised Levies being Persons of broken and desperate
Fortunes, not able to maintain themselves or their Soldiers, were forced to
filch and steal black Cattle and Sheep, all over the Kingdom, for their
Subsistence; and more especially, in the County of Kerry, where the Natives
were more Indigent, the Thieves appeared publicly in great numbers, thirty,
forty, and oftentimes seventy in a Company, well armed with Pikes, Swords,
Guns, Pistols, etc. marching openly through the Glins and Mountains, with
Droves of six or seven score Cows and Bullocks at a time, in such terror to the
Protestants, that when they saw their Cattle hurried away, before their faces,
by the Rogues, they durst not pursue nor enquire for them: But of all the
County, the Protestants in Killmare have endured the greatest Persecution, upon
whom the Malice and Inveteracy of the Papists was exercised with so much
severity, that by the beginning of January following, they were bereft of all
their Cattle and Haggards of Corn; their Barns and Granaries stripped and robbed,
and all the substance they had without Doors forced from them, and nothing left
them to live upon but what little Provision they had in their Houses.
Whereupon, T -- P --, and R -- O --, in behalf of themselves, and the rest of
their Parishoners, made a Draught of their complaints, setting forth at large
the many wrongs and loses they sustained by their Circumjacent Neighbors: And
sent the same to Lieutenant General Justine mac Carthy, Governor of that
Province; and another to Sir Valentine Brown, Governor (under him) of the
County of Kerry; and Petitioned them both for remedy against the Robbers. The
Governors received their Complaints and Petitions very kindly, and Inveighing
vehemently at the behavior of the Villains, that had despoiled them in that
manner, seemed much troubled for the injuries which was done unto the
Petitioners; and at length in six days after, returned upon the backs of their
Petitioners Warrants, impowering the Petitioners to apprehend and bring in the
Malefactors; (remedies, which at such a juncture did not lie well in the power
of the Petitioners to apply;) While the Petitioners were waiting for a return
from the Governors upon their Petitions, behold six of the Petitioners Houses
were in one Night Riffled and Plundered of all that was in them; so that these
poor Protestants were in much Distraction and Consternation, not knowing how to
dispose of themselves for their safety, and fearing that those Rogues who began
to Rob their Houses, would not be content without their Lives also: And being
struck with Reflections upon the Numerousness of the Natives that lived
surroundingly about them, and the direful and dismal Massacre acted upon most
part of the Protestants of that Kingdom in the year 1641. They consulted T. P.
and R. O. what course to take for their preservation; who sent an Express
forthwith to Newmarket to their Friend (Sir R. Ald. near Forty Miles distant
from Killmare) to know from him, how things looked out of England, and to give
them his best advice how to manage themselves for their safety; whereunto Sir
R. A. sent them his answer in these words. That an Army was expected every day,
to Land out of England, that in the mean time the Protestants about Newmarket,
and all over the rest of the County of Cork, sent in their Provisions to the
next Garrisons, and themselves came in after with their Horses and Arms, and
that he thought well to follow their Example.

The Protestants of Killmare upon this, considering that all their Horses
(except about a dousin, which R. O. had preserved by keeping a Watch over them
in his Stable) were Stolen from them; that they had not Money to Hire Horses
from the Natives, to carry their Provisions and Children out of that place;
that they had about Forty Miles, the greatest part of it the worst way for
Boggs, Rocks, and Precipices, and the most Savage People in the Kingdom, to go
through, to Bandon; being the nearest place to them, where they could expect to
join with a Protestant Body; the difficulties and Barbarities that might happen
to themselves, their Wives and small Children, from the inaccessableness of the
Road at that time of the Year, and from their Popish Neighbors: Finding
themselves in the condition of the Persecuted Hugonots of France, that had no
safety at home, and must not (or could not) leave their Houses, to be succored
elsewhere, concluded to stick to each other in a Body, and wait as long as they
could for relief, resolving to stand and die together like men, rather than a
part to be Murdered in their Beds like Dogs, by their Blood-thirsty Neighbors.

Upon the River of Killmare (from whence the Parish has its name) is a House
built by Sir W. P. for his Chief Agent: It Is 44 Foot in length, 22 in breadth 2
Stories and a half high, in it are only four large Rooms and a Garret; It
stands upon a Rock at a place called Killowen, where the Tide flows almost
round, making an Istmus or Peninsula, naturally capable of Fortification. Into
this House they resolve to crowd themselves and their Families. In order
whereto they hastened in their provisions; whilst they were about that, T. P.
and R. O. to render it more Defensive and Formidable, caused Carpenters to put
forth two Bulconia's of Timber and Plank, on two of the opposite corners of the
House, with passages into them from the Garret, for Men to Watch in, and where
they might upon occasion make use of their Firearms: They soon followed in
after their Provisions; the number of their Families were 42, amounting in all
to 180 Men, Women and Children, whereof about 75 Fighting Men; their Arms and
Ammunition were Blunder-busses 4, Muskets, Carbines and Fouling-pieces 40,
Cases of Pistols 20, Swords 36, Pikes 12, and Sythes 6, of Powder 170 l.; with
Ball proportionable: They presently found themselves too much Thronged, and
began think of adding to their Garrison more Room and Strength; and on the 16th
of January, they went unanimously to work, with Spades, Shovells, Pickaxes,
Hand-barrows, etc. 150 of the Natives (who always heretofore had Earned their
Bread from us, and 250 of their Labouring-Horses, were now Hired by him to
hasten this Work; and before the 24th of that Month they finished the same, and
encompassed half an Acre of Land about the House, with a Clodd-wall of 14 Foot
in height, and 12 in thickness; with Flankers, etc. in the manner of an
Irregular Pentagon; within the Wall they Built slender Livings, and small
Hutts, of half Inch Planck, for Lodges for some of their Families, such as they
could quickly pull down again; that they might be no hindrance to them, when
action should be required. And for further confirmation of their unity, they
entered into the following Association.

ASSOCIATION.
WE the undernamed, do hereby in Defense of our Lives and Religion, Associate
our selves in a Body, within the Fort of Killowen; against the Enemies of the
Protestant Church: And will from time to time, to the utmost of our Power
behave our selves according to all such Directions as shall be given us, by T.
P. and R O. for our management and Safety; until we are received into Command
of His Highness the Prince of Orange. In Testimony whereof, We have taken our
Oaths upon the Holy Changelists, and put our Hands and Seals, the last day of
January 1688/9.

Their Popish Neighbors were much disgusted hereat, finding that by this
contrivance they were stopped from committing further Robberies upon these
Protestants: Besides, hereby they conceived themselves frustrated in their base
private designs, which they intended about that time to Execute upon the body
of R. O. For they were much bent against him, because that in the very height
of Popery in that Kingdom, he stood up vigorously for the Protestants, and
their Religion. And because he had brought to Condign Punishment several of the
Papists, for wrongs done to the Protestants of that place; particularly Daniel
Mac Tiege Carthy, one of those that Murdered Edward Gilks a Smelter, for
endeavoring to defend himself, from being Robbed at Noon day, of 40 s. which
they knew he had about him, in the Year 1680. Owen Sulwan, (a loose Gentleman)
for coming unawares behind R. O. in a Dark Night, and running him through the
Body with a Sword, for offering to recover a Debt due to him from Sulwan's
Friend in the Year 1680. Teague a Glanna and others that Murdered the
Pursivant, for daring to come into that part of the Country, to arrest a Papist
at the suit of Sir William Petty, or of any Protestant whatever, in the Year
1685. Daniel mac Dermot, and half a Score others, for Robbing a parcel of
French Protestants, that having escaped out of France, were by Stress of
Weather forced into the River of Killmare, in the Year 1686. Daniel Cruoly, and
7 more Tories, that in the Year 1687, attempted to Murder and Rob R. O. and his
Brother, but without success, their Captain having received a Shot in the Head,
and two more of the chief of them in the Shoulder and Thigh; being made
Prisoners they Lived till they were Hanged at the Assizes following: The
greatest part of all these Malefactors were severely Prosecuted by R. O. some
of them were Hanged, some Burnt in the Hand, some remained in Gaol, and the
rest dispersed and fled out of the Country.

Within this Fort the small handful of Protestants of Killmare reckoned
themselves safe, from their injurious Neighbors; knowing that no ordinary
Force could hurt them, and that it was not very possible for an Army to March
into that Country with any Train of Artillery, by reason of the many Steep, and
Craggy Hills that are round about it, and no way to harm them but by Water.
Moreover, when an Army should Land out of England, the Papists Garrisons could
have but little opportunity to spare their Cannon in sending of it against this
place. And not only in this, but in all Protestant holds within our knowledge,
the English were much heartned to proceed in this manner: For 'twas verily
believed by them, and daily expected, that an Army would Land out of England in
some part of Munster: And therefore put themselves into such preparations to
receive and join with them: And these of Killmare, accounted themselves in
their own Station no less Serviceable than others: For when the Prince should
please to send his Forces, to quiet that unruly Kingdom, it is not to be doubted
that great companys of Robbers, Tories, and Free Booters would flee into these
Western parts for shelter, as many did, in the last Rebellion, where they were
never perfectly subdued, nor the Laws of England duly Executed: None could be
more active in pursuing them in these deserts, than the Protestants of
Killmare, that were well acquainted with every Nook and Corner in all the
Glinns and Mountains for 20, and in some places 30 Miles round them.

Having as they thought secured themselves within this their new Fortification,
they acquainted Lieutenant General Mac Carthy, and Sir Valentine Brown, his
Deputy Governor therewith, who approved thereof, and expressed themselves much
grieved at the several Robberies, and Villainies of the Natives, which urged
them to this way of safety; against whom they desired the Governors again to
proceed to have them brought in, and punished, which they faithfully promised
should be forthwith done: But the Governors neglecting to suppress the
Robbers, R. O. resolved to put the Warrants in Execution, which they formerly
obtained upon their Petitions, that these Governors might not have to say
another day, that they were not only complained unto, but that their Warrants
were also Executed upon the Malefactors; and in the night he went out with a
Party of the Garrisoners into the Glinns and Mountains, where they took six of
the known Robbers, and found with them several of the Goods which were lately
before Robbed and Stolen from some of the Garrisoners; these together with the
Goods were brought into the Garrison, and afterward the Prisoners were
delivered to some Officers, appointed by the Governors to take charge of them,
but were soon set at liberty again upon insolvent Bail.

By this time the 25th of February was come, being the day appointed for
disarming all the Protestants in that Kingdom: At one of the Clock in the
Morning, the Irish Soldiers to the number of 3000 commanded by Captain Phelin
Mac Carthy, and several other Captains came up to the Gates of the Garrison,
with intent to have surprised the Garrisoners in their Beds; but by a shot made
by one of the Watch, they were Alarmed, and the Soldiers stood off; when 'twas
light the Garrisoners sent forth to know what they were, and their business,
and admitted one of the Irish Captains into the Garrison; who told them plainly
that his Errand was to have from them their Horses, Arms and Ammunition, and
delivered a Letter from Sir Valentine Brown, to T. P. and R. O. importing the
same, and promising (that if they would surrender,) to make good what ever
conditions they should make with the Officers; and produced an Authority under
the Hand and Seal of the Governors, impowering the Irish Captains, in case of
resistance to compel submission by Fire and Sword. The Garrisoners refused to
submit, and put themselves in readiness to receive the onset of the Besiegers,
who still lay before the Garrison; a spy was also sent abroad into the County
of Cork, who in 4 Days time returned with an account that the Protestants in
Cork were Disarmed: That Castlemarter was Surrendered, and that Bandon was but
in little better condition.

Now the Garrisoners of Killmare began to see their misery approaching toward
them, all their hopes of speedy relief from England being blasted, of which
till then they were very confident; for the Protestants were not only sure of
it, as they thought, but even the Lord Deputy, Lieutenant General Mac Carthy,
and all other Governors throughout the Kingdom, seemed to be very fearful of
of the Prince's Invading Ireland. The Dublin News Letter about Christmas last,
gave an account that an English Army was Shipped off designed for Ireland, which
was confirmed by other News, giving a farther account, that meeting with
contrary Winds they put back again; other Shams were likewise dispersed in all
Places, as, that, though they were daily raising new Forces in Ireland,
nevertheless the Lord Deputy had sent Proposals to the Prince for laying down
the Sword, etc. Whilst indeed, they were mannaging the grand design for Rooting
out the Protestants, and Establishing Popery in that Kingdom; which delusions
of the one party, and credulity of the other, proved afterward to be of sad
consequence to most of the Protestants of that disorded Nation. For, through
the expectation of an Army out of England, they made little or no manner of
Provision for their Flight; neither could they form themselves into Regiments,
partly because there were no Commissions sent to any of them from the Prince,
and partly that they were not too prone to make themselves the first
Instruments of a War, which perhaps was about being composed without drawing
the Sword on either side; and so by over-acting might have brought upon
themselves the frowns, rather than the countenace of their Prince. Nevertheless
they put themselves into some defensive posture, to the end that they might be
found together upon the Armies Landing; and seeing they mist Surprising the
City of Cork, which was once in agitation, and had probably taken effect, had
not the design been discovered by one of their Bosom Friends. It was to no
purpose, to endeavor what was aimed at, in making Bandon a place to sit down
in against so powerful an Enemy, as appeared to the Solid and Wise Earl of
Inchiqueen; who, though he concluded to Reinforce that Town with his party of
Horse, yet foreseeing the ill success that would follow the defending a
Garrison of no Strength, declined his Resolution, and sent Advice to the
Bandonian Gentlemen to surrender upon making good Terms, lest they might Perish
by their perseverance; and though they blamed him abundantly for this
Admonition, it is manifestly the best Counsel that ever they received, for if he
had assisted them with the Horse aforesaid, they would have proved most
ignorantly resolute (though for Courage they were fit to serve the bravest of
Princes) and expired by their own fool-hardiness. It Is also to be doubted, that
had they succeeded in their design of seizing the City of Cork, they could
have kept it but a short time (with a parcel of people so unexperienced in
Martial Affairs, and among whom there was no Order or Government) against the
whole Army of the Kingdom, of which great part were modeled and exercised for
some years before: For if Londonderry, whose Walls, Water, and whose People
are Numerous, and situation are extraordinary, has been so closely beset with
the French and Irish, how could poor Cork, (whose Walls and Water are but
ordinary, and liable in several places for battery against it, particularly
Blarny Hill, from whence the whole City, in defiance of Shandon Castle, could
be laid to Ashes) with Undisciplined people, defend it self in the very heart
of a Papist Country.

Another Question is also very common: Why did not the Protestants in Munster,
and thereabouts, repair to Londonderry? To which it is Answered, That soon
after the Prince's Landing in England, and the Protestants rising in the North
of Ireland, all the Passes to the North, from the rest of the Kingdom, were
secured by the Papists, and several (sometimes thirty together) of the
Protestants were taken Prisoners, as they were going from Dublin, and other
places toward the North; and so carefully were these Passes kept, that they
would not suffer 3 men to travel together through the Kingdom; and moreover,
who would flee from the West of Ireland to the North for refuge, while the
English Army was daily expected to Land in Munster. Thus a distracted people
for want of Head or Commissions to lead them, or instructions out of England to
direct them, were brought to ruin, and a prey to Ravenous and Merciless
Papists.

Hereupon these Garrisons of Killmare finding themselves not able to make a
long defense when the Cannon (being not otherwise diverted) could be brought
against them by water, concluded it to be more agreeable with honor and good
conscience to yield with safety of their lives, in hopes another day to serve
their Prince, rather than rashly, or obstinately to perish in defense of a
Garrison which they could not maintain, and therefore entered into the
following Articles with the chief of the Besiegers.

I.

That they were not to plunder, nor suffer the Rabble to take away any goods
belonging to the Garrisoners.

II.

That the Garrisoners were to have their Swords left with them, according to
the Governors promise, by his Letter concerning that particular.

III.

That they were to have their Liberties to remain in their Garrison, or their
own Houses, and to depart the Kingdom when they please.

Upon these Terms the Garrisoners delivered up their Horses, Arms and
Ammunition, which was no sooner done, but they found the Old Proverb of not
keeping Faith with an Heretic, preferred before strong promises and perfected
Articles of Agreement; for immediately after they had given up their Arms, the
Officers filled the Garrison with Soldiers, and brought as many as could stand
by one another, into every Room of the House; and having Plundered the
Garrisoners of all their Provision and Goods, did afterward turn them out of
their Garrison in a most miserable and starving condition.

It happened, that a little before the Disarming of these Protestants, the
beforementioned J. -- W --, Esquire, (who was then in London, having regard to
the condition that the English of that Country were in) left behind him two
small Barques (of near 30 Tun both,) to carry off the English of that place, in
case they found themselves not able to keep together, until such time of as an
Army should come to their Relief.

Into these two Vessels (to which under God these Protestants owe their
deliverance) they put themselves, Men, Women and Children, except 8 Families
which the Officers compelled to stay behind (as Slaves) to work for them at
their Iron-works, which none of the Natives were Skilful in.

Being thus got on Board, the Irish Captains (to leave not one Article
unbroken) ordered that the Sails should be taken away from both Ships, to
disable them from going to Sea. Home again, they could not return, for their
Garrison and Dwelling Houses were possessed by the Natives; and to Sea they
were not suffered. Here the Passengers were kept on Board for the space of 8
days, in a very loathsome condition, pack't like Fish one upon another, the
violence of the sharp weather forcing them to keep close under the Hatches; and
this Inhumane usage they received from these Barbarous Officers, without
showing any sort of Reason why they should not proceed on their Voyage. At last
one Maurice Hussy, (Captain Lieutenant to Governor Brown,) a Man somewhat
more compassionate than the rest, told them, that notwithstanding their
Articles, they were stopped for fear they would go for England: Whereupon, R. O.
was forced to pass a Bond of 5000 l. Conditioned that they would Sail to Cork,
and that all the Passengers of these two Ships must deliver themselves up,
under the care of the Governor of that City.

The losses of R. O. are his Estate worth 170 l. per. Ann. and Iron-works,
furnished with Mine, Coals, and a stock of Bar, and Sow-Iron, worth 1500 l.
Sterling: In black Cattle, Horses, and Book Debts 1200 l. In Bonds for Money at
Interest: The losses of T. P. are his Livings, worth 200 l. per Ann. in Cattle
Goods and Debts 550 l. The rest of these Protestants lost among them in Black
Cattle, Horses, Debts, etc. 1100 l. Sterling.

Notwithstanding the Robberies of Corn, Cows, Bullocks, Sheep Swine and other
provisions, forced away by the Papists from the Protestants all over the
Kingdom of Ireland: It Is to be feared that God Almighty, will in his good time,
punish that Nation with Hunger if not great Famine and that very soon; unless
it can be supplied from Foreign parts. For the generality of the Robbers,
Filchers and Stealers, especially abroad in the Country, are most of them such
as always fared very meanly, perhaps not above 4 good Meals of Flesh in the
Year; and now abounding with plenty of the Ruins of the Protestants, are in
competition, who shall spend most and make greatest havoc: The Protestants
being (among the rest) Robbed of their Ploughing-Horses and Oxen, and the
Papists wholly employed in taking their substance from them, at the time when
all should look to the Ploughing of their Ground: It appears that little
Provision is made for Corn against the ensuing Season; so that it is expected,
that there will be great scarcity of Grain, and all other Food.

It may not be irrationally conjectured, to have a Plague likewise to break
forth among the Natives of that Kingdom, before the end of this Summer 1689, by
reason of the corruptions that may grow in their Bodies, and in the Air of
their Villages and Cottages, that are still reaking with the slaughter of so
much Meat, handled and dressed with too much nastiness of a people, that from low
Penury started into Pride and Plenty, Glorying in their Beastiliness of greedy
devouring and over-gorging themselves with Flesh, half-raw-half-roasted,
sometimes half-boiled half-rotten and Stinking for want of Salt; some, times
moving toward the Boyler, by the assistance of the wriggling Crawlers, that
lately before received their Birth from the same piece of Flesh.

The aforementioned Bond of 5000 l. being perfected, the Sails were restored,
and the Passengers slipping no opportunity, Sailed thence on the 10th of March;
all the Provision which was allowed them for the Voyage and their Subsistence
when they should come to Cork, was only five Barrels of Beef, Forty Gallons of
Oatmeal and some unbaked Dough (as is in the days of Old with the Israelites
fleeing out of Egypt) but of Water they had enough; and being got to Sea out
of the reach of their Enemies, they concluded to Sail for Bristol, resolving
without respect to an Extorted, Bond to beg their Bread in England, rather than
come again under the Hands of the Papists, whose Mercies are very Cruelties.
The Masters of these two Ships were not Expert in Navigation, but were Skilful
only in Coasting about those Western parts: So that T. P. and R. O. having some
insight therein took upon them to shape the Course; and after the delays of
some Calms and contrary Winds, which met them at Sea, both these Ships with
Gods assistance arrived at Bristol on the 25th of March aforesaid, where these
Passengers were put on Shore in a very needy Condition, and most of them great
objects of Charity; whereof the Mayor of that City was pleased to take notice,
and ordered Collections to be made for their Relief.

Soon after they Landed three of them Dyed, through the Injury they received on
Board for Twenty Days, in Colds and Hats, Soaking in their Clothes and Stowed
one upon another, and through extreme Thirst, Drinking over much Water, so
distempered and infected their Blood, that most of them were afflicted with
violent Feavours, Flux, and a more than ordinary sort of Meazles. The greatest
part of them being come up to London, are many of them Relieved and
Entertained, by the Right Honorable the Lady Baroness of Shelborne; some are
waiting before the Commissioners for distributing Relief to the Distressed
Protestants of that Kingdom; and the rest according to their several
Capacities, have disposed of themselves in the Army, designed for reducing of
Ireland.

FINIS.
Advertisement of Books lately Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon, in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
POpish Treachery, or a Short and New Account of the Horrid Cruelties Exercised
on the Protestants in France; being a true Prospect of what is to be Expected
from the most Solemn Promises of Roman Catholic Princes: In a Letter from a
Gentleman of that Nation, to one in England.

A Critical History of the Text of the New Testament, where is firmly
Established the Truths of those Acts, in which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid; by Father Simon.

A Justification of the Proceedings, of their Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary; of their Royal Highnesses Prince George, and Princess Ann; of the
Convention Army, Ministers of State, and others, in this great Revolution. By
Authority.

A True Narrative of all the Proceedings against the Lord Bishop of London, in
the Council Chamger at White Hall, by the Lords Commissioners appointed by His
Majesty, for Ecclesiastical Affairs.

FINIS.

