TWENTY PRECEPTS, OR, Rules of Advice to a Son:
By a late Eminent LAWYER.
1. I Advise you not to come too soon from the University, and also to make
some inspection into Physic, and the Law, as well as Divinity, for they will
contribute to make your Company acceptable wherever you come. But prosecute
not, beyond a superficial knowledge, any Learning that moves upon no stronger
Legs than the tottering Basis of Conjecture is able to afford it.

2. No study is worth a Man's whole employment, that comes not accompanied with
Profit, or such unanswerable Reasons, as are able to answer and silence all
future debate, not to be found out of the Mathematics, the Queen of Truth,
that imposes nothing upon her Subjects, but what she proves due to belief by
infallible Demonstration. The only knowledge we can gain on Earth, likely to
attend us to Heaven.

3. Huge Volumes may proclaim plenty of Labor and Invention, but afford less
of what is delicate, savoury, and well concocted, than lesser pieces: Humane
sufficiency being too narrow to inform with the pure soul of Reason such vast
Bodies. You may gain more natural and useful Knowledge, by being conversant in
the Speeches, Declarations, and Transactions occasioned by the late unhappy
Wars, than is ordinarily to be found in the moldy Records of Antiquity. The
Understanding is nourished more by a few Books well Studied, than by great
numbers curiously run over, as is the Practice of most Students.

4. Let not an over-passionate prosecution of Learning draw you from making an
honest improvement of your Estate, as such do, who are better read in the
bigness of the whole Earth, than that little spot left them by their Ance-stors
for their support.

5. Be sure never to lend your Money upon the Public Faith, for he that does
so, becomes security for his own Money; and can blame no body more than himself
if never paid: Common Debts like Common Lands lying most neglected.

6. Honesty treats with the World upon such vast disadvantage, that a Pen is
often as useful to defend you as a Sword, by making Writing the Witness of all
your Contracts: For where Profit appears, it does commonly cancel all the Bands
of Friendship, Religion, and the memory of any thing that can produce no other
Register than what is Verbal. Measure the End of all Counsels, though uttered
by never so intimate a Friend.

7. When you are inclined to enter into the state of Marriage, make not a
celebrated Beauty the Object of your Choice, unless you are ambitious of
rendering your House as populous as a Confectioners Shop; to which the gaudy
Wasps no less than the liquorish Flies, make it their business to resort, in
hope of obtaining a Lick at your Hony-pot; which though bound up with the
strongest Obligations; yet Feminine Vessels are obnoxious to so many Frailties,
as they can hardly bear without breaking; such Pride and Content they naturally
take in seeing themselves adored. Marriage is most freed from such
inconveniences as may obstruct Fellcity, when accompanied with a good Estate;
therefore take the true extent of her Estate before you entail your self upon
the Owner. And in this common Fame is not to be trusted, which for the most
part dilates a Portion beyond its natural bounds, proving also not seldom
litigious, and that given by Will questionable; by which Husbands are tied to a
Black-Box, more miserable than that of Pandora. Yet take one who thinks her
self rather beneath than above you in Birth; since Honorable Persons, as is
reported of Eagles Feathers in a Bed, consume all not of the same Plume. Riches
were in a like predicament in relation to Pride, but easier passed by, because
best able to bear the Charges of her own Folly; whereas lean Honor, like
Pharaoh's Kine, devours the Gentry with whom they match, by multiplying the
quantity of their Expenses.

8. If you happen to Travel, let not the Irreligion of any place breed in you a
neglect of Divine Duties; remembering God heard the Prayers of Daniel in
Babylon, with the same attention he gave to David's in Sion. Shun all Disputes,
but especially concerning Religion; because that which commands in chief,
though false and erroneous, will, like a Cock on's own Dunghill, line her
Arguments with force, and drive the Stranger out of the Pit with insignificant
clamours.

9. A multitude m^amed under a Religious pretense, is at first as unsafely
opposed as joined with; resembling Bears exasperated by the cry of their
Whelps, and do not seldom, if unextinguished by hope or delays, consume all
before them, to the very thing they intend to preserve. The Example of Brutus
rather than Cato is to be followed in bad times; it being safer to be patient
than active; or appear a Fool than a Malecontent. Make not the Law, assigned
for a Buckler to defend your self, a Sword to hurt others. Be not the Pen or
Mouth of a Multitude congregated by the gingling of their Fetters, lest a
Pardon or Compliance knock them off, and leave you as the soul of that wicked
and deformed Body, hanging in the Hell of the Law, or you be justly left to the
vengeance of an exasperated Power. If Authority requires an acknowledgment from
you, give it with all readiness; and let not the Example of a few Fools tempt
you to dispute the matter with those, under whom the disposure of your person
does wholly remain.

10. Look not upon it as any disparagement to your discretion or birth, to give
Honor to New Families; for it cannot be denied but that they have ascended by
the like steps as those that have the repute of Ancient. New being a Term only
respecting us, not the World; for what is now, was before, and will be when we
are gone.

11. It is truly said that War follows Peace, and Peace War, as Summer does
Winter, and foul Weather fair: And none are ground more in this Mill of
Vicissitudes, than such obstinate Fools as glory in the repute of State-martyrs
after they are dead; which concerns them less than what was said a thousand
years before they were born.

12. Be not liquorish after Fame, found by Experience to carry a Trumpet, that
does for the most part congregate more Enemies than Friends. The consideration
of the inconstancy of Common Applause, and that many have had their Fame broken
upon the same Wheel that raised it, and puffed out by the same Breath that
kindled the first report of it, should admonish you not to be elevated with the
smiles, nor dejected at the frowns of that gaudy Goddess, formed out of no more
sollid matter than the Foam of the Multitude.

13. Be not persuaded by any above you, to bear a part in the carrying on of
any Design whereby you may run the hazard of falling under the punishment of
the Law; for if you miscarry, you will meet with no better assistance or
commiseration, (even by those that put you upon it) than the imputation of
Folly, and want of discretion in the management.

14. Write not the Faults of Persons near the Throne, in any Nation where you
reside, lest your Letters should be intercepted, and you sent out of the World
before your time. But reserve such discourse for the (...) or your Master, into
which you must pour it with more Caution than Malice; lest it should be
discovered, as it is odds but it will, and then the next endeavor is revenge.
It is an office unbecoming a Gentleman, to be an Intelligencer, which in real
Truth is no better than a Spy; who are often brought to the Torture, and dye
miserably, though no words are made of it, being an use connived at by some
Princes.

15. As for your Religion, I can approve of no Doctrine for Magisterial
Divinity, but that which is found floating in the unquestioned sense of the
Scriptures; but advise you to follow that of the Reformation, ( viz. The Church
of England as by Law Established) as most conformable to the Duty we owe to God
and the Magistrate. The Schismatic is so fiery that he cannot last long
unconsumed, being ready upon the least advantage to melt all into Sedition, not
sparing to burn the Fingers of Government longer than they shower down Offices
and Preferments upon him.

16. As for your Converse, despise none for meanness of Blood, yet do not
ordinarily make them your Companions, for debasing your own, unless you find
them clarified by excellent Parts, or gilded by Fortune or Power: Solomon
having sent the Sluggard to the Pismire, to learn industry; and to the living
Dog rather than to the dead Lion for Protection.

17. When you speak to any, (especially of Quality) look them full in the Face,
other Gestures bewraying want of Breeding, Confidence, or Honesty; dejected
Eyes confessing, to most judgments, Guilt or Folly.

18. Live so frugally, that you may reserve something to enable you to grapple
with any future contingency* And provide in Youth, since fortune has this
property with other common Mistresses, that she deserts Age, especially in the
Company of want.

19. Though it may suit no less with your years than mine that advise you, to
follow such Fashions in Apparel, as are in use as well at home as abroad, those
being least gazed on that go as most men do: Yet it cannot be justified before
the Face of Discretion, or the Charity due to your own Countrymen, to esteem
no Doublet well made, nor Glove worth wearing, that has not passed the hands
of a French Tailor, or retains not the scent of a Spanish Perfumer. A vanity
found incident to the People of England.

20. All your days serve God with all the reverence you are able, and do all
the good you can, making as little unnecessary work for Repentance as is
possible. And the Mercy of our Heavenly Father supply all your Defects in the
Son of his Love.

Amen.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for B. Heath, 1682.


