The Second Part Of the DISPLAY OF Tyranny: OR REMARKS UPON The Illegal and
Arbitrary Proceedings in the Courts of Westminster, and Guild Hall London. From
the Year, 1678. To the Abdication of the late King James, in the Year 1688. In
which time, the Rule was, Quod Principi placuis, Lexesto.

Printed, Anno Anglia Salutis Secundo, 1690. Sold by Booksellers in London and
Westminster.

TO The Eminently Deserving and Highly Honored Sr Samuel Barnardiston, Baronet.
Sir!
YOu are no more able to deliver your self from the Persecution of a
dedication, than you were, in your single Person, to stem the dreadful deluge
of Popery and Tyranny, which very lately brought Old England within an Hair's
breadth of that utter Ruin that was manifestly impending.

Indeed, when I first took the resolution of inscribing your honored Name, to
the first part of my Scriblings, I purposed to have petitioned your License so
to do; but at the time when the thing was finished, I was at such a great
distance from you, that I had not opportunity to do it, and therefore (being no
nearer to you at this time) I do implore your Pardon for my Presumption
therein, and for my repeating that Transgression; and do hope that you will the
more readily grant it; when I have made this public Acknowledgement to the
World (in case any thing I have said be deemed offensive, which I hope there
cannot) that Sr Samuel Barnardiston was no way privy to the writing of the
First, or of this Second part of these Stories; and that I can (upon very good
ground) say, that he does not, to this day, know who is the Collector of them.

Sir! He who is not allowed to use a Sword in his Countries quarrel, may surely
be indulged in crying out Murder, Treason; when he sees a Pistol at his
Prince's head, or a Dagger at his Heart; and having, with grief, beheld that
very same Toryism, which murdered the best of Men, my good Lord Russell, and
many others of our best Patriots; to be rampant and impudent; and as
irreconcilably bent against the true Government of England, which the glorious
and most miraculous providence of Heaven, has lately devolved upon our
undoubted rightful King and Queen, as it was against our late blessed Martyrs
for the English Liberties; I could not withhold my self from attempting the
service of my Generation (according to my mean capacity) in exposing those
Principles and Practices which but the other day had brought the Kingdom to the
very brink of irreparable ruin; especially, when I see at this very day, the
Men who had sucked in that Poison, Designing and Plotting (not to allure, but)
to dragoon us into French Bondage.

The truth of it is (Sr.) I was much irritated to the prosecution of this Work,
by what I met with in my return from the late Trial of Skill in Essex; when
those most worthy Gentlemen, Colonel Mildmay and Sr. Fran. Masham were elected
Knights for that County; I have heard that it has been an old Observation,
that though many Honorable, Reverend and Worthy Persons, have frequently voted
against your self, in Suffolk; and against Colonel Mildmay in Essex; yet, that
it has been rarely seen, that a Tory has voted for either of you: And it is
well remembered, that at the time of the mighty struggling between Popery and
Christianity in the Critical Year of 1681. the then Lord Chief Justice Scroggs
sent for many of the Gentlemen of Essex, and told them that whatever they did,
they must not choose Mildmay.

But I have digressed, what I was saying, is, Rigby was one of the Good and
True Men, whom the great Care of Sr. Dudley North had returned to pass upon my
Lord Russel's Life, and he stood in that Panel within two of Oneby, who was
last sworn.
that one Mr. Rigby of Covent Garden ( I name him because he stands indicted in
Essex for the Crime I am mentioning) returning from voting at that Election
(upon the 11th of March last) and being to a high degree enraged, that Colonel
Mildmay and Sr. Francis Masham were chosen (for you must know he was of the other
side) said, that 'twas no matter who carried the day there; But if the King
would not do as they would have him ( innuendo himself, and he knows who
besides; But I am most certain my Lord of Oxford does not) They would make a
King that should do as They would have him: And, this being upon the Eve of the
Fast appointed by their Majesty's Proclamation, he proceeded, adding, We must
keep a damned Fast to morrow, This most Loyal Disciple of Sr. Roger's, and
designed Jury-man for my Lord Russel, (taking Pet because Colonel Mild may was
chosen a Parliament Man) must now by all means have a King of his own making,
and it is six and twenty to one but if the Silly Woman had pledged him K.
James's Health, but the next Glass had bin to our Lord Lewis, King Elect.
but we will eat Roasted Beef and be Drunk. He then put a glass of Wine into a
very Civil Woman's hand, saying, Drink King James 's Health; and upon her
answering him, No, I deny that, but I will drink the Wine; he said, Damn you
for a Bitch, would it might poison you where you stand; and added, A Bitch to
deny a Gentleman such a Request, She deserves to be Sacrificed.

Sr. I cannot upon this occasion of Health-drinking, hinder my self from
remembering the Case of Mr. Elias Best, a substantial Citizen (but one who had
been an Ignoramus Juryman, a great Reproach, and an unpardonable Crime in that
day, as you (Sr.) very feelingly know) He was indicted for the Frolic of
drinking to the Pious Memory of Honest Stephen College, and condemned to a
Fine of 1000 l. to stand Three Times in the Pillory, and to give Sureties for
the Good Behavior for Life. Upon this Judgment he was imprisoned Three Years;
to the loss of good Trade, and to the ruin of his Health and his Estate; and
when almost ready to expire, he was graciously pardoned, upon payment of 200 l.
to the Empson and Dudley of the late Reign; Graham and Burton: It Is well for
Mr. Rigby, that the accursed Practices of that day, are not to be Presidents,
in the present benign and most merciful Reign.

Sr! I have no sinister nor mercenary end in emitting these Papers to public
view; I write not for reward (for I gave away as many scores of the first part
of this Tract, as the Printer gave me, and have not one for my self,) and I
should be vain, to the highest degree, to expect applause, for so confused and
ill digested a Work, as this is; But I have with a good will (though in a very
feeble manner) brandished my Pen for the service of that good old Cause which I
ever loved and must love, should it cost me my life, I mean the Liberties of
England; and it has deeply wounded me, to hear and know so many instances as I
do, of the unpunished (nay, of the uncheckt) Seditious and Traiterous
discourses and boastings, of the Factious and Malecontent Party, which I
encounter; ( I mean not Papists, for I know not one Person avowedly so, about
London) as though the whole Nation were ready (as the Men I talk of vainly
flatter themselves) by a unanimous and universal consent, to degenerate and
apostatize to Popery and Slavery: But Methinks they should be too early and too
quick in their expectation, that the English Nation should no sooner see the
Yoke of the Oppressors in a most wonderful manner broken, by the immediate hand
of Heaven; but it should tamely submit unto (nay Court, with them) the
intolerable Yoke of France; and that at a Juncture when it is thrown off, by a
Bigoted Popish Prince, who has been for a long time an unhappy Instrument in
the hands of the Bloody Tyrant of France, to the oppressing and destroying the
most ancient, pure and best Christians upon the Face of the Earth, the Vaudois.

That we have such a Race of Animals, walking, and that with no more than two
Legs apiece, amongst us; is too well known to be denied or dissembled; and one
would think that their Practices, which are so grossly evil, and eminently
dangerous, should not be countenanced or defended; but (which is to be
lamented) they have their powerful Abettors and Patrons; and therefore, it is to
be wished, that their Edge may be blunted, and their effronted Impudence duly
censured.

Sir! As to these Collections (if that may be any invitation to your throwing
away a very few hours upon their perusal) I do assure you, that I have made
them, with all due regard to Truth; and am not conscious of one Mistake or
untruth in the whole Work; my Care in that point has put me to much trouble and
some charge; for where I doubted, I have traveled to receive true and certain
Information of matters of Fact; and such Materials as I wanted, which were upon
Record, I fetched from thence; and therefore, the certainty of matters here
told, must atone for the want of Method and delighting Language.

I had the Promise (and so I thought assurance) of some things, at least as
valuable, as the best things in this Tract can be esteemed to be; but some Men
are too zealously intent and busy in their private Affairs, to be
publick-spirited (though I remember the time when they were eminently so) and
therefore, (to touch that Point no further at present) I shall only say, I have
done Vt potui; and wish that some other Person, who could have done this to
more advantage had undertaken the Task; I am (what I always was, and ever will
be)

SIR Your Honourer and most humbly-devoted Servant.
July 10th, 1690.
To the Publick-Spirited READER.
It Is not my design in this Address to commend this Pamphlet, or to invite Thee
to throw away thy time or money upon it; for I must tell thee truly, that though
the Matters here treated of are worthy of any Man's considering; and are not to
be forgotten; yet the Disadvantages and Discouragements which I have been
under, in compiling the History thereof, have been such; that when thou go
to read them, thou will, I doubt, meet with disappointment; and fall short of
the satisfaction thou may promise thy self; for it will appear short,
immethodical and very confused; but I did my best: here is a geat deal of
matter brought into a narrow compass; and the thing had heen something
valuable, if some Persons had furnished the Materials which they promised; and
others had, in time, found leisure to lend what I at last obtained; but they
came late to my hand, so that I could not methodize what thou here find,
better, or otherwise than thou see: If thou dislikest the Book, upon these,
or any other Reasons, thou may let alone; and then there is no Harm done. And,

And after this fair Caution, thou will buy and read it, and the nature of the
thing should render it any way grateful; and thou can find in thy heart to
employ a little time in a Work of this kind, in which I have quite tired my
self, I do here present thee with Heads sufficient to fill a Folio (viz.) The
Trial and Case of him who is the best Pattern for Magistrates in England: That
of the Right Honorable Sr Thomas Pilkington (most happily at this time, Lord
Mayor of London) with the Duke of York; wherein a Hertfordshire-Jury gave the
Duke 100000 l. Damages.

His Lordship's Trial with Bolsworth, wherein a Surry-Jury gave the Perfumer
800 l. Damages.

The Trial of Sr Patience Ward, upon a Pretense of Perjury; but in truth for
putting the Inscription upon the Monument, notifying to the Ages to come, that
the Papists burnt London.

The Trials of Sr Trevor Williams, Mr Arnold and Mr Colt with the Duke of
Beaufort.

The Trial of the Grave and most Pious and highly learned Mr Baxter.

The two Trials of the Reverend and eminently learned Divine, and incomparable
good Englishman, Mr Johnson, the Confessor for the English Liberties

The Proceedings between the Duke of York and Mr Covert of Chichester; wherein
100000 l. Damages were given to the Duke.

The Prosecution of Mr Aaron Smith, for his honest and undaunted Assistance of
Stephen College at Oxford; And for his not Witnessing against Colonel Sidney,
according to the Advice of Sr A. P.

The Trial of Mr Gutch of Bath, with a Bishop.

The Prosecutions and Trials of Mr Roswel the Minister, Mr Whitaker, Mr Wilmer,
Mr Culliford, Mr Best, Mr Samuel Harris, Mr Joseph Brown, cum multis alijs.

My good Friend, I have here cut thee out Work, and therefore not to detain
thee from it, I bid thee heartily Farewell.

The CONTENTS.
REmarks upon the Trial of Mr Braddon and Mr Speak, in relation to the Murder
of the Earl of Essex, page 1. An Abstract of Proofs made before the House of
Lords, in relation to the Earl of Exssex's Murder, page 31. Remarks upon the
proceedings in the King's Bench in the Case of Fitz-Harris. page 52. Heads of
the Speeches and Resolves in the Oxford Parliament about Fitz-Harris, p. 57.
The Protest of the Lords upon the Refusal of the Impeachment against
Fitz-Harris, p. 64. The Indictment and Plea of Fitz-Harris in the Court of
King's Bench, p. 67. Tue Arguments upon the Plea, p. 75. The Trial of
Fitz-Harris at the King's Bench Bar, p. 122. The Libel given in Evidence
against Fitz-Harris, as it was read to the Jury, p. 127. The Examination of
Fitz-Harris by Sr Robert Clayton and Sr George Treby, p. 149. Remarks
thereupon, and upon Dr Hawkins his Sham Confession, published in the Name of
Fitz. Harris, p. 153. Remarks upon Mrs Gannt's Trial, p. 159. Mrs Gaunt's
Speech, p. 166. Remarks upon the Trial of Mr Joseph Hayes, p. 172. A touch of
Mr Roswell's Trial, p. 199. Remarks upon Mr Charles Bateman's Trial. p. 201.
Remarks upon my Lord Delamere's Trial, p. 217. The Fanatical Presentment of the
Cheshire Grand Jury, in 1683, against my Lord of Macclesfield, my Lord
Delamere, and twenty six more of the honorable and most valuable Gentlemen of
that County, p. 268. Heads of Informations before the House of Lords, about the
Murders of my Lord Russell, Col. Sidney, Sr Tho. Armstrong, Mr Cornish, etc. p.
273. An Account of Charters, Dispensations and Pardons passed, between October
1682, and the late King's Abdication. p. 312. Copies of some Papers relating to
the foregoing Informations, p. 316. Copy of Colonel Sidney's Plee, p. 320. The
Names of the Grand and Petty Juries returned upon my Lord Russell, p. 324. The
Grand and Petty Juries returned upon Alderman Cornish and Mrs Gaunt, p. 328.
The Panel of Jurors returned upon Colonel Sidney, p. 331. The solemn dying
Declarations of seven Persons executed for the Conspiracy against the Life of
King Charles the second, and the Duke of York. p. 335.
REMARKS Upon the Trial of Mr Laurence Braddon, and Mr Hugh Speak; Upon an
Information, about the matter of the Murder, of the late Right Honorable
Arthur Earl of Essex.
THis Excellent Person, and right Noble Peer, the Earl of Essex, did (to say no
more) equal the best and most deserving of his Contemporaries, in zeal and
resolution, steadily to assert and defend, our Religion, Laws and Liberties; in
the day, in which they were most highly threatened, and most dangerously
invaded: His Lordship, and that sure and never shaken Friend to the right
English Government, and to the Interest of his Country; His Grace the Duke of
Bolton (then Marquess of Winchester) were usually (if not always) in the
Chair, of the secret Committees of the House of Lords; which inspected the
business of the damnable Popish Plot, and (which was a Consequent of it) the
horrid Murder of Sr Edmundbury Godfrey; who was made the first Sacrifice to the
Popish rage, for prying into that Arcanum. His Lordship, the Earl of Essex,
added also greatly to his Crimes, in being Chaire-man of that Committee of
Lords, which prepared matters, for the Trial of that great Conspirator Colman,
the Duke of York's Minion and Secretary. And, he contracted a further and never
to be forgiven Guilt, in that, soon after the astonishing dissolution of the
Parliament, in January 1680, and the King's Declaration of his Resolution, to
hold the next Parliament, upon the 21st of March 1680, at Oxford; several Noble
Lords agreed upon a Petition, to advise the King against that Resolution; and
their Lordship's pitched upon the Earl of Essex to present it; as he did upon
the 25th of January 1680; and then made a Speech to his Majesty which deserves
eternal Remembrance; it was to this effect,

That the Lords there present, with other Peers; observing how unfortunate many
Assemblies have been, when called remote from London; particularly the Congress
at Clarendon, in Henry the second's time: Three Parliaments at Oxford in the
time of Henry the third; and the Parliaments at Coventry in Henry the sixth's
time; with diverse others; which have proved fatal to those Kings, and brought
great mischief on the Kingdom; And considering the Jealousies and Discontents
amongst the People: They apprehended, the consequences of a Parliament at
Oxford, might be as fatal to the King, and the Nation; as those were to the
then Reigning Kings; and therefore they conceived, they could not answer it to
God, to his Majesty, or to the People; If they, being Peers, should not offer
him their advice, to alter that unseasonable resolution. The Petition was to
this effect;

That, whereas the King by Speeches and Messages, to both Houses, had rightly
represented the dangers threatening his Majesty and the Kingdom, from the Plots
of the Papists, and the sudden growth of a Foreign Power, which could not be
stopped, unless by Parliament; and an Union of Protestants.

That the King, in April 1679, having called to his Council many honorable and
worthy Persons; and declared, that being sensible, of the evil Effects of a
single Ministry, or private Advice, or foreign Committee, for the direction of
Affairs; That he would, for the future, refer all things unto that Council; and
that by their constant advice, with the frequent use of the Parliament, he was
resolved hereafter to Govern; They began to hope to see an end of their
Miseries; But,

They soon found their expectations frustrated, and the Parliament dissolved,
before it could perfect what was intended, for their relief and security; And
though another was called, yet, by many Prorogations it was put off to the 21st
of October past.

That, though the King then acknowledged, that neither his Person, nor the
Kingdom could be safe, till the Plot was gone through; yet the Parliament was
unexpectedly prorogned on the 10th of January, before any sufficient Order
could be taken therein.

That all their just and pious endeavors to save the Nation were overthrown;
The good Bills they had been industriously preparing, to unite Protestants,
brought to naught; The Witnesses of the Plot discouraged; Those foreign
Kingdoms and States, who by a happy Conjunction with us, might check the French
Power, disheartened, even to such a despair, as may induce them to take
Resolutions fatal to us: The strength and courage of our Enemies, both at home
and abroad increased; And our selves leftin the utmost danger, of seeing our
Country brought into utter Desolation.

That, in these Extremities, they had nothing under God to comfort them, but
the hopes that the King ( touched with the Groans of his perishing People)
would have suffered the Parliament to meet, at the day to which it was
prorogued; and no further interruption should be given to their Proceedings, in
order to the saving the Nation: But, that that failed them too, for the King,
by the private suggestions of Wicked Persons, Favorers of Popery, Promoters of
French designs, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom Innuendo Some Body; their
Names are (even at this day) worth the knowing, lest any of them should creep
into their present Majesty's Councils.
(without the Advice, and against the Opinion of the Privy Council) dissolved
that Parliament, and intended to call another to sit at Oxford; where neither
Lords nor Commons could be in safety, but would be exposed to the Swords of the
Papists and their Adherents; of whom too many were crept into the Guards; That
the Witnesses against the Popish Lords and Impeached Judges, could not bear the
charge of going thither, nor trust themselves, under the Protection of a
Parliament, that is it self evidently under the power of Guards and Soldiers.

The Petitioners, out of a just Abhorrence of such pernicious Council (which
the Authors dared not to avow) and their direful apprehensions, of the
Calamities and Miseries that may ensue thereupon; Most humbly prayed and
advised, That the Parliament might not sit at a place, where it would not be
able to act with that freedom, which is necessary; but that it might sit at
Westminster.

This Petition was signed, Monmouth, Kent, Huntington, Bedford, Salisbury,
Clare, Stanford, Essex, Shaftesbury, Mordant, Eure, Paget, Gray, Herbert,
Howard, Delamer.

This humble Application, and most necessary and seasonable Advice, found the
same entertainment which King Charles the second ever gave, to the Councils
offered to him in favor of the Protestant Religion, and of the true English
Government; however, the honest zeal and undaunted Courage of these Noble
Lords, made deep impressions upon the Breasts of all true Lovers of the Laws
and Liberty of their Country; And the Citizens of London, in Common Hall
assembled (upon the 4th of February, 1680.) spoke their Approbation of their
Loraship's Noble Enterprise, in what follows; which was agreed upon, with a
general and loud Acclamation of thousands of Citizens.

To the Worshipful Slingesby Bethel, and Henry Cornish Esquires, Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex.
WE the Citizens of the said City, in Common Hall assembled, having diligently
perused, the late Petition and Advice, of several Noble Peers of this Realm to
his Majesty; whose Counsels We humbly conceive, are (in this unhappy juncture)
highly seasonable, and greatly tending to the safety of these Kingdoms: We do
therefore make it our most hearty request, that you (in the Name of this
Common Hall) will return, to the Right Honorable the Earl of Essex, and (by
him) to the rest of the Noble Peers, the grateful Acknowledgment of this
Assembly.

By these means, and indeed by the whole Course of this Noble Lord's Life,
which was a steady Course, of Exemplary unshaken Virtue, and showed an
unalterable affection, to the true Religion; and detestation of Tyranny; He
became insupportable to those, whose Study was Mischief; and to whom no Person
was acceptable, but such as they found disposed to betray the Protestant
Religion, and the Rights of England; to their Popish and Despotick Designs; and
therefore from this time, they grew more assiduous to contrive his Destruction.

The Conspirators well knew, that this Great Man, had most deservedly acquired
a mighty share, in the hearts of the People; And, that as he knew very much of
their Designs; so that he was not, by any arts, or allurements, to be Cozened
or tempted to a Compliance therewith; therefore (as They told the brave Colonel
Sidney) he must dye, that their Plot might live; and to avoid the Reproach, of
bringing the Son to the Block, by that very Prince, for whom the Father had
lost his Head; and, (which is also very probable) to prevent his discovery, of
what he could tell, and others knew not; They condemn him, without a Trial, and
in a most barbarous manner Murder him in the Tower; But, Heaven intending to
bring this accursed Assassination of the brave Earl of Essex to light; a report
of very suspicious Circumstances, in relation to that matter, was instantly
spread, and reached the Ears of Mr Braddon; a Gentleman of great Integrity and
of no less Courage; whose honest Zeal, prompted him to look into that hellish
Intrigue; and to endeavor a full discovery of that horrid Villainy; but that
Season not allowing it, he and Mr Speak were run upon, and with great fury
prosecuted, in the manner following.

They were brought to Trial, upon an Information, charging them with
Subornation, and endeavoring to raise a belief, that the Earl of Ess. did not
murder himself.

The Judges, then in Court, were,
The Lord Chief Justice Jeffryes,
Judge Withens, and
Judge Holloway,
The Jury, Sr Hugh Middleton, a Papist. Thomas Harriot, Thomas Earsby, Joshua
Galliard, Richard Shoreditch, Charles Good, Samuel Rouse, Hugh Squire, Nehem.
Arnold, John Byfeild, William Wait, and James Supple.

The King's Council, were, Attorney General Sawyer Solicitor General Finch,
Jenner, Recorder of London, Mr Dolben, Mr North, Mr Jones.


Council for the Defendants, were, Mr Wallop, Mr Williams, Mr Thompson, Mr
Freke.


Mr Dolben opened the Information to this effect, That whereas the Earl of
Essex upon the 10th of July last, was committed to the Tower for Treason, and
did there Murder himself, as was found by the Coroner's Inquisition; yet, the
Defendants, designing to bring the Government to hatred, the 15th of August,
conspired to persuade the King's Subjects, that the said Earl was Muedered by
certain Persons unknown; and to procure false Witnesses to prove, that he was
not felo de se, but was Murdereds and that they did maliciously declare in
writing; that Mr Braddon was the Person that did prosecute the said Murder, to
the scandal of the Government, etc.

Then the Attorney General brought in Evidence, Sr Leoline Jenkins his Warrant,
for the Commitment of the Earl to the Tower; and the Inquisition of Mr Farnham
the Coroner taken by this Jury. July 14th 1683. viz. Samuel Colwel, William
Fisher, Thomas Godsell, Thomas Hunt, Natha. Mountney, Thomas Potter, William
How, Robert Burgoyne, Eleazar Wickens, Thomas Hogsflesh, Henry Cripps, Richard
Rudder, William Knipes, John Hudson, John Kettlebeater, Lancelot Coleson,
Morgan Cowarne, Thomas Bryan, William Thackston, Richard Cliffe, Zebediah
Prichard, William Baford, and Theophilus Carter.


Which Jury had found, that the Earl of Essex was Felo de se.

Then, the Witnesses for the King being called, Mr Evans was sworn, and the
Attorney General suggested, that he and old Mr Edwards would prove, that Mr
Braddon went about and declared, that the Earl of Essex was Murdered; and that
he was the Prosecutor of the Murder; but neither of them answered expectation
in that matter.

Mr Evans testified, that Mr Edwards told it to him and others for News, at the
Custom-House that fore-noon of the day of the Earl of Essex his death, that his
Son said, that he saw a Razour thrown out of the Earl's Window. That upon the
Monday after (which was July the 16th) Mr Braddon came with Mr Hatsel to his
House, where Mr Hatsel showed him the Coroner's Inquisition in Print; which
having read, Mr Evans told Mr Hatsel what he had heard from Mr Edwards at the
Custom-House; And he said, that Mr B. did not concern himself, or say any
thing, though he might hear Mr Evans his discourse with Mr Hatsel, he being
walking about the Room.

Mr Evans added, that upon the 17th of July, Mr Edwards and Mr Braddon found
him in a Coffee-House; and Mr Edwards then told him, that Mr Braddon had been
with him, examining his Son about a Razour that was thrown out of the Earl of
Essex his Window.

Mr Edwards testified, that about ten of the Clock, the day of the Earl's
death, he was informed by his Family; and by his Son, that same day at noon,
that his Son came from the Tower about ten of the Clock, and said, that he had
seen the King and Duke, and that the Earl of Essex had cut his own Throat; and
that the Boy saw an hand throw a Razour out of the Window; and a Maid in a
white Hood came out of the House and took it up, and then go in again; and that
he heard a noise as of Murder cried out.

Mr Edwards acknowledged, that he told several at the Custom-House the same
day, what the Lad had declared; and that Mr Bradden came not to make enquiry
about it, till Tuesday the 17th of July; before which time he never knew Mr
Braddon; that he then told him what report the Boy brought home; and added,
that the Boy never denied it before Mr Braddon came, but did afterward that
same day deny it, as his Wife and Daughter informed him; his Sister having put
him into fear about it; and that Mr Braddon did not desire the Boy to give it
under his hand, till he had been there two or three times.

William Edwards the Son, aged 13 years, was then sworn (his Father like a very
honest Man charging him in the presence of Almighty God to say nothing but the
truth) he said, that he told his Father that he saw an Hand cast out a bloody
Razour, and a Maid come out and take it up, and go in again. That Mr Braddon
asked him what he saw at the Tower, and that he told him as he had told his
Father; and that Mr Braddon bad him speak the truth, and wrote down what he
told him, and nothing more; and then read it to him; and asked him whether it
were true, and that he told him, that all that was in the Paper was true, and
that he then put his Name to it.

Then, the Chief Justice and King's Counsel interrogating him, he said, that he
did at first refuse to put his Name to it, because he was afraid of coming into
danger; and being further pressed, he added, that the reason why he feared
danger was, because what was in the Paper was not true; but consessed that he
did not tell Mr B. that it was not true, but that his Mother was afraid to have
him sign it; and declared, upon the question put to him, that Mr B. did not
offer or promise him any Money.

Thomas Hawkins, Son of Dr Hawkins of the Iower (Protestant Confessor to Fitz.
Harris the Papist) being produced to contradict young Edwards: The A. General
suggested, that they were together the whole Morning, and that there was no
such thing of the Razour, as Edwards had declared; but this Lad only testified
that young Edwards and he, walked round the Tower, as long as the King walked;
and that when the King went into the Constable's House, they went to play, and
after their play, he left Edwards and went home; and that after he had been
there a little time, news was brought to his Father, that the Earl of Essex had
killed himself; and that thereupon his Father went down, and he followed; and
after he had been a little while there, William Edwards came, and they stood
looking up at the Window an hour or two; and went away together; and that he
saw no Razeur thrown out.

Upon this Mr A. General, in a reproachful way said, My Lord, This rumor began
in a Fanatic Family; he might have been justly answered, that Mr Edwards his
Family, was, and is of as good reputation as one certain Doctor's (not to vie
with more) where the stifling of such Evidence as ran against the Stream, had
been some Years before notoriously practiced.

But to return to the matter in hand, is it not most evident, that Mr Attorney
was not rightly instructed; For it is manifest that the Lads were parted when
the Murder was committed, and the Razour thrown out; the young Doctor
declaring, that he was in his Father's House, when the news of the Earl's death
came; and then went with his Father to the place; and it is more then probable,
that in the crowd and distraction, which must necessarily be there, he might
not at his first coming see young Edwards.

Next Mr Blathwayte and Mr Mon-Stevens (the Earl of Sunderland's Secretary)
were called and sworn.

Mr Blathwayte appeared, rather as an Advocate, than a Witness, against Mr
Braddon.

They testified Mr Braddon's bringing the Information of young Edwards, to my
Lord Sunderland the Secretary's Office, and that Edwards declared before the
King, that what was contained therein was not true, and yet Mr Braddon would
prosecute it.

The Information was then read, to this following effect, July the 18th 1683.

The Informant says, that on Friday the 13th instant, he heard that the King
and the Duke of York, were going to the Tower; and that he went thither to see
them; and then went about nine of the Clock, to see the Lord Brandon's
Lodgings, and as he was standing between these Lodgings, and the Earl of Essex
's, he saw an Hand cast out a bloody Razour out of the Earl's Lodgings, and he
was going to take it up, but before he come to it, there came a Maid running
out of Captain Hawley's House where the Earl ledged, and took up the Razour,
and carried it into the House; and the Informant believes it was the same Maid,
which he first heard to cry out Murder; and says, that he heard the Maid say
to some about the Door, after Minder was cried, that she heard the Earl of
Essex groan three times that Morning.

Sr Henry Capel was then produced to thew, as the Council urged, that Mr
Braddon prosecuted this matter on his head.

He testified that Mr Braddon was twice with him, and that he told Mr Braddon,
that he was under great grief; and that whatsoever he had to say in the matter,
he desired him to acquaint a Secretary of State with it.

This very man Beech, was the head Prosecutor of all Protestant. Dissenters in
the North of Wittshire; and many of them paid him a yearly Tribute to avoid his
rage. When his present Majesty Landed, he said, that he hoped to see them
hanged that went in to him. But a more famous Story of his Life was; That his
Father telling him, that never Man was cursed in a Son, as he was in him; he
replied. That he knew one who was more unhappy, which was his Grandfather in
him; upon which occasion, and for his constant course of disobedience, his
Father deservedly disinherited him.
Becch (who occasioned Mr. Braddon to be seized in Wiltshire, at the time when
he went to make enquiry there, about the Reports of the Earl's having murdered
himself, before he was dead) testified, the taking from Mr Braddon a Letter of
Mr Speke's, to Sr Robert Atkyns, which was to this effect, (viz.)

That the bearer Mr Braddon, was a very honest Gentleman; and it was his fate,
to be the only Person that prosecuted the Murder of the Earl of Essex: That he
had made a considerable discovery already of it, though he rowed against an
hard stream.

That it could never have fallen on so fit a Man; for he had been an hard
Student, and was of very good Reputation and Life, and had a great deal of
Prudence, and as much Courage as any Man. That Mr Braddon went away Post
toward Marlborough, to make some further discovery; and seeing he went into
those parts, Mr Speak thought it not amiss for Mr. B. to advise with Sr R.
Atkyns, how he had best proceed. That he had charged Mr B. not to discover who
he was, lest it should be known that he had been with Sr Robert Atkyns; for he
would not for the World that Sr Robert should come to any Prejudice for his
kindness toward them, because they labored under many Difficulties, as the
Tide then ran. He therefore desired Sr Robert to call Mr B. by the Name of
Johnson; That they did hope to bring the Earl's Murder upon the Stage, before
they could any of those in the Tower to a Trial, That Sr H. Capel had told Mr
B. that it was a thing too great for him. That Mr B. had been at great trouble
and charge about it, and that as times went he knew few would have undertaken
it besides himself.

Mr Lewis of Marlborough, being called by Mr Braddon, witnessed, That upon the
day of the Earl's Death, riding within three or four Miles of Andover (fifty
two Miles from London) between three and five in the Afternoon, a man told him
for news, that he heard the Earl of Essex had cut his Throat; and that at his
going home to Marlborough the next day, he told his Neighbors what he had
heard the day before; and that they thereupon said, It was done but yesterday,
how could you hear it so soon?

Mr Feilder of Andover witnessed, That upon the Wednesday and Thursday of the
Week, in which the Earl of Essex dyed, it was the common talk of the Town of
Andover; Note, in like manner it was proved in the Tayal of the Lord Stafford,
that it was reported at a great distance, that Sr Edmundbury Godfrey had
murdered himself before it was known at London what was become of him.
that he had cut his Throat; that the Women talked of it, as they came in and
out of the Town; and that on the Saturday night in that Week, the certain news
of it came.

Mrs Edwards, (the Boys Mother) testified, that the Boy came from the Tower,
and told her, that he had seen the King, etc. and that the Earl of Essex had
cut his Throat, and then wept; and further said, That he saw a Razour thrown
out at the Window, and was going to take it up, but a short fat Woman came and
took it, and went in again, that he told her all this weeping and crying; and
never denied it, till after Mr Braddon had been there, and then denied it upon
this occasion; when Mr B. came, his enquiry put them all into a great damp; and
after he was gone, the Boy being then at School, her Husband said to her
Daughter Sarah, Don't you say any thing to your Brother, and when he comes in,
we will talk to him; that her Daughter was grievously affrighted thereat, and
so amazed, that so soon as the Boy came in, She told him, that there had been a
Gentleman to enquire about what he had said; and that he thereupon said to her,
Why Sister, will any thing of harm come? and upon her answering him, That She
did not know, but it might be, her Father and the Family might be ruined; he
then denied what he had said; but at the same time, he came to his Mother, and
cried he should be hanged (this was also acknowledged by the Daughter.)

Sarah Edwards, (the Boy's Sister) testified, what the Boy had declared of
seeing the Razour, etc. And that She told him upon Tuesday the 17th of July,
that a Gentleman had been there to enquire about it; and that the Boy did
thereupon ask her, whether any harm would come of it; and that upon her
answering him that She could not tell; he did deny what he had declared. That
Mr B. came again soon after, upon the same day, and found them all daunted upon
their hearing the Boy deny it; and Mr Brad. asked him about it; and bad him
speak the Truth, telling him, Indeed Jovian Hicks, and many others of our
passively Obedient and Non-Resisting Gentlemen of the Cassock, have handled
many Texts of Scripture at a very unwarrantable rate, to decoy Mankind, to the
foolish Exchange of their glorious title to Freedom, for that of Slavery: But
we have here the first instance, of a Man's preaching up the lawfulness of
Perjury, from the dreadful Judgment of Heaven upon Ananias and Sapphira.
It was a dreadful thing to be a Liar; and bad him read the 5th of the Acts,
where he would find, that two were struck dead for telling a Lie.

She further testified, that Mr Braddon came the next day (the Wednesday) about
noon; and that then her Brother [probably having read the 5th of Acts] did
again own that what he had declared ahout the Razour, etc. was true; that Mr
Braddon wrote down what he acknowledged; and she further confessed, that she
told the Boy, that his Father would be in danger of loseing his Place.

The matter pinching at this time, the Chief Justice to perplex the Cause, and
divert from the Evidence, fell to hectoring Mr Wallop (Counsel for the
Defendants) a Person of great Integrity, and Master of more Law, than all the
Judges then upon the Bench; telling him, in a most scurrilous manner, that he
was zealous for Faction and Sedition [as every Man was deemed to be at that
Conuncture, who was so hardy, as to stand up in any honest Cause, in that
Court] and impetuous in the worst of Causes; and that his Lordship could see
nothing in all this Cause but villainy and baseness, [which in truth, to an high
degree, was most evident in the carriage of the Court and Prosecutors of this
Cause] and that Mr Wallop should not have liberty, to broach his Seditious
Tenets there, [ Such, the asserting the native Rights of Englishmen, were in
that day esteemed, by the Been placito Judges of that Court.]

Mrs Burt, then produced by Mr Braddon, testified, That She was present when Mr
Braddon came to speak with the Boy; and that he said to him, if it be true that
you have spoken, own it; for it is a dreadful thing to be found in a Lie; and
that Mr Braddon advised him to read the 5th of Acts; and that the Boy then
said, Sir, it is true, and what I said I will speak, before any Justice of
Peace in the World; and he then told Mr Braddon the whole Story.

Jane Lodeman (a Girl 13. years old) called by Mr Braddon, declared, that she
did not know young Edwards; and testified, that she saw an hand throw a bloody
Razour out of the Earl of Essex's Window; and presently after heard two
Shriekes, or two Groans; and saw a Woman come out in a White-Hood; but did not
see her take up the Razour; and she added, that she presently told all this to
her Aunt.

Here Mr Solicitor was pleased to sport himself with the Girl, by way of
Dialogue, thus.

Solicitor, Was the Razour bloody?


Girl, Yes.


Solicitor, Very bloody:


Girl, Yes.


Solicitor, Are you sure 'twas a Razour or a Knife?


Girl, I am sure 'twas a Razour.


Solicitor, Was it open, or shut?


Girl, It was open.


Solicitor, What color was the handle?


Girl, Sir, I cannot tell, I see it but as it flew out.


Solitior, Was it all over bloody?


Girl, No.


Solicitor, All but a little speck?


Girl, It was very bloody.


Then Jeffryes, finding the Girl to be more than a Match for her first
Assailant, falls in to his aid, and first bellows out a terrifying Exclamation,
Blessed God! What an Age do We live in? [ That the King's Learned Council, with
all their Cunning, cannot confound these innocent, honest, Infant Witnesses]
and then taking up the same Dialoguing Cudgel, falls roundly upon the Girl,
thus.

Chief Justice: Girl, you say you did not know that 'twas the Earl of Essex's
Window.


Girl, No, but as they told me.


Chief Justice, Nor you did not see any body take up the Razour.


Girl, No.


Chief Justice, But are you sure you did not?


Girl, I am sure I did not.


Chief Justice, But, Child, recollect thy self, sure thou did see some body
take it up?


Girl, No I did not.


The Goliath thus miscarrying, Mr Braddon proceeded in his Evidence, and called
the Girl's Aunt, Mrs Smyth, who witnessed, that the Girl coming from the Tower,
upon the 13th of July, told her, that she saw a Razour thrown out of a Window,
etc; and that Mr Braddon hearing of it, came as a Stranger to enquire about it;
and ever encouraged the Girl to speak the truth; and bad her speak nothing but
what was truth; and that he never offered her or the Girl any thing.

Mr William Glasbrooke testified, That upon the 13th of July, he heard the Girl
very loud with her Aunt, saying, the Earl of Essex has cut his Throat in the
Tower; and that her Aunt chiding her, she said, she was sure it was true, for
she saw a bloody Razour thrown out of the Window; and that he the said Witness
was present, when Mr Braddon first discoursed the Girl; having never seen him
before; and he heard her tell Mr Braddon, that the Earl of Essex cut his
Throat, and that she saw a bloody Razour thrown out of the Window, and that she
heard two Groans, or two Shriekes.

Then, Mr Smyth, being called by Mr Braddon, testified, that he went with Mr
Braddon to the Girl, and heard her tell him, that she saw an hand toss a Razour
out at the Earl of Essex's Lodgings; and that she heard two Shriekes; and saw a
Woman come out, with White head-Cloathes; but did not see any one take up the
Razour.

Mrs Meux was then produced by Mr Braddon to testify, that she went from
London to Berk-shire, the day before the Lord Russell's Trial; and that a
Gentlewoman in the Coach with her, then told her, that one of the Lords in the
Tower had cut his Throat. At this the quondam City Mouth, stormed and huff'd at
his wonted rate, refusing to hear the Evidence, and demanding why they brought
not the Woman which told this to Mrs Meux; and was answered, that she was so
big with Child, that she could not come.

Mr Burgess of Marlborough then testified, that he being at Froome (in
Dorset-shire) upon the day of the Earl of Essex's death; he heard there, a
Report that his Lordship had murdered himself.

Then, the King's Council produced the Coroner's well instructed Witnesses, to
prove that this Noble Peer was Felo de se; who were Bomency (his Lordship's
Servant, now in France, and a professed Papist) Hawley, and Russell the Warder,
and Lloyd the Sentinel.

Now, because the Depositions of these Fellows, will appear in their most true
and best light, in the Abstract of some of the proofs, made about this most
barbarous Assassination; which ( with the leave of the candid and ingennons
Abstracter thereof) I purpose to subjoyn, I shall not here enlarge upon them.

The Evidence on both sides being given, in the last place comes Jeffryes, to
descant and remark upon it, which he did in an harangue which makes six leafs
in Folio; ( half as many, as the Acts of all the Parliaments in the Reign of
Charles the Martyr do fill in our Statute Book) He tells the Jury, That there
is scarce in nature a greater crime than this before them -- It carries all the
Venom and Baseness, the greatest Inveteracy against the Government, that ever
any Case did -- That the Earl of Essex, rather than he would abide his Trial,
he being conscious, the great Guilt he had contracted, made him destroy
himself, immediately after my Lord Russell ( one of the Conspirators) was
carried to Trial; and it cannot be thought, but it was to prevent the methods
of Justice, in his own Case: there was digitus dei in it, and it is enough to
sati fie all the World of the Conspiracy -- It Is beyond all peradventure true,
that my Lord of Essex did minder himself.

Then, the Jury by their Verdict, brought in Mr Braddon Guilty of the whole
matter charged upon him in the Information; and Mr Speak Guilty of all, but
conspiring to procure false Witnesses.

The Court adjudged Mr Braddon to pay 2000 l. Fine; to find Sureties for good
behavior for Life, and to be committed till performed. Mr Speak, to pay 1000
l. Fine, to find Sureties for good behavior for Life; and to be committed till
performed.

An Abstract of some material Proofs which have been made in Relation to the
Death of the Earl of Essex.
First for disproof of the Earl's Self-Murder.
THE Right Honorable Arthur late Earl of Essex was Committed to the Tower,
upon Tuesday the 10th of July, 1683, and there were two Warders placed over him
(viz) Monday and Russell, and one Servant (viz.) Paul Bomeney was permitted to
attend upon him; The very next Friday Morning about nine of the Clock, his
Lordship was found dead in his Closet, with his Throat cut through both Jugular
Arteries to the Neck-bone.

Now, seeing our Law presumes every Man destroyed by violent Hands, is murdered
by others, unless such Evidence appears as gives satisfaction in the contrary,
and proves him a Self-Murder; This Lord had been found to be barbarously
murdered, had not Bomeney, Monday and Russell appeared to prove the contrary,
and they endeavored to prove it thus;

My Lord of Essex (they say) called for a Penknife to pare his Nails, which
Penknife not being ready, he required a Razour, which was accordingly delivered
him, with which his Lordship having pared his Nails, he retired into his
Closet, and looks himself in, and there he cut his Throat; and the Razour
(before delivered to pare his Nails) lying by the Body.

But that this Relation is forged, and that there was, First, No Razour
delivered to my Lord to pare his Nails, nor had his Lordship pared his Nails
with any.

Secondly, Neither the Body locked into the Closet: Nor

Thirdly, The Razour lying locked in by the Body, when my Lord was first known
to be dead, is evident from what follows, which clearly detects this Forgery.
For the first of these, that there was no Razour delivered to my Lord.

This appears by the Contradictions of Bomeney, Russel and Monday, as to the
time of the delivering this Razour, for Bomeney first swears, he delivered this
Razour to my Lord to pare his Nails on Friday Morning at eight of the Clock;
and within two hours, positively swears in the deposition himself writ, that he
delivered it on Thursday morning at eight of the Clock (being the day before
his death) and this as to the Thursday, he swears positively and
circumstantially, positively, for he does expressly name Thursday, as the day on
which the Razour was delivered; and circumstantially, for he does swear the
Razour was delivered the very next morning after my Lord came to Captain
Hawley's; and his Lordship went to Hawley's, on Wednesday the 11th of July. But,

Russell swears a point blank contradiction to Bomeney's Oath; for Russell
deposes, and now declares, that on Friday morning, in less then half an hour
before they found my Lord dead in his Closet, he stood as Warder at my Lord's
Chamber Door, ( Monday that morning having first stood as Warder on my Lord,
and was then gone down to stand below Stairs) and heard my Lord ask Bomeney for
a Penknife to pare his Nails; which being not ready, his Lordship required a
Razour; which he did immediately see Bomeney deliver his Lordship. But,

Monday does as directly give the Lie to Russell, as Russell did to Bomeney,
for Monday, the day my Lord died, declared, he saw my Lord have a Razour in his
Hand, paring his Nails with it, at seven a Clock that morning my Lord died, and
this about two hours before Russell came up, to stand as Warder at my Lord's
Chamber Door.

Wherefore, unless it can be reconciled how this Razour should be delivered a
Thursday Morning at eight of the Clock, according to Bomeneys Oath; and yet not
delivered till Friday Morning at nine of the Clock, within half an hour of the
time his Lordship was found dead, and delivered whilst Russell stood Warder at
the Chamberdoor, as Russell deposes; And notwithstanding this, my Lord to have
had the Razour, and pared his Nails with it two hours before Russell came up
Stairs to stand Warder at my Lord's Chamber, as Monday declared the very day my
Lord died. I say unless these Contradictions can be reconciled, it cannot be
thought that any Razour at all was delivered; And then whereas all declared my
Lord pared his Nails with the Razour; by strict observation, it appeared my
Lord's Nails were not newly, before his Death, either pared or scraped.

2dly, That the Closet-door was not locked upon my Lord's body, appears by the
contradictions of these three, as to the opening the Close-door. Bomeney first
swore, he did open the Door (when my Lord would not answer upon his knocking at
the Door) and there saw my Lord lying dead in his Blood, and the Razour by him,
and he then called the Warders; but immediately swears in contradiction to his
first Oath, that he peeped through a chink of the Door, and saw Blood and part
of the Razour, and then without opening the Door, ran and called Russell, who
thereupon first opened the Door, and at Mr Braddon's Trial, swears he knew not
who opened the Door.

Russell deposes he did first open the Door, and makes no difficulty in it;
Then comes Monday, and gives the Lie to both: For,

Monday (the very day my Lord died) declared (what he has since often
confirmed) that neither Bomeney nor Russell could stir the Door, my Lord's Body
lay so close and hard against it, and he being stronger then either, put his
Shoulders against the Door, and pressing with all his might broke it open.

Whosoever there is that can reconcile these Contradictions (in these three
men's Relations) and make all appear credible.

-- Erit mihi magnus Appollo.

A further Argument, that the Closet-Door was not locked upon the Body, appears
by my Lord's Legs lying upon the Threeshold of the Closet-door, when the Body
was pretended not to have been stirred from its first posture.

3dly, That there was no Razour lying locked in with the Body, when the Body
was first found, appears by the bloody Razour's being thrown out of my Lord's
Chamber-Window, (which is about seventeen Foot distant from the Closet-Door,
where the Body lay) and no noise of my Lords death, till after the Maid carried
up the Razour; which Maid thereupon first discovered my Lord's death.

And, as yet other Argument, of the Perjury of these perfidious Villains, add
the Mathematical impossibility of the Wound, seeing not above two Inches of the
Razour must be without my Lord's hand, (had he done it himself) and yet the
Wound above three Inches deep. Moreover, by many eminent Doctors and
Chyrurgions; the Wound is thought to be naturally impossible to have been done
by my Lord himself, because upon cutting the first Jugular Artery, such an
effusion of Blood and Spirit would have immediately thereupon followed, that
Nature would not have been strong enough for to cut through the other Jugular
Artery, to the Neck-Bone on the other side, muchless, to make so many, and so
large Notches, in the Razour against the Neck-Bone, as an old foolish or K --
Chyrurgion suggested to the Coroner's Jury.

Wherefore, by what is before observed, as to the many Contradictions, it
plainly appears, that these three (as it is said in the History of Susanna,
verse. 6.) are convicted of false Relations by their own mouths; and those other
Arguments before observed, are further Detections of these three men's
Perjuries. It then remains as at first (viz.) That here is a Body found dead by
violent Hands, and the manner of the Death not discovered (for it cannot be
according to these three men's Relations, for the Reasons before observed) The
conclusion that the Law makes in such cases; in this, therefore holds good,
(viz.) that this honorable Lord was Murdered by the violent and cruel Hands
of barbarous and bloody minded men.

Secondly, For the proof of the Murder; in this I shall first consider, what is
most material which passed before my Lords death.

Secondly, The Day of his Death. And then

Thirdly and Lastly, after the Day of his Death. In the

First, Before my Lords death, I shall consider,

1st, The previous Resolutions by Papists to cut my Lords Throat. And then,

2dly, The many previous Reports before my Lords death, That his Lordship had
cut his own Throat in the Tower.

For the first of these, D. S. declares, that about nine days before the Death
of the late Earl of Essex, she heard several Papists consulting together,
concerning the said Earl; And this Informant heard them say, the Earl of Essex
was to be taken off, and that they had been with his Highness, and his Highness
was first for poisoning the Earl; but that manner of Death being objected
against; it was then said, one did propose to his Highness; Stabbing the Earl;
but this way his Highness did not like; at length his Highness concluded and
ordered his Throat to be cut; and his Highness had promised to be there when it
was done. Some few days after some of the aforesaid Persons declared, it was
resolved the Earl's Throat should be cut, but they would give it out that he
had done it himself, and if any should deny it, they would take them, and
punish them for it.

Secondly, For the previous Reports before my Lords death.
Its proved, by eight several Witnesses, that before my Lords death (or before
it could be known) it was reported, that the Earl of Essex had cut his Throat
in the Tower, amongst the rest, it was at From, which is about one Hundred
Miles from London, the Wednesday Morning; and at the same time at Andover,
about sixty Miles from London, though at neither of these places, especially
the former, could it then be known the Earl was a Prisoner in the Tower, his
Lordship being not committed to the Tower, till the Tuesday in the Afternoon.
All these Reports agreed in the manner how (viz.) cutting his Throat, and the
place where (viz.) the Tower; and (which is further) at Andover the Wednesday
Morning before my Lords death, it was reported not only in the manner how, and
place where, but likewise the pretended Reason wherefore, was given, for it was
then, and there said, that the Earl of Essex being a Prisoner in the Tower, and
understanding that the King and Duke were come into the Tower, his Lordship was
afraid the King would have come up into his Chamber, and seen him; of which his
Lordships guilt and shame would not bear the Thought, and therefore he did cut
his Throat to avoid it. This being declared two days before my Lords death,
when it could not have been in the least forethought, that the King and Duke
would have come together into the Tower, where they had not been above twice
together since the Restoration; I say, this previous Report, which so
particularly clothed this action, with the how, where, and wherefore; clearly
proves, That all things were so resolved upon to be done; or otherwise it is
impossible it should have been reported under these three essential
Qualifications, as to manner, place, and reason, before it was indeed done;
especially at Andover, where it could not then be supposed to be known that my
Lord was so much as a Prisoner in the Tower; this Reason the Papists themselves
gave out just after my Lords Death.

Secondly, What passed the day my Lord Dyed.
These then attending on my Lord (viz.) Russell and Monday the Warders, Bomeney
the Servant, and Lloyd the Sentinel at the door, did all deny that day my Lord
died, that there were any Men let into my Lords Lodgings that morning before my
Lords Death. But now it appears, that there were some Ruffians, a little before
my Lords death, sent into his Lodgings to Murder him, which they did
accordingly.

R. Meake A Soldier in the Tower, that morning my Lord of Essex was Murdered,
about one of the Clock that very day, near Algate, told B -- and his Wife, That
the Earl of Essex did not cut his own Throat, but was barbarously Murdered by
his Royal Highnesses Order; For the said Meake declared, That just before the
Earl of Essex's Murder, his Highness sent two Men to the Earls Lodgings to
Murder him, which after they had done, they threw the Razour out of the Window.
Likewise a Soldier that morning in the Tower, about a eleven a Clock that
morning my Lord dyed, in Baldwines-Gardens, informed G. and H. that the Earl of
Essex did not cut his own Throat, but was barbarously Murdered by his Royal
Highnesses town Order. For the Soldier then declared, that a little before the
Earl's Murder, his Royal Highness parted a little way from his Majesty, and
then two Men were sent into the Earl's Lodgings, to Murder my Lord, which when
they had done, they did again return to his Highness.

Mr E -- declares, That he saw his Royal Highness just before the Earl's Death,
part a little from his Majesty, and then beckned to two Gentlemen, to come to
him, who came accordingly, his Highness thereupon sent them toward the Earl of
Essex's Lodgings, and about a quarter of an hour after, this Informant saw
these very two Men return to his Highness, and as they came, they smiled, and
to the best of this Informants hearing and remembrance, said, the Business was
done; upon which his Highness seemed very well pleased, and then went to his
Majesty, to whom the News was immediately brought, that the Earl of Essex had
cut his Throat.

Lloyd the Sentinel at my Lords door, the day my Lord died (till the twenty
first of January last) did deny the letting in of any men, (and Russell and
Monday still deny it) but now Lloyd does confess that just before my Lords
Death, two or three men, by Major Hawley's special Order, were let in, and
immediately he heard them, (as he did suppose they were) go up Stairs into my
Lord's Room, where there was a very great bustle and stir, so great, that the
Sentinel declared, he would have forced after them, had not the first door been
made fast; upon the bussle he heard somewhat thrown down like the fall of a
man, which he did suppose was my Lords Body; soon after which, it was cried
out, my Lord of Essex has cut his own Throat.

Here is not only these men's going in, but a great bustle confessed immediately
thereupon, to ensue in my Lords Room, and the Body of a man in this bustle to
be thrown down; this is in a close Prisoners Room, where no one is admitted,
but his Servant, and those that kept the door, denied upon Oath, that any were
in my Lords Chamber that morning my Lord dyed, before his Death. But these
Warders, being supposed privy to the Fact, would not own the admitting of those
men, which themselves let in with such a Murtherous design; and it is to be
presumed that this Sentinel was not a stranger to the matter, but enjoined to
secrecy; for otherwise he would never have declared to a Friend, under a
repeated request of secrecy, that this Confession (as before) laid upon his
Conscience, and troubled him night and day, for though it was indeed very true,
that he did let in these men, it was what he should not have confessed. This
Consirmation to his acquaintance (under a great and repeated injunction of
secrecy) argues first, that this Confession was indeed true.

Secondly, That there is some cursed Confederacy (its probable by Oath) entered
into to stifle this Murder, for what other probable reason can be assigned for
that trouble of Conscience in this Confession, seeing himself at the same time
declared it was true, though he should not have said it? There are some other
arguments that this Sentinel was particeps Criminis in the Privity; first his
retraction in part of what he did confess; for, upon his being first
apprehended, he owned the throwing out of the Razour, before my Lords Death was
known, but now he retracts and disowns it; Another instance of his privity, is
his now prevaricating, in his now pretending, that these men were let in an
hour, or more before my Lords Death; whereas at first he declared they were let
in before my Lords Death; for, as soon as let in, he heard several go up Stairs
into my Lords Room, and heard the bussle, etc. as before.

A third argument of this Sentinels privity, is his not declaring the whole
truth, which he must know; for one at a greater distance that saw these
Ruffians, as they were bustling with the my Lord, and heard the bustle, did
likewise hear one of these in the bustle (as it seemed to be, (and therefore
presumed to be my Lord, cry out very loud, and very dolefully, Murder,
Murder, Murder; The Sentinel who could hear the trampling, or indeed the very
walking in my Lords Chamber, could not but hear this Murder, so loud and often
repeated: It appears by five Cuts in my Lords right hand, (viz.) two upon his
forefinger, one upon the fourth-finger, another on the little-finger, and the
fifth about two Inches long in the palm of his right hand, that his Lordship in
this bustle made great resistance; for these Cuts can be supposed to be done no
otherwise, then by endeavoring to put off the cruel Instrument of his Death.

The next thing that I should observe, which happened the day my Lord dyed, and
gives us reason to believe the Murder, is the Irregularity committed upon the
Body before the Jury saw it, the Body was stripped and washed, and the Room and
Closet washed, and my Lords Clothes carried away (though all Men know the Body
should have remained in its first posture, till the Coroners Jury had seen it.)

Sr T. R. as himself says, declared to the Lords, that the Body was not
stirred from its first posture, till the next morning about ten of the Clock.
To this Sr. Tho. has not sworn (for he was not sworn before the Lords) and it is
well he has not, for herein he is so much mistaken, that the contrary can be
proved by almost twenty Witnesses, had the Body remained in its first posture,
by my Lords Cravat being cut in three parts, the Jury would have plainly seen,
that his Lordship could not so do it, with a Razour; And then, Secondly, they
would have perceived the print of a bloody Foot upon my Lord as he lay in the
Closet, by which it appeared some one had been with the Body in the Closet, and
several other material circumstances might have been discovered, which by the
total (illegal) alteration of the Circumstances of the Body etc. were destroyed.

About three of the Clock in the afternoon that day my Lord dyed, some of those
bloody men (who had been at the Consult) met at Holme's House, and one of them
leapt about the Room as overjoyed, and as the Master of the House came into the
Room, he strikes him upon the back, and cried, The Feate was done, or We have
done the Feate; upon which the Master said, Is the Earls Throat cut? To which
the other replied, Yes; And further said, He could not but Laugh to think, how
like a Fool the Earl of Essex looked, when they came to cut his Throat.

To destroy the Testimony of this Dorothy Smyth, Holms has produced two
Witnesses who (by many Witnesses) appear to be for-sworn in every part of their
Depositions. His defense being false, his Charge therefore may be concluded
true.

Thirdly and lastly, What passed after the day of my Lords Death.
That very morning, several Soldiers (which were presumed able to discover what
was material, with relation to his Death) were called together (As Meakes then
said) and enjoined to secrecy, under very severe Penalties.

About ten of the Clock in the morning, the next day, the Jury met, and were
surprised to see all the Ciroumstances of my Lords body changed from what was
first discovered.

After the Jury had seen the naked Body at Hawley's, the Coroner adjourned them
to a Victualling: House in the Tower; one of the Jury demanded a sight of the
Clothes, but the Coroner was immediately called into the next Room, from which
returning to the Jury in some Heat, he told them, It was the Body, and not the
Clothes they were to sit upon, the Body was there, and that was sufficient.

One of the Jury then said, My Lord of Essex was esteemed a very sober, sedate,
and good Man (which Bomeney then confirmed, saying, His Lord was a very pious
Man) and therefore it was improbable so good a man should be guilty of the
worst of Actions. Upon which Hawley told the Jury, They were misinformed in my
Lords Character, for every man that was well acquainted with my Lord, well knew
that it had ever been a fixed Principle in him, that any man might cut his
Throat, or any otherwise dispose of his Life, to avoid a disho, nourable and
infamous Death; wherefore this Action, which they thought unlike him, was
according to his avowed and fixed Principles. This made the Jury the more
easily believe that my Lord had indeed done it.

Some of the Jury were for adjourning their Inquisition to some further day,
and in the mean time to fend notice to the Earls Relations, so that if any
thing appeared on my Lords behalf, it might be produced. Hawley hereupon
assured the Jury, that they could not adjourn their enquiry, for his Majesty
had sent one for their Inquisition, and would not rise from the Coun. till it
was brought him; This the Jury believing, immediately made all haste possible,
whereas otherwise they might have been more strict, and particular in their
Examinations; Hawley in answer to this totally denies all, and protests that he
was not nigh the Jury in the Victualing-House all the time the Jury sat, though
most of the Jury can say the contrary. And as for the suggesting Self-Murder to
be my Lords Principle, he did protest he did never hear it said, till their
Lordships in this Committee told him it had been so declared. This clearly
proves that the pretended Principle of Self-Murder, was a forgery of that
bloody Party which Murdered my Lord, And Hawley pitched upon as the most
proper person to corrupt the Jury with the belief of it.

The backwardness of the then Government to examine this matter, and their
unjust proceedings against the Prosecution (for they discouraged and ruined him
who did humbly offer the matter to a judicial consideration, though no crime or
color of offense was proved against him) is further evidence of this Murder.

The Government turned old Edward's out of his Place for what his Son said in
this matter, and hereby inverted the old Proverb, For here the Sons eating sour
Grapes, had set the Fathers teeth an edge.

A poor Soldier was barbarously Whipped (after he had been cruelly managed in
Prison) for only saying, That he would not say, that he believed the Earl of
Essex cut his own Throat. But a more barbarous Cruelty is justly suspected to
have been committed in the after Murder of several (viz.) of Meake and Hawley,
etc. to prevent a defection of this Murder.

Though the Government heretofore had received private Intimations, and in Print
public Applications for a Pardon, and thereupon a promise of a full Discovery,
and in both these the Duke of York particularly charged as the chief Contriver
of this horrid Cruclty, yet the then Government would never permit such an
Inquisition to be made, but punished those that dispersed those public
Challenges; Had his Highness been really Innocent, none would have been more
zealous for such a Proclamation of Pardon, for Innocence desires a Trial, and
its only Guilt that flies from Justice. Another Argument of this Murder, and
likewise of Major Webster's Guilt therein, is Webster's producing my Lords
Pocket-handkerchief all bloody to some of his Neighbors, rejoicing at the
blood of a Traitor, and the very next day to some of the same Person, he
produced part of the price of Blood, viz. a Purse of Gold, wherein there were
Forty nine Guineas, and a Pistol which he showed in great Ostentation, but all
this was but a small part of that villainous Reward, for sometime after my Lords
Death, when his Wife was upbraided with her Husbands Poverty, she replied, her
Husband long since was not so Poor, for he had Five hundred Guineas, at which
the other being stariled, answered, most certainly he could not come by them
honestly, to which it was said, that he got them by his Trade, but to that it
was replied, that his Trade could hardly get Bread, therefore there must be
some other way.

Its very probable that Websters Wife speaking of his Trade, might intend
Murder, in which it is supposed he has been more then once concerned, though the
other mis-understood her.

That she was not a stranger to his Guilt appears, by her often telling him
(upon her hard Usage) that he was a Fool, as well as a Rogue to use her so ill,
he knowing it to be in her power to Hang both him and another in the Tower; A
like Instance there happened upon a Quarrel between Holmes and his Wife, soon
after my Lords Death, she thereupon told him, he was a Murdering Rogue, and he
well knew, that she could at any time hang him for it, to which Holmes answered
(with his usual scurrolous Language, you Bitch, you Whore, you of all the World
have no reason to speak, for do not you remember I bought you a good Satin Gown
and Petticoat, whereupon the wife replied, you are a Murdering Rogue for all
that.

REMARKS Upon the Proceedings in the Case of Edward Fitz-Harris Esquire: in the
Court of King's Bench, in the Year 1681.
IT may not be forgotten, that the Popish Plot in 1678, was to have been
ushered into the World, by a Presbyterian, or Fanatic Conspiracy; to that end,
in July 1678, when the Papists had resolved to dispatch King Charles, to make
way for King James the Second; Mr Claypoole (because Son-in-Law to Cromwell)
was clapped into the Tower, (upon the Accusation of Sing a Papist) upon a
pretense, that he was to seize the King in his way to That Newmarket, or the
way to it, was the place designed for dispatching the King, long before Keeling
made it so, in the year 1683; is very evident, for by the Journal of the House
of Lords (upon the 12th of November 1678) it appears, that Conyers (Confessor
to the Lord Bellasis) had at this very time, in 1678 * undertaken to kill the
King, in his morning Walks, at Newmarket; Were the Newmarket Fire thoroughly
(even at this day) examined, it might be found, that that Town was as certainly
burnt by the Papists, to countenance Keeling's Plot, which immediately
succeeded; as it is certain that they Burnt London; and that the great Earl of
Essex's Throat was cut, in order to the Murder of the good Lord Russell.
Newmarket; And it does as well deserve Remembrance, that the Conspirators,
having been disappointed and vexed, with the unlucky discovery of their Plot;
Resolved, to make one Fanatic Plot, or other, to thrust theirs off the Stage;
and to turn the Popish into a Protestant Plot; Thereupon, the danger of Forty
one, and of Fanaticism, was most industriously discoursed and preached; And,
which was more, a great Prelate declared, that though it was true, That there was
a Popish Plot, there was also a greater design carrying on by the Forty one
Party.

Matters being thus prepared (cost what it will) we must have another Plot,
that the belief of that of the Papists may be blasted, and the management
thereof is now committed to Madam Wall, ( Chambermaid to the Duchess of
Portsmouth, always a Creature of the D. of York's, and now the same Lady
Ogelthorp who was lately seized at Chester going for Ireland) this Woman of
Intrigue introduces and recommends to K. C. the second, Mr Edward Fitz-Harris,
an Irish Papist, and he was directed to make a Counter-Plot, in which we find
Rome and Hell united with our Conspirators, for the destruction of Protestants;
and Fitz. H. is encouraged to it with great Rewards and greater Promises.

In order to the framing and fitting this new intended Plot, against the
meeting of the Parliament at Oxford, upon the 21st of March 1680. Fitz. Harris
renews an old acquaintance which he had with Mr Everard, who pretended himself
a Confident of the Earl of Shaftesbury's, and en tertained his old Friend
Fitz-H. with complaints of that Noble Lord, and his Party; hereby was Fitz-H.
encouraged to tamper with Everard, to join with him in framing a most
Traiterous Libel against the Government: There were great as well as little
Villains in this design; and Fitz. H. was daily instructed at White Hall, and
directed to adapt their Libel to the humor, and make it speak the Language of
the highest Malcontents; that thereby their Plot might gain belief, and
appear plausible to the World; accordingly they set about it, Fiz. H.
furnishing Materials, and Everard drawing it into form; The Conspirators were
Cocksure of catching the Earl of Shaftesbury, and the discontented party (as
they termed all the avowed Enemies of Popery, and true Friends to the English
Liberties) in this share; it being resolved to disperse this hellish Paper
amongst them, and then to seize it upon them.

After several meetings about this Intrigue, between Everard and Fitz-Harris
they appointed to complete their work at Everard's Lodgings, about the last of
February 1680, against that time, Everard planted Sr William Waller, and Smyth
(known by the Name of Narrative Smyth) within hearing; They then perfecting
their Libel, and each of them taking a Copy of it, Fitz-Harris runs with great
joy with it, to Nell Wall, to White Hall, but the King being unluckily at
Windsor, he fatally missed the opportunity of being beforehand with Everard;
and was seized in his Bed by Sr William Waller, and carried to Secretary
Jenkins; and being the next day brought before the Council, the Witnesses were
examined, and he was committed to Newgate for high Treason; Notwithstanding a
great Man said, that Fitz-Harris was his Friend, and that Waller was a Rogue,
and had spoiled all.

Fitz-Harris being fast, and reflecting, no doubt, upon Colman's fate, began to
relent, and offers to make full discovery of the Villainy, and of those who
omployed him in it; Thereupon, Sr Robert Clayton and Sr George Treby (as
Justices of London) took his Examination; This gave great offense at Whitehall;
insomuch, that he who had the Power of Life and Death, positively declared that
he should dye; and to prevent his further discovery, which he had promised to
make, he is instantly removed, and kept most closely in the Tower, where he was
most rigorously handled, to make him retract his Confession.

The Conspirators, being thus defeated, of this hopeful Fanatic Plot,
calculated for the entertainment of the Oxford Parliament; and well knowing
that Fitz-H. and his Wife could make it out, who set them to work; and that he
was paid 250 l. at White Hall for this Service; They came to a resolution, that
the Parliament must not pry into this mystery of Iniquity; however,

The Parliament being met, the House of Commons fell upon it, and on Friday the
25th of March, 1681. Upon the reading Sr Robert Clayton's and Sr George Treby's
Examination of Fitz-Harris; Sr John Hotham moved, that it might be printed, to
show the World the devilish Conspiracies of the Papists; which motion was
seconded by Sr William Jones, who said, that People had been prevailed upon to
believe, the Plot not true, and that that Examination confirmed the
Informations of Otes and Bedloe.

Sr Francis Winnington added, that the Treasonable Paper of Fitz-Harris, was to
have been sent to many Gentlemen, and they to have been seized thereupon, as
Traitors in a Conspiracy against the King; That all was at stake, therefore let
not our Courage lessen; Let us go to the bottom of this business of
Fitz-Harris; I move, he may be impeached of High Treason; and it may be he will
relent and tell you all.

Sr Robert Clayton then said, That, when F. Harris his Examination was taken at
Newgate, he told him, that he thought he had not dealt ingenuously, unless he
would tell what Council he had for drawing the Paper; and that he had him be
ingenuous in the whole matter, and he would come and take his further
Examination; and that F. Harris having promised this; he was removed out of
their reach into the Tower.

Wherepon, an Impeachment was ordered; and Sr L. Jenkins commanded to carry it
to the Lords; and Col. Birch said, That we ought all to give God thanks for
this discovery of Fitz-Harris next to the first discovery of the Plot.

Upon Saturday the 26th of March, 1681, the House of Commons being informed,
that the House of Lords had refused to proceed upon the Impeachment.

Sr Thomas Lee said, That he saw, by the Lords refusing the Impeachment, no
further use of Parliaments, That they would be a Court, or not a Court, to
serve a present purpose.

Then Sr William Jones spoke to this effect; Indictments were brought against
the Lords in the Tower, and yet that was no impediment to their Impeachment in
the Lords House; but, here is no Indictment, or Prosecution brought against
Fitz-Harris. We have an instance fresh in memory, Scroggs a Commoner, and not
indicted at Common Law, yet the Lords without scruple accepted his Impeachment;
We find the Lords have determined a great point, The Lords Spiritual, as well
as Temporal, have voted the refusal of the Impeachment of Fitz-Harris, which we
own not in this Judicature, nor I hope never shall; and, We are denied Justice
by the Lords Spiritual, who have no right to Vote; This is a double act of
Injustice; Let us then Vote. That the Commons have a Right to impeach in
capital Cases; and that the Lords have denied us Justice in refusing the
Impeachment, in a Parliamentary way; At a Conferrence, show how unwarrantable
the Lords Actions have been, and if the dissolution of the Parl. follows, its
the fault of those Men who will not hear our Reasons.

Sr Francis Winnington backed this Motion, and said; This Impeachment is not an
ordinary Accusation, but it relates to our Religion, and Property and how the
Bishops come to stifle this, let God and the World judge -- If the Lords will
vote, that the Commons shall not impeach him; They may as well vote, they shall
not be Prosecutors. This is a new Plot against the Protestants, of which F.
Harris is accused; and We must not Impeach him; In this, the Lords say, we must
not hear it; -- I desire you would come to some Vote, you are willing to
discover the Plot, if you could; -- If our time be short (as I believe it is)
pray come to some Resolution to assert your Right; -- A little while ago, when
the Duke was presented for a Papist, the Grand Jury was dismissed by the Chief
Justice; This seems, as if the Lords would justify the Judges Proceedings, by
their own; -- If no Man doubts our Right, pray vote it.

Sr Robert Howard then spoke to this effect, This of Fitz-Harris seems to me,
to be a more dangerous breath then usual, a breath fit to be stifled; There is
something in this more then ordinary. If there be so sacred a respect to common
Trials, in Inferior Courts; it is strange, that the House of Commons should be
below a Common-Jury; -- It seems the Lords value Fitz-Harris to keep him from
us, -- If Dangerfield would speak what he knew, nothing of Mercy was too big
for him; but they hurry Fitz-Harris away to the Tower, when he began to confess
in Newgate; Are you so lost, that you have no Mercy left for the Protestant
Religion -- We hear that the French Ambassador had a hand in this Plot, which a
Jury will not enquire into. I must confess, that by the carriage of this, I
have enlarged my suspicion, for I cannot but suspect unusual ways -- Something
depends upon this Man -- Sure We must not lay down all Prosecution of the Plot,
and say, that the Protestant Religion shall have no Mercy. Fitz-Harris may
merit Mercy by Confession, and if his breath be stoped by the Lords, I am sorry
that People will say, If it were not for the Lds. F. H. might have discovered
all the Conspiracy, and the Protestant Religion might have been saved.

Mr Sergeant Maynard then added, We all know what Arts and Crafts have been
used, to hide the Plot; it began with Murder, Perjury and Subornation; This of
Fitz-Harris is a second part of it; The Lords deny to receive our Impeachment;
In effect, they make this no Parliament; if We are the Prosecutors, and they
will not hear our Accusation; It Is strange, when their own lives, as well as
ours, are concerned in the Plot -- When all is at stake; We must not prosecute;
If this be so, Holland and Flanders must submit to the French; and they run
over all: This is a strange breach of Privilege, and tends to the danger of
the Kings Person, and destruction of the Protestant Religion.

Sr Thomas Player then said, This of Fitz-Harris is a considerable confirmation
of the former Plot; I call it the Old Plot, but it is still new upon us; when he
inclined to discover what he knew, he was fetched to White Hall, and sent to
the Tower; and so We were deprived of all further hopes of discovery; and now
they stop his Mouth; I move therefore, That you will declare, That if any
Judge, Justice, or Jury, proceed upon him, and he found guilty; that you will
declare them guilty of his Murder, and Betrayers of the Rights of the Commons
of England; Hereupon the House came to these Resolves.

That it is the undoubted right of the Commons in Parliament assembled; to
impeach, before the Lords in Parliament, any Peer, or Commoner for Treason, or
any other Crime or Misdemeanour; and that the Refusal of the Lords to proceed
in Parliament upon such Impeachment, is a denial of Justice, and a violation of
the Constitution of Parliaments.

That in the Case of E. Fitz-Harris, who by the Commons, has been impeached for
High Treason, before the Lords, with a Declaration, That in convenient time,
they would bring up the Articles against him; For the Lords, to resolve, that
the said Fitz-Harris should be proceeded with, according to the course of the
Common Law; and not by way of Impeachment in Parliament; is a denial of
Justice; and a Violation of the Constitution of Parliaments; and an Obstruction
to the further discovery of the Popish Plot; and of great danger to his
Majesty's Person, and the Protestant Religion.

That for any Inferior Court to proceed against him, or any other Person,
lying under an Impeachment in Parliament, for the same Crimes, for which he or
they stand impeached, is an high breach of the Privilege of Parliament.

This matter, thus agitated in the House of Commons, was countenanced by a
Protestation of many Temporal Lords, which was to this effect,

That in all Ages, it had been an undoubted Right of the Commons, to impeach
before the Lords any Subject for Treasons, or any other Crime whatsoever.

That they could not reject such Impeachments, because that Suit or Complaint,
can be determined no where else; for an Impeachment is at the Suit of the
People; but an Indictment is at the Suit of the King; As, the King may Indict
at his Suit, for Murder, and the Heir, or the Wife of the Party Murdered may
bring an Which was always to be preferred, and upon notice thereof, all
Prosecutions at the Kings Suit were to stop, till the Prosecution at the Suit
of the Party was determined.
Appeal; And the King cannot Release that Appeal; nor his Indictment prevent
the Proceedings in it.

It is an absolute denial of Justice; in regard it cannot be tried any where
else; The House of Peers, as to Impeachments, proceed by virtue of their
Judicial Power; and not by their Legislative; and as to that, act as a Court of
Record; and can deny Suitors ( especially the Commons of England, that bring
legal Complaint before them) no more than the Judges of Westminster, can deny
any suite, regularly commenced before them.

Our Law says, in the Person of the King, Nulli negabimus Justitiam, We will
deny Justice to no single Person; yet here, Justice is denied to the whole Body
of the People, This may be interpreted an exercise of Arbitrary Power, and have
an influence upon the Constitution of the English Government; and be an
encouragement to all Inferior Courts, to exercise the same Arbitrary Power, by
denying the Presentiments of Grand-Juries, etc for which, at this time, the
Chief Justice stands impeached in the House of Peers.

These Proceedings may mis-represent the House of Peers to the King and People,
especially at this time; and the more, in the particular Case of Edward
Fitz-Harris, who is publicly known to be concerned in vile and horrid Treasons
against his Majesty; and a great Conspirator in the Popish plot, to Murder the
King, and destroy and subvert the Protestant Religion.

Monmouth, Kent, Huntington, Bedford, Salisbury, Clare, Stamford, Sunderland,
Essex, Shaftesbury, Macclesfield, Mordant, Wharton, Paget, Gray of Work,
Herbert of Cherbury, Cornwallis, Lovelace, Crew.
This Protest was no sooner made upon Monday the 28th of March 1681, but the
Parliament was instantly dissolved.

Well, The Parliament being dismissed, Fitz-Harris must be Hanged out of the
way, and the Term approaching, Scroggs the Chief Justice, who lay under an
Impeachment for Treason in Parliament, is removed with marks of Favor and
Respect; being allowed a Pension for Life, and his Son Knighted and made one of
his Majesty's Learned Council; and Sr Francis Pemberton being advanced to the
Seat of Lord Chief Justice, the Business of Fitz-Harris is brought before him,
and Justice Jones, Justice Dolben, and Justice Raymond; and proceeded upon in
the manner following.

UPon the 27th of April 1681, an Indictment for high Treason, was offered to
the Grand Jury, for the Hundreds of Edmonton and Gore in Middlesex, against
Fitz-Harris, whereupon,

Mr Michael Godfrey, the Foreman, in the name of the Grand Jury, desired the
opinion of the Court, whether it were lawful and safe for them, to proceed upon
it; in regard Fitz-Harris was Impeached in the late Parliament at Oxford, by
the House of Commons, in the name of all the Commons of England.

Mr Attorney General then said, That Mr Godfrey and two more, were against
accepting the Bill; but the body of the Jury carried it, to hear the Evidence;
and that thereupon, himself and Mr Solicitor went on upon the A new way of
dealing with Grand-Juries to procure the finding Bills of Indictment.
Evidence, and spent some time in opening it to the Jury; and We thought they
would have found the Bill; but it seems, They have prevailed to put these
scruples in the others heads; Then

The Lord Chief Justice Pemberton said, your scruple is this; here was an
Impeachment offered against Fitz-Harris to the Lords, which was not received,
and thereupon there was a Vote of the House of Commons, that he should not be
Tried by any other Inferior Court; We do tell you, it is our Opinion, that, If
an Indictment be exhibited to you, you are bound to enquire, by virtue of your
Oaths; you cannot, nor ought to take notice of any such Impeachment, nor
Votes; and We ought to proceed according to Justice, in Cases that are brought
before us: This We declare as the Opinion of all the Judges of England.

Then the Jury went away, and afterward found the Bill.

Upon Saturday the 30th of April, Mr Fitz-Harris was brought to the King's
Bench-Bar, and Arraigned upon the Indictment; whereupon, he offered a Plea in
writing, to the Jurisdiction of the Court; and the Chief Justice said, We do
not receive such Pleading as this, without a Counsels hand to it.

Upon which, the Prisoner desired the Court, to assign Sr Francis Winnington,
Mr Williams, Mr Pollexfen, and Mr Wallop, for his Council; which was
accordingly done.

Upon Monday the 2d of May, the four Council moved the Court to have longer
time for drawing the Plea; and that they might have a sight of the Indictment
as necessary to the drawing it; but they were opposed therein by Mr Attorney,
and the Court denied both; Then Sr George Treby, and Mr Smith, were also
assigned as Council for the Prisoner, at his request.

Upon Wednesday the 4th of May, Fitz-Harris being brought from the Tower, to
the King's Bench-Bar; Mr Wallop said, That they had not had those Instructions
that were fit to direct them in drawing the Prisoner's Plea; not having
prevailed for a sight of the Impeachment or Indictment; and that he conceived,
that by the Law, as that Case was, upon a special Plea; The Prisoner ought to
have a Copy of the Indictment.

Then the Plea was read in these Words, viz.

Et predictus Edwardus Fitzharris in propria persona sua ven. and dic. quod
ipse ad Indictament. predict. respondere compelli non debet, quia dic. quod
ante Indictament. pred. per Jur. pred. in forma pred. compert. scil. ad Parl.
Dom. Reg. nunc inchoat. and tent. apud Oxon. in Com. Oxon. vicesimo primo die
Martii anno Regni dict. Dom. Reg nunc tricesimo tertio, ipse idem Edw.
Fitz-harris per Miiites Cives and Burgenses in eodem Parl. assemblat. nomine
ipsor. and omnium Com. Angliae, secundum legem and cons. Parl. de alta
proditione coram Magnat. and Procerib. hujus Regni Angl. in eodem Parl.
assemblat. impetit fuit; quae quidem impetitio in plenis fuis robore and
effect. adhuc remanet and existit, prout per Record. inde inter Recorda
Parliamenti remanens before liquet and apparet. Et pred. Edw. Fitzharris
ulterius dic. quod alta Proditio in Indictamento pred. per Jur. pred. in forma
pred. compert. specificat. and mentionat. and alta Proditio unde ipse predict.
Edw. Fitzharris in Parl. pred. modo ut prefert. impetit. fuit and existit, sunt
una and eadem alta Proditio, and non alia neque diversa; and quod ipse pred.
Edw. Fitzharris in Indictamento pred. nominat. and pred. Edw. Fitz-harris in
Impetitione pred. nominat. est und and eadem persona, and non alia neque
diversa: and hoc parat. est verificare, etc. Vnde ipse pred. Edw. Fitzharris
petit Judicium si Cur. Dom. Reg. hic super Indictamentum pred. versus ipsum
ulterius procedere vults etc.

The Attorney General then prayed Judgment upon the Plea; saying, It Is an
insufficient Plea; nay, it is no Plea to to bar you of your Jurisdiction;
Whosoever will plead to the Jurisdiction, if he have any Record to plead, must
produce it in Court; and for this matter, it will appear a plain frivolous
Plea; for there is no such matter depending as this Plea alleges; Another
thing is this, They have pleaded no Record at all, nor any Impeachment at all;
For they say he was impeached by the Commons de alta Proditione; but that is
naught; The Plea ought to set forth, for what Crime particularly; this is no
Plea to the Jurisdiction, upon that point. -- Upon an Impeachment, or
Indictment, the King has his Election to proceed upon which he will -- This is
not only apparently, a false Plea, but frivolous in it self, being to the
Jurisdiction; For, there was never any thing of a Crime so great, but the Court
of King's Bench ( which has a Sovereign Jurisdiction, for Commoners
especially) could take Cognizance of it.

The Chief Justice then said, Pray consider, whether if it be an insufficient
Plea, and such that no Issue can be taken upon it, whether you would not demur
to it; Consider whether you think fit to demur, or to take Issue upon it, or
reply to it; that it may come judicially for our Opinion.

The King's Council; Mr Solicitor, Sergeant Jeffryes, Sr Francis Wythens, and
Mr Saunders spoke much to the effect with Mr Attorney, and pressed to have the
Plea rejected; but after much contrasting about the matter, the Attorney agreed
to demur generally, and the Prisoner's Council immediately joined in Demurrer.

Then Mr Attorney moved thus; I desire your Judgment, that the Plea may stand
over ruled, for a plain fatal Error in is, This is a particular Indictment for
the framing a most pernicious scandalous Label against the King; They, to out
the Court of this Jurisdiction, plead, that he was Impeached of high Treason in
general; Now, Pleas to the Jurisdiction, ought to be the most certain of any
Pleas whatsoever.

Mr Solicitor added, This Plea is neither good in matter nor form; he that
pleads an Indictment or Impeachment in another Court, must set it forth in the
Plea; which is not done in this Case, and We take that to be fatal to it.

Mr Williams (for the Prisoner) then said, We hope the Court in this Case will
not tie us up presently to argue this matter; Mr Attorney says, he never found
that any Plea to the Jurisdiction required a Demurer, but was overruled, or
allowed by the Court presently; The Precedent in Elliot's Case, is full in it;
He was Indicted for Misdemeanors in the House of Commons; he Pleaded this to
the Jurisdiction of the Court, the Attorney at that time, insisted to have it
rejected but the Court overruled him, and put him to demur; This is a
Precedent Mr Attorney has not seen: The Court, in that Case, did not tie them
up to argue the Plea presently, but gave them till the next Term. Here is a
Man's Life in question, and the Privilege of Parliament concerned in it; We
desire a reasonable time; in the Case of Plunket, you gave him till next Term;
which is as high a Treason as this, I am sure of it.

Sr Francis Winnington, spoke to the same purpose, and said, This is a Case
well worth our taking care of, and yours too; We hope you will not deny us what
time is reasonable.

Mr Wallop added, That he had been an unprofitable Attendant in that Court near
forty Years, and never saw so swift a proceeding as this, which is as swift as
lightning; That, whereas they called it a frivolous Plea; he believed the Plea
to be of the greatest import, that ever those Gentlemen came there about; That,
de Morte Hominis, nulla est Cunctatio longa; That he humbly prayed a reasonable
time to be allotted.

Then, the Lord Chief Justice proposed to the Prisoner's Counsel, that he
should plead over. Mr Pollexfen answered, We cannot do it, we have considered
it, and are of Opinion, that if we should plead over, it would destroy our
Plea; by doing it, we give up the Jurisdiction. It is as indifferent to me, as
any Body, to be forced to argue it now; but, No Body can say, they ever saw
many Instances of the like nature; Therefore, pray my Lord, let us not go on so
hastily with it; If you will not give us leave and time to be prepared to argue
it, you must take it as we are able, since we cannot have time to make our
selves able.

The Attorney, Solicitor General and Sr George Jeffryes, vehemently opposed the
allowing any time, to argue the matter, and pressed for present Judgment; but
after much tugging about it, the Court allowed time till the Saturday following.

Then, upon Saturday the 7th of May, the Attorney General began, saying, This
is a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court, and some of our Exceptions are to
the form, and one is to the matter. To the Form, 1st, The general Allegation,
that he was impeached de alta Proditione, is uncertain, it ought to have been
particularly set out, that the Court might judge, Whether it be the same Crime;
and it is not helped by the Averrment. 2dly. Here is no Impeachment alleged to
be upon Record; They make a general Allegation, that F. Harris was Impeached,
Impetitus fuit, by the Commons, before the Lords, Quae quidem Impetitio in
pleno robore existit, prout per Recordum inde, etc. Now, there is no
Impeachment mentioned before; And quae quidem Impetitio, is a relative Clause;
and no Impeachment being mentioned before in the Plea, there is nothing averred
upon the Record to be continued, or discontinued; for Impetitio, does not
actively signify the Impeaching, or passively the Person Impeached; but it
signifies the Impeachment, the Accusation which is to be upon Record:
Therefore, when they say, he was impeached, and afterward allege, Quae quidem
Impetitio, remains upon Record; that cannot be good, for the Relative there, is
only Illusive.


For the matter of the Plea; it is a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court;
There the point will be, Whether a Suite depending, even in a Superior Court,
can take away the Jurisdiction of an Inferior Court, which had an Original
Jurisdiction of the Cause, and of the Person, at the time of the Fact
committed; I insist upon these Exceptions.

Mr Williams (for the Prisoner) then said, I take these things to be admitted,
(Mr Attorney having demurred generally.)

1. That the Prisoner stands Impeached. 2. That the Impeachment is now in
being. 3. That this was done, secundum Legem and Consuetudiem Parliamenti; and
being so, remains in plenis suis robore and effectu; And more particularly, the
Plea, refers to the Record, for the parts and Circumstances of the Impeachment;
prout patet per Record. So that it refers the Impeachment to the Record, and
tells you, it is amongst the Records of that Parliament. 4. Moreover, That the
Treason in the Impeachment, and the Treason in the Indictment, are one and the
same; and that this Person Fitz-Harris indicted, and F. H. impeached, are one
and the same Person; And withal, it appears upon the Record, that this
Impeachment was depending, before the Indictment found, for the Parliament was
the 21st of March, and it appears this is an Indictment of this Term; And
further, it appears not, by any thing to the contrary in the Record, but that
this Parliament is still in being, and then it must be admitted so to be --
Whether your Lordship, now, will think fit in this Court, to proceed upon that
Indictment, is the substance of the Case.
I think it will not be denied, but that the Commons may Impeach any Commoner,
before the Lords; That was the Case of Tresilian and Belknap, in the time of
Richard the second; Upon that Impeachment, one of them was Executed, and the
other Banished in Parliament.

Mr Attorney allows the Parliament, to be a Superior Court; but says, yet the
Inferior Court, having Original Jurisdiction of the Person and Cause, may
proceed, notwithstanding an Impeachment in Parliament; I will show how
manifestly, an Indictment and an Impeachment differ -- The Case of an Appeal,
is like the Case of an Impeachment: An Appeal of Murder, is at the suite of the
Party; and in this case, it is at the suite of the Commons; it is not in the Name
of the King, but of all the Commons of England; So that it is like an Appeal,
and not like an Indictment, an Indictment is for the King, an Impeachment for
the People -- It is not safe to alter the old ways of Parliament; it is out of
the road of Comparisons, when they will compare an Indictment, and an
Impeachment together.

It becomes not the Justice of this Court, to weaken the Methods of Proceedings
in Parliament; Your proceeding upon this Indictment, is to subject the Method
of their Proceedings there, to the Proceedings of this Court -- It is not fit,
that the Justice of the Kingdom, and the High Court of Parliament, should be
crampt, by the Methods of an Inferior Court, and a Jury.

The Parliament is the supreme Court; and this Court every way inferior to
it; and 'twill be very strange, that the Supreme Court should be hindered here.
For the highest Court is always supposed to be the wisest, and the Commons in
Parliament, a greater and wiser Body, than a Grand Jury, of any one County: And
the Judges in that Court (the Peers) to be the Wisest Judges: Will the Law of
England suffer an Examination, Impeachment and Prosecution for Treason, to be
taken out of the Hands of the greatest and wisest Inquest in England? And will
it suffer the Judicature, to be taken out of the hands of the wisest Judges? --
It stands not with the Wisdom of the Law, or of the Constitution of the
Government.

Another thing is this (the common Argument in an extraordinary Case) there is
no Precedent for this way of Proceeding; It Is my Lord Cok's Argument (...)
Coke's Littleton, fol. 108. and in the ^th Instit. fol. 17.) in the Case of the
indictment against the Bishop of Winchester; and of that against Mr Plowden; --
He says, it is a dangerous attempt for Inferior Courts to alter, or meddle with
the Law of Parliaments. So, in this case, in regard it never was done from the
beginning of the World till now, it being without President, there is no Law
for it.

Another mischief, which follows upon this, is; If you take this Case out of
the power of the Parliament, and bring it into this Court; where the Offense
may be pardoned; you change the method of proceedings, which make the Offense,
without consent of the Prosecutors, not pardonable by Law; This may be of
dangerous consequence to the Public -- by giving this Court a Jurisdiction,
and possessing it of these Causes, expose them to the will of the Prince.

This way of proceeding, inverts the Law in another thing; It Is a Principle,
that no man's Life is to be put twice in danger, for the same thing: If you
proceed upon this Indictment, and he be acquitted, will that acquittal bind the
Lords in Parliament? If they may proceed upon the Impeachment, then you invade
every English-man's right, and his Life may be brought in question, twice upon
the same account.

I take it to be a Critical thing, now at this time, to make such attempts as
these are; There are Lords now that lie under Impeachments of Treason; if you
goon in this; do you not open a Gap that may be a ground to deliver them; By
the same Justice, the Lords may be tried by another Court; -- This proceeding
will have this effect; it will stir up a Question, between the Jurisdiction of
this Court, and the Parliament; for in probability, if this Person be
acquirted, the Commons, and the Lords too, will look into it; -- If he be found
guilty; here is the Power of the Commons, in Impeaching; and the Jurisdiction
of the Lords, in Trial and Judgment, taken away by an Inferior Court: This
being said in general, I come to the particular Exceptions made by Mr Attorney,
to the form of the Plea.

He insists, that this Plea, does not set forth any Record of an Impeachment;
nor the particular matter of it; and compares it to the Case of a Plea, of
Auter foitz acquit; If a Man has been Indicted and Acquitted, he may plead it
in another Court; that has Jurisdiction of the Cause, if again Indicted for
the same matter.

I say, I take this to be a very good Plea, and that according to the pleading
of Auter foitz acquit; In pleading a General Act of Parliament, We need not set
forth the whole Act, but refer to the Record; -- In the Case of auter foitz
acquit; there is an Indictment, Proceeding of the Cour upon the Plea, a Trial
and an Acquittal, and a Record of all this matter; and if the party be again
Indicted, he has a Record to plead, which will show the whole matter; and if
he does not plead it, it is his own default; But in this Case, here is no such
Record to plead; and there is Mr Attorney's mistake; you must in this Case, be
governed by the Rules and Methods of Parliament, which is this; the Commons
Impeach a Man, and bring up the Impeachment to the Lords, in general; and have
Liberty to present Articles after due consideration -- It is said in this Plea,
that it is secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti, -- you are to take
notice of the Law of Parliaments, and Customs of Parliaments.

The second Exception is, That it is not said in the body of the Plea; that
Fitz-Harris is Impeached for this Treason, but it comes in only in the Averment.

As to that; we must pursue the Impeachment as it is in the Lords Journal; it is
for Treason generally, there; and it is said to be, secundum Legem, and
consuetudinem Parliamenti; which goes to all, and there is a Record of it,
among the Records of Parliament; and Mr Attorney has confessed it by the
demurrer; And this is the same Treason, we do aver, in fact; which also is
confessed by the demurrer.

Mr Attorney has fancied an exception of Grammar; an Adjective for a
Substantive; but, I take it to be as well as any Man can plead in this case;
The Prisoner says, the Commons Impeached him; which Impeachment is still in
force before the Lords; It is as plain as can be, if they did Impeach him, then
there was an Impeachment; it can bear no other sense.

Another Exception, and which was strongly urged, is, That the King may choose
his Court; It Is no doubt, the King may choose his Court, for his own Action; but
the Impeachment is the Suit of the Commons; and that is to be tried in
Parliament, and no where else.

I have offered these Reasons, as to the form of the Plea to maintain it; As to
the Precedents,

There was the Bishop of Winchester's Case 3 Edw. 3. In Coke's 2 Inst. fol. 15,
the Record is recited de verbo in verbum, It was not an Indictment my Lord Coke
says, it was a Declaration; the Record sets forth, that the Bishop was attached
to answer the King; for that, whereas it was ordained, Per Ipsum Regem, Ne Quis
ad domum Parliament. summonitus, ab eodem recederet sine Licentia Regis; And
that the Bishop, in contempt of the King, recessit, without his leave; The
Bishop comes and says, Si Quis deliquerit erg^ dominum Regem in Parliamento
aliquo, ie Parliamento debet corrigi and emendari, and non alibi in minori
Curia Quam in Parliamento, etc. We find no Judgment given upon this Plea, nor
would they venture to do it; My Lord Coke says, It looks as if there was a
design to weaken the Parliaments, by bringing their Proceedings into
Westminster Hall; but they would not do it.

Then, there is the Case of Mr Plowden, and others, 1st. and 2d. Phi. and Mar.
the Information is this; That they were summoned to Parliament, and departed
without leave of the King and Queen, the' they had prohibited that any should
depart; Mr Plowden pleads a Plea, a hundred times as faulty as ours, if ours be
faulty; and yet this Case continued all the time of that Queen, and it
appearing, upon the face of the Information, that the Case concerned the
Commons, the Court would not give Judgment for or against the Commons.

There is also Elliot's Case, 5 Car. There was an Information against my Lord
Hollis, Sr John Elliot, and many more; They plead to the Jurisdiction of the
Court; their Pleae is, in a manner, as faulty as Plowden's; but the Court goes
not upon the insufficiency of the Plea; but gives Judgment generally; that this
Court had a Jurisdiction; The assault happened in Parliament, the Words were
spoken there, and upon the demurrer, they gave Judgment upon the whose matter;
This Judgment was reversed 19 Car. 2. The Judgment was given against these
Gentlemen of the House of Commons, Their Plea was a Plea in Abatement; They
thought it a very hard Judgment, and were obstinate, and would not plead over;
and Judgment was given for want of a Plea; they were fined severely, and
continued in Execution for the Fines, and were delivered by the Parliament, 16
Car. 1. and in the second Impression of Croke's Car. it is said, That the House
of Commons, 19 Car. 2. voted, That the Judgment was illegal, and against the
freedom and liberty of Speech; and that the Lords concurred in that Vote; And,
upon the Resolution of both Houses, the Judgment was reversed by Writ of Error;
If in our Case, you should give Judgment against the Prisoner's Plea, and he
should prove obstinate, and not plead over, and you give Judgment of Death upon
him. It may come to be a very hard Case, if your Judgment should be reversed by
Writ of Error in Parliament, when the party is dead. Sr Francis Winnington (in
his Argument) added to this, that it was agreed by the Lords, unanimously, that
the Judgment was erroneous, and that the Parties should be restored to all that
they had lost, but if this Man should lose his Life by your Judgment, what help
would there be, upon a Writ of Error?


20 Rich. 2. To. Parl. 12. Rushworth 47.48. A Person presented a Petition to
the Commons, and something suggested therein, amounted to Treason; He was
Indicted out of Parliaement, and found guilty; But, (though he was pardoned)
because the Commons would not lie under that Precedent of an Invasion of their
Privilege, though he was a Person without Doors, and no more hurt done to him,
but the prosecution; the Judgment was voided.

Mr Williams then concluded his Argument, thus; My Lord, I have done with my
Reasons for the matter and for the form; Here is the Life of a Man before you,
here is the right of the Commons to Impeach in Parliament, before you; Here is
the Judicature of the Lords to determine that Impeachment before you; Here is
the Method and Proceedings of Parliament before you; and I hope you will
proceed no further on the Indictment.

The Chief Justice then said, Here is nothing of the Commons Right to Impeach,
before us; nor of the Lords Jurisdiction; nor the Methods of Parliament, in
this Case; the sole matter is, whether this be a good Plea, to oust the Court
of its Jurisdiction in this matter; To which,

Judge Jones added, Here is nothing of any fact done in Parliament, insisted on
here; this is for a thing done without Doors.

Mr Williams replied, It Is a hard matter (my Lord) for the Bar to answer the
Bench.

Sr Francis Winnington, then argued for the Prisoner, thus; The King's Attorney
has demurred generally; and if our Plea be well and formally pleaded, I am
sure, all the matter of fact is confessed by the demurrer. And upon the matter
of fact so agreed, the general Question is,

Whether an Impeachment by the Commons, and still depending, be sufficient to
oust the Court to proceed upon an Indictment for the same offense?

The Lord Chief Justice said, That cannot come in question in the Case.

Sr Francis Winnington, replied, Why my Lord?

Chief Justice, The Question is, Whether you have pleaded sufficient matter to
oust us of our Jurisdiction.

Sr Francis Winnington proceeded, saying, My meaning is the same; It is agreed
that there were no doubt to be made of the Plea, if there had been a particular
Impeachment -- The House of Lords is a Superior Court to this, and a Suit in a
Superior Court, may be pleaded to stop the Proceedings of an Inferior Court;
and if once the Suit be well commenced in the Superior Court, it cannot after
go down to the Inferior; and what is begun in one Parliament, may be
determined in another; So is the Case 4. Edw. 3. N. 16. of the Lord Berkley,
and those accused of the death of Edw. 2. It was there objected, as it is here,
that by this means there might be a stop of Justice, by the dissolution of the
Parliament; yet the true answer is, That it is presumed in Law, that
Parliaments will be called frequently, according to the Statute, 4 Edw. 3.14.
36 Edw. 3.10.

This Record is well pleaded, and could not be otherwise, unless Mr Attorney
would have us plead what is false; the Commons Impeached Fitz-Harris generally,
and We allege in our Plea, that 'twas, secundum legem and consuetudinem
Parliamenti, and so it is confessed by the Demurrer.

A general Impeachment, is good by the Law and course of Parliament; Coke 4
Inst. 14, 15 says, What the Law and course of Parliament is, the Judges will
never intermeddle with. We find 11 Rich. 2. Rot Parl, part 2. and Rushworth,
part 1. in the Appendix. 51. Tresilian and others, were appealed against for
Treason, the Judges of the Common and Civil Law, were called by the King, to
advise of the matter; they all agreed, that the Proceedings were neither
agreeable to Common, or Civil Law; But, the Lords said, it belonged not to
those Judges to guide them; but they were to proceed according to the Course
and Law of Parliaments; and no Opinion of theirs, should oust them of their
Jurisdiction.

31 H. 6. Rot. Parl. N. 26. The Judges were demanded, whether the Speaker of
the Commons; during an Adjournment, might be Arrested; They excused themselves,
saying, That in this great matter, they ought not to interpose, it being a
matter of Parliament.

In the great Council 1st. and 2d. Jac. The Judges refused to give their
Opinions, upon questions put to them, about the Union of both Kingdoms; for
that such things did not belong to them, but were matters fit for Parliament
only; Hence I infer, that since it is Pleaded here to be according to Law of
Parliaments, and Mr Attorney has acknowledged it; that you are fore-closed
from meddling further with this Case; it being a matter whereof you cannot
judge. But,

It Is objected, That, if the Impeachment be admitted to be according to the
course of Parliament; yet, it is so general the Court cannot judge upon it.

Answer, The House of Commons would not Impeach a Man for no Crime; The
Prisoner's Plea avers, that that it was for the same Treason in the Indictment;
this makes the matter as clear to the Court; as if the Impeachment had
mentioned the particular Treason.

26 Assiz. Pl. 15. Stamf. Pla. Cor. 105 A Man Indicted for the Murder of I. S.
pleads a Record of Acquittal; where he was Indicted for the Murder of I. N. but
avers, that I. S. in this Indictment, is the same Person with I. N. in the
other Indictment; and it was adjudged a good Plea, though the Averment seemed to
contradict the Record; This makes it clear, that if an Averment may consist
with the Record, the Law will allow it.

Mr Attorney had his Election, either to plead Null Tiel Record; Or he might
have taken Issue upon our Averment, that it was not for one and the same
Offense; but, he has demurred, and thereby confessed, there is such a Record;
and confessed the Averment to he true, that he was Impeached for the same
Crime, and that he is the same Person.

I shall now offer some Reasons in general, 1st, That when the Commons in
Parliament, in the name of all the Commons of England, have lodged an
Impeachment against any Man; it seems against natural Justice, that any
Commoners should afterward try or judge him for that Fact; Magna Charta says,
That every Man shall be tried by his Peers; or by the Law of the Land; This is
a way of Trial by the Law of the Land, but not by his Peers; for 'twould be
hard, that any Man should come to Try or give Judgment, upon a Person, who has
been his Accuser before; The Lords are here Judges, in point of Fact, as well
as Law; the Commoners may come in as Witnesses, but not as Judges. 2d, Reason,
If an Appeal of Murder were depending before the Statute 3 H. 7.1. The King
could not proceed upon an Indictment for the same Fact, because the King only
takes care, that the Offender should not go unpunished; but the preferrence was
given to the Person more particularly concerned, and the King's Indictment must
stay, till the year and day were out, to see whether the Person immediately
concerned, would prosecute the Suit; so says Lord Hales, in his Pleas of the
Crown; Then a Minoriad Majus; does the Law so regard the Interest of the Wife
or Heir etc, in their Suit; and has it no regard to the Suit of all the Commons
of England? for, manifestly an Impeachment, is the Suit of the People, and not
the King's Suit. 3d Reason, If this Man be tried and acquitted here, Can he
plead this in Bar to the Impeachment? it cannot bar that great Court, by saying
he was acquitted by a Jury in Westminster Hall; and if so (contrary to a
fundamental Rule of Law) a Man shall be twice put in danger of his Life, for
one Offense.


I will now mention Precedents to prove that this Impeachment is according to
the Course and Law of Parliaments. Michael de la Poole, Rot, Park. 18 or 28 H.
6. N. 18. was accused by the Commons of Treason, and there it is said, that the
Course of Parliament, is to find out the Truth by Circumstances, and such
Degrees as the nature of the thing will bear; and they are not confined to the
strict Rules of other Courts; The Earl of Clarendon was Impeached generally,
and the Commons took time to bring in their Articles. I have had the Experience
in three or four Parliaments, (wherein We have been busied with Impeachments,
though We have had no great success in them) That, though the Commons may carry up
particular Articles at first, yet the Course is, for the Lords to receive the
general Impeachment; and the Commons say, that in due time, They will bring in
their Articles; So it was done in the Case of the five Popish Lords; and in
that Case, though the Parliament was Dissolved before any Articles sent up; yet,
in the next Parliament, the Articles, upon the former Impeachments, were sent
up and received; yet, Indictments were against them, before any Impeachment,
and preparations made for their Trials; but there has been no attempt to try
them upon the Indictments, though there have been several Intervals of Parliament.

Our Case, is stronger than that of the Lords; for in this, the first Suit was
in the House of Lords; but in the other Case, the first was the Suit of the
King, by Indictment; and yet, by a subsequent Impeachment, that was stopped, and
the Lords are yet Prisoners.

For the Objection, That the King may choose in what Court he will sue; It is
agreed, when it is at his own Suit; but this is not so, but at the Commons
Suit, and can be no where else prosecuted but where it depends.

To conclude, This Plea cannot be overruled, without deciding, whether the
Lords can proceed upon such general Impeachments, and whether the Commons can
Impeach in such a general way; This Case highly concerns the Jurisdiction of
the Lords; the Privileges of the Commons, and the Rights of all the People of
England.

Mr Wallop (for the Prisoner) then argued thus; There are in this Plea, three
principal parts, upon which it turns, which are expressly alleged, 1st, That
the Prisoner, before the Indictment, was according to Law and Custom of
Parliament Impeached. 2d, That the Impeachment remains enforce. The 3d, great
Point and Hinge upon which it turns, is this, That the Treason in the
Indictment, and the Treason for which he was Impeached, is one and the same
Treason; These three things are confessed by Mr Attorney, for all things well
alleged and pleaded, are confessed by the demurrer.

I pass the two former points; there being no difficulty in them; I take the
third to be the only point in the Case; and if We have well averred it, and can
by Law be let into such an Averment; I hope this Court will not pretend to go
on in this Case; They object; because he is Impeached generally, that cannot be
averred to be the same; and a Demurrer confesses not the Truth of that, which
by Law cannot be said; But if it may be said, and is said plainly, Then the
Demurrer confesses it.

I conceive the matter is well averrable, and We have well averred; I grant, a
Repugnant and impossible Averment cannot be taken; But if there be no
impossibility, repugnancy, or contradiction, between the matters averred to be
the same; it is not only allowable to averr it, but most proper; For, quod
constat clare, non debet verificari; In this Case, it is not necessary, that it
should appear upon view of the Indictment and Impeachment; that the matter
contained in both, is the same; But its sufficient, that it be provable upon an
Issue to be taken; and so much is admitted by the Judges, in Sparrye's Case,
Co. 5. Rep. 51. -- If this matter may appear at first or at last, and the thing
is possible to be proved, We are well enough, Corbet and Barnes Case first,
Croke fol. 320.

By taking the Averment, We offer them here a fair Issue, an Issue of fact
tryable by a Jury; but the Attorney refuses that; and having demurred, it must
be taken to be true, as if found by a Jury; And, if they had taken Issue upon
this Question of fact, We might have gone to a Jury, where the matter would
have been easily proved; For upon evidence given, The Jury might fairly take
into consideration, the reading of this very Numerical Libel, set forth in the
Indictment, and the particular and special Debates, of the House of Commons
thereupon: And that, upon those very Debates, the House voted that Fitz-Harris
should be Impeached for matters in that Libel, and that upon those Votes, the
Impeachment was carried up to the Lords; This is Evidence sufficient, that the
House of Commons intended to accuse him of the same Treason; which proves the
Issue (viz.) That the Treason in the Impeachment, is the same with that in the
Indictment; This is not to put the Intention of the Mind, or secret Thoughts of
the Heart in issue, but to put them into a way of proof -- In the present Case,
the Intention of the Commons, upon the Issue we offered, and the Attorney
refused, might, and ought, and would have been proved, and without doubt, found
by the Jury; Neither is this general Impeachment such a notional thing as is
pretended; but it is, as if the Commons in Parliament should say, We charge him
with Crimes that are Treason; Now, whether those Crimes are the same, with
those for which he is Indicted, is a good and proper Issue; And if it appears
to the Court to be the same, you will certainly take off your Hands from these
Proceedings.

Again, they say, The Impeachment is too general, and no Man shall be put to
answer to such a general Accusation.

And I say so too; neither shall Fitz-Harris be put to answer to it, without
special Articles; -- But here, by the Law of Parliament, general Impeachments
are held good; and Articles, and Additional Articles also, are usually brought
in afterward; And therefore, We must take the Impeachment as We find it, which
stands against us as a Record, and We must plead it in the same generallity.

This Impeachment, according to the course of Parliament, is well lodged in the
House of Lords; where it only ought to be tried; and we must plead it, as we
find the Case to be: And having averred the Crimes to be the same; We have done
what we could, and therefore enough. And,

That a general Impeachment without Articles, is a bar to any Indictment for
the same matter, was resolved by all the Judges (as I am informed) in the Case
of the Lords in the Tower, who were indicted for Treason, and afterward (5th
of December 1678.) generally Impeached, and no Articles exhibited, till the 3d
of April, 1679; And yet, in the mean time, the Judges resolved it at the
Council Table, that they could not be proceeded against upon those Indictments;
though the Parliament was dissolved. That was a stronger Case, than this of
Fitz-Harris, for there, the Inferior Court was first possessed of the Cause,
and yet, the general Impeachment tied up the Hands of the Court; But here, the
Parliament was first possessed of the Cause; which the Inferior Court cannot
take out of their Hands.

An Impeachment differs also from an Indictment, in that in an Indictment you
cannot plead auter foitz Arraigned; but must plead Auter foitz Convict, or
Acquit; as in Sr William Wishople's Case; But in an Impeachment, They will
acknowledge, that after Articles exhibited, They cannot proceed upon an
Indictment, for the same Offense; although the Defendant be neither Convict or
Acquit.

I shall say no more, but observe how serupulous the Judges have been, to touch
upon a Case, where they had the least suspicion that the Parliament had, or
pretended a Jurisdiction; or were possessed of the Cause; I am sure, I could
never obtain any thing by any Labors of mine in those Cases; But upon such
Motions They (being aware of the Consequence) would always worship afar off,
and never come near the Mount: They ever retired, when They came near the Brink
of this Gulf.

My Lord! If you retain this Cause; in consequence you charge your selves with
this Man's Blood, -- I leave it to your Wisdom to consider it.

Then Mr Pollexfen proceeded thus; I shall not make any long Argument; But I
would fain come to the Question, if I could; for I cannot see what the other
side make the Question; Our Plea is objected against, both for the matter and
form; But, if for the matter, it be admitted, that an Impeachment, for the same
matter, will out this Court of Jurisdiction, I will say nothing of it, for that
is not then in Question.

The Chief Justice assented to this, saying, No, not at all.

Then Mr Pollexfen added, The matter then seems to be agreed, and only the
manner and form of the Plea are in question; for the manner, they say, it is not
alleged there is any Impeachment upon Record; I confess Form is a subtle
matter in it self, and it is easy for one that reads other Men's Words, to make
what Construction he will of them, even Nolumus to be Volumus; To answer the
Objection, I think it is as strongly and closely penned, as can be; He was
Impeached, Quae quidem Impetitio, etc. What can the Quae quidem signify, but
the Impeachment just mentioned before.

The great Question now is, whether this be not too general, to allege that he
was Impeached in Parliament, and not saying how, or for what Crime; though there
be an Averment that it is for the same Crime; whether this Plea should therefore
be naught.

1st. For this of the Averment, be the Crimes never so particularly specified
in the Record that is pleaded, and in that upon which the party is brought in
Judicature; yet there must be an Averment, which is so much the substantial
part of the Plea, that without it, it would be naught; and it must come to be
tried Per Pais, whether the Offense be the same or not; Then the Objection to
the generallity, is not to the substance, but rather an Objection to the Form,
on their side, because the plea alleges the substance, that it is for the same
Treason; which, had not Mr Attorney demurred, but taken Issue on, must have
been tried Per Pais.

To speak to the general Allegation; that he was Impeached for Treason, and not
saying particularly, what the fact was.

If they admit the Law, That an Impeachment suspends the Jurisdiction of this
Court; They admit a great part of the fact; and then the Question will be, what
Impeachment will take away the Jurisdiction? and there can be but two sorts;
the one at large, where the Offense is specified; the other in general words,
where the Commons Impeach such a one of Treason; Now, if such an Impeachment be
good, then have we the most plain Case pleaded that can be; as plain as the
Fact; that this is an Impeachment in Parliament, and then this Court is ousted
of its Jurisdiction.

The Court, and We, are to take notice of the proceedings in other Courts; as
other Courts are to take notice of the proceedings of this; generally the Writ
or Declaration (as it is in Sparrye's Case) does in all Civil Causes, set forth
the particularity of the thing in question; yet in some Cases it does not do
so; but the Course and Practice of some Courts admits general proceedings; Now
where that is so, the party cannot mend himself, by making their Course
otherwise then it is; for he must not say, it is more particular then the
Course of the Court does make it; Therefore, he has no other way by the Law,
to bring his matter on, and help himself, but by an Averment that it is the
same; -- The Law must be governed by its own proceedings, and take notice of
the nature of the things depending before the Court; and if there is as much of
certainty set forth, as the Case will admit, and is possible to be had; We must
permit the party to plead as he can, and help himself by the Averment.

Then, the Question is, Whether an Impeachment, generally be good or no? If
they say, it is not, then the bottom of the Plea is naught, and all is quite
gone; But if they say it is, then I have pleaded my matter as it is; For I
cannot say, that that is particular, or make that particular that is not; and I
have done all that is possible for me to do in my Case; I have pleaded what is
in the Record, and as it is in the Record, from which my Plea must not vary; and
I have averred it is for the same matter, and you have confessed it by the
demurrer.

I would not entangle the Question, but I see not how they can extricate
themselves out of this Dilemma, if they admit a general Impeachment is good.

In December 1678. the Lords in the Tower were Indicted, and after ( December. the
5th) the Commons considering that it was intended to bring them to Trial before
the Peers; They, purposely to have the carriage and prosecution of this horrid
Treason, and to take off the Prosecution upon the Indictment; Impeach the
Lords, and the Impeachment, is just the same as this in our Plea; of Treason;
but not of any particular Fact; Now the Judges took so much notice of it, that
though the Parliament was dissolved, before the particular Articles were carried
up; yet in February following ( some of the Judges are here, and they will
rectify me, if I am mistaken) the Opinions of the Judges being asked about it,
at the Council Board; upon the Petition of the Lords, to be either bailed or
tried; They declared, that the Impeachment, though thus general, was so depending
in Parliament, that they could not be tried.

We have pleaded, as our Fact is, an Impeachment of Treason; what would They
have had us to do, or wherein is our fault? What would They have had us said,
We were Impeached of Treason, so and so particularizing? how can that be? There
is no such thing; Then they would have us said, Null tiel Record, and We must
have been condemned for failing in our Record; then indeed we had been, where
They would have had us; but having done according to our Fact, if that Fact
will oust this Court of Jurisdiction; I see not how we should plead otherwise;
or what answer they will give to it.

This must needs be agreed to me; If this Impeachment be in the nature of an
Appeal; surely an Appeal does suspend the Proceedings upon an Indictment for
that Fact; and so it is expressly, in my Lord Dyer, fol. 296. Stanley was
indicted and convicted of Murder, and before Judgment, the Wife brought her
Appeal; and They moved for Judgment; No, said the Court, here is an Appeal
brought; They could not go to Judgment till the Appeal was determined; So the
Stat. 3. H. 7. Cap. 1. and Vaux's Case, 4 Rep. 39. If this then be of the
nature of an Appeal, this Suit ought to have its Course and Determination,
before you proceed on this Indictment.

Inferior Courts have never taken upon them to meddle with the Actions of
Superior Courts; but leave them to proceed according to their Laws; and if
that be done in any Case, there will be as much regard had, in this great Cause
to the Court of Parliament, as in others.

In the Earl of Northumberland's Case, ( Cotton's Records 5 H. 4. fol. 426.) He
confesses himself guilty of an Offense against his Allegiance; the King would
have the Justices to consider of it; No, said the Parliament, it is matter of
Parliament, and the Judges have nothing to do with it; The Lords make a
Protestation to this purpose, and went on themselves, and adjudged it to be no
Treason; There is that Record more, Rot. Parl. 11 R. 2. Pars 1. N. 6. I only
offer these things, with what my Lord Coke says, Has been formerly thought
Prudence in the Judges to do.

So I hope, That if the matter be good, the form is as good as the matter can
be put into; and therefore we hope you will allow us the benefit of it.

The Attorney General argued thus for the King; Notwithstanding what has been
said, I take it, this is a Naughty Plea; and there is no matter disclosed
therein, that we can take Issue upon.

The great substance of the Arguments of the Prisoners Counsel is against him;
for it is least he should escape, but he pleads this Plea that he might escape.

For the Cautions given you; what a difficult thing it is, for two
Jurisdictions to interfeir; Fitz-Harris is much concerned in that matter, who
has forfeited his Life to the Law; yet he would fain live a little longer; and
is concerned that the Judicature of Parliament should be preserved.

I observe it is an unusual Plea; It concludes Si Curia procedere vult; I wonder
they did not put in, aut debeat; you have no Will but the Law, and if you
cannot give Judgment, you ought not to be pressed in it; but it being according
to Law, that Malefactors be brought to condign punishment, We must press it,
whatsoever the Consequences are; It is the Interest of all the Kingdom, as well
as of the King, that so notorious a Malefactor should not escape, or the Truth
be stifled, but brought into Examination in the face of the Sun; but They say,
if it be not Law, you will not proceed, it ties up your Hands; But they give
not one Instance to make good what they say.

Put the Case, it had been a good Impeachment and he had been arraigned upon it
and acquitted; and had afterward come to be Indicted in this Court, and would
not plead this in Bar, but to the Jurisdiction; it would not have been a good
Plea; Then certainly, an Impeachment depending singly, cannot be a good Plea to
the Jurisdiction.

This Court has a full Jurisdiction of this Case, and of this Person; and this
you had at the time of the Fact committed; What then is it, that must oust this
Court of Jurisdiction; For all the Cases that have been put, about matters not
originally examinable in this Court, make not to the matter in question; where
the Fact is done out of the Jurisdiction of the Court, that may be pleaded to
the Jurisdiction; but, where the Court may originally take Cognizance of it, I
would know, what can oust that Jurisdiction, less than an Act of Parliament; I
will be bold to say, the King by his Great Seal cannot do it. To say the
Proceedings in Parliament ought to be a Bar; that is another Case, the Party
may plead it in Abatement or Bar, as the Case requires: For the Cases they put,
the Reasons are, that the Court had no Original Jurisdiction. There is not one
of the Cases cited, but where it was out out of the Jurisdiction of the Court
originally.

As for the Case of the five Lords in the Tower; I observe the House of Lords
removed the Indictments into their, House; foreseeing that the King might have
proceeded upon them, if not removed thither; But our Case is quite another
thing, for those Lords were not fully within your Jurisdiction.

The Case of 11. R. 2. will be nothing to our purpose at all; that was in the
Case of the Lords Appellants; a proceeding contrary to Magna Charta, contrary
to the Statute of Edw. 3. and the known Privileges of the Subject. Those
proceedings had a Countenance in Parliament; and they would be controuled by
none, nor be advised by the Judges; but proceed to the trying of Peers and
Commoners, according to their own Will and Pleasure: And between the time of 11
R. 2. and 1 H. 4. see what Havoc they made by those illegal proceedings, and
in 1 H. 4. these very Lords were sentenced; and it was resolved by Act of
Parliament, That no more Appeals should be any more in Parliament.

The other great point is this; There is nothing at all certainly disclosed to
you by this Plea; therefore, there is nothing confessed by us, only the Fact
that is well pleaded.

They say, They have pleaded it to be, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem
Parliamenti; but I say, They must disclose to you what is the Law and Custom of
Parliament, in such Case; or you must take it upon you, upon your own
knowledge, or you cannot give Judgment.

There are three things to be considered of the Parliament; the Legislative
part, the matters of Privilege, and the Judicial part; For the two first, both
Houses proceed only Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti; But for the
Judicial part, they have in all times been guided by the Statutes and Laws of
the Land; and have been ousted of a Jurisdiction in several Cases; as by the
Statute of 4 Edw. 3. and 1 H. 4. And the Lords, in all Writs of Error and
matters of Judgment, proceed, Secundum Legem Terrae, and so for Life and Death;
And there is not one Law in Westminster Hall, as to matters of Judgment, and
another in the Lords House.

It is not sufficiently disclosed to you, that there is any such thing as an
Impeachment depending there; it is only alleged that he was Impeached, and so
much the New-Books told us; but to infer thence, that there was an Impeachment
carried up, and lodged for the same Treason; is no consequence, And then it is
alleged, Quae quidem Impetitio, when no Impeachment is before set forth; but
only that he was Impeached generally.

When a Record is pleaded in Bar, or in Abatement; the Crimes ought to be set
out, to appear the same; so are all the Presidents of Cok's Entries 53.
Holcroft and Burgh's Case, and Watt's and Bray's Case, in 41 and 42 Eliz. Cok's
Entries 59. Wrote and Wigg's Case 4 Rep. 45, etc. The Record must be set out,
that the Court may judge upon it, and the Record must not be tried per Pais,
but by it self.

Mr Wallop was of opinion; that upon this Averment, the Jury may try the Fact;
what a pretty Case would it be, that a Jury should judge upon the whole debates
of the House of Commons, whethere it be the same matter or No?

I did demur with all the care I could, to bring nothing of that in question; I
take it there is nothing of that matter before you, concerning an Impeachment
depending before the Parliament; but whatsoever was done, it is so imperfectly
pleaded, that this Court cannot take any notice of it.

The Soticitor General's Argument was to this effect, The Point in question is,
whether this Plea be sufficient in point of Law.

They on the other fide, argue the Plea to be good both in matter and form -- I
will not now debate, whether, Magna Charta, which Ordains that every Man shall
be tried by his Peers, and the Statute 4 Edw. 3. which says, that the Lords
shall not be compelled, nor shall have power, to give Judgment upon a Commoner,
have sufficiently secured the Liberty of the Subject from Impeachments; Nor is
it the question before you, whether you shall judge of any matter that is a
Right or Privilege of Parliament; This is an Indictment for Treason. Neither
will it be the Question, whether an Impeachment depending in the House of Lords
against a Commoner, by the Commons; will bar this Court of its Jurisdiction.

They say, the Commons are the grand Inquest of the Nation, and They make their
Presntments to the Lords; Now, when such a Presentment is made, it is worthy
consideration, whether it be not a Presentment for the King; for an Impeachment
does not conclude, as an Appeal does; but, contra Ligeantiae suae debitum, and
Coronam and digintmem demini Regis; so far it is the King's Suit; In an
Impeachment, the Witnesses for the Prisoner are not sworn, neither has the
Prisoner Counsel in matter of Fact, as he has in an Appeal at the Subjects
Suit; The King may pardon part of the Sentence; It was so done in Richard the
second's time; and in my Lord Stafford's Case, but suppose it, that it is the
Suit of the People, yet that cannot preclude the King from his Suit.

The Consequence which they urge, as such a dismal one, will be nothing; which
is, If he should be acquitted here, he could not plead auter foitz acquit, and
so would be twice brought in Jeopardy for the same Offense; for it is the same
in all Cases of Appeals.

This is not like the Case of an Appeal for Murder, neither; for though it has
been used discretionarily, to stay the Suit of the King, and prefer the
Subjects Suit; it was because the Subject had the nearest concern; as the Son
in the Death of the Father; The reason of that turns quite contrary here; in
this Case, that very reason, will have the King's Suit to be preferred; for
there is no Treason but against the King, he has the nearest concern, and the
wrong is primarily and originally to himself.

Now, for the Objection, that if you try this Man, upon the same reason you may
try the Lords in the Tower; Their Case is different, and the Lords removing the
Indictments against them into Parliament, that no Prosecution might be upon
them; seems to imply, that this Trial may be in this Case; for certainly they
thought, the King's Court might proceed; had not the Indictments been removed.

As to the form of the Plea; I conceive it is not a formal Plea.

We know here, of no form of Pleading an Indictment, but what sets forth the
Indictment particularly; it is so in all the Presidents I have seen; and the
Law Books resolve it must be so, as Wrott and Wiggs Case;

But they say, there is a difference between their Case, and those I put; for
that it is the Course of Parliament to Impeach generally? so they could not have
pleaded otherwise then the Case was; This Reason holds rather the other way;
For if in any Case such a general way of pleading, with reference to the
Record, were to be admitted, it were in Case of an Indictment; because there is
no Indictment, but what particularly sets forth the Felony; and when produced,
is capable of being applied; but here, if the Record be brought in, 'twill no
more ascertain the matter of the Impeachment, then the Plea does already.

And as the Plea is naught, for not setting out the Record; so is the Averment
insufficient too; for the he does averr, That the Treason in the Indictment and
the Treason for which he was Impeached, are one and the same, and not diverse,
affirmatively and negatively, yet he ought to have said; That the Treason for
which he is indicted, and the Treason mentioned in the Impeachment it one and
the same; For if he was Impeached generally, without mention of particulars; it
is impossible to be reduced to a certainty; so it is an Averment of a Fact, not
capable to be tried.

We do think upon the whole matter, without entering upon the debate, whether a
particular Impeachment, lodged in the House of Lords, does preclude the King
from his proceedings; We have a good Case upon this Plea, for that is not a
Question necessary to be resolved, though it be not granted by the King neither;
But the Question is, whether this be a formal Plea; and whether here be
sufficient matter set forth upon a Record, to bring the other matter into
Question, and tie up the hands of the Court.

Sergeant Jefferies then said, I shall only offer one word to the informality
of the Plea.

They cite the Case of the Lords in the Tower, as a Judgment for them, which
seems to be against them; for by the, Lords removing the Indictments into
Parliament, They seem to be of Opinion, that notwithstanding they were
Impeached before the Lords, yet there might have been proceedings upon those
Indictments, had they not been removed; and there they remain to this day; nay
further, to those Impeachments they have pleaded to Issue, which is ready for
Trial; but in the Case at the Bar, there is only an accusation, without any
further proceedings thereupon.

I take not this to be such a dangerous Case, as the Gentlemen of the other
side do pretend, for you to determine; For I am sure it will be better for the
Court to answer, if ever they shall be required; That they have performed their
Duty, and done Justice according to their Consciences, and Oaths; than ever to
be afraid of any Threats or Bugbeares from the Bar.

For would not they by this manner of Pleading, put upon your Lordships a
difficulty to judge; without any thing contained in the Impeachment to guide
your Judgment; whether the Prisoner be Impeached for the same thing for which
he is Indicted? May not the Treason intended in this Impeachment be Cliping or
Coining?

We rely upon the informality and uncertainty of the Pleading only; and meddle
not with the Question, whether an Impeachment in the House of Lords supersedes
an Indictment in the King's Bench; For We say, they have not Pleaded it so
substantially, as to enable the Court to Judge upon the Question; and therefore
We pray your Judgment that the Plea may be overruled.

Sr Francis Wythens added, I say that this Plea cannot be good to oust this
Court of Jurisdiction; The Prisoner shall by no means be admitted to averr the
intention of the House of Commons, before they have declared it themselves; and
therefore I conceive the Plea to be naught, for that reason; also for another,
because the Court, in this Case, by any thing expressed in the Plea, cannot
discern or takenotice, whether it be the same Treason or not.

Treason generally alleged in the Impeachment, is the Genus, and the
particular Treason in the Indictment, is only a Species; And the Averment in
the Plea is, That the Genus and the Species is the same; which is absurd; and
if allowed, tends to hood-wink and blind the Court, instead of making the
matter plain for their Judgment. The Arguments being ended,

The Chief Justice said; We never intended, when We assigned four Council to
Fitz-Harris, that they all should make formal Arguments, in one day; it is the
first time that ever it was done; but, because it is in a Case of Blood; We were
willing to hear all you could say: But I must tell you, you have-started a
great many things, that are not in the Case at all: We have nothing to do here
whether the Commons, at this day can Impeach a Commoner in the House of Lords;
nor what the Jurisdiction of the Lords is; nor whether an Impeachment (when the
Lords are possessed fully of it) does bar the bringing any Suit, or hinder the
Proceeding in an Inferior Court; but here We have a Case, that rises upon the
Pleadings, Whether your Plea be sufficient, to take away the Jurisdiction of
the Court, as you have pleaded it; And you have heard what Exceptions have been
made to the form, and to the matter of your Pleading; We ask you again, whether
you are able to mend your Pleading in any thing; for the Court will not catch
you, if you can amend it, either in matter or form; But if you abide by this
Plea, then We think it is not reasonable, nor will be expected of us, in a
matter of this Consequence, to give our Judgment concerning this Plea,
presently.

All the Cases cited, concerning Facts done in Parliament, and where they have
ender voured to have them examined here, are nothing to the purpose, for We
call none to question here for Words spoken, or Facts done in the Commons
House, or in the Lords; which takes off the Instances you have given, but our
Question is, barely upon the Pleading of such an Impeachment, whether it be
sufficient to fore-close the Hands of the Court? And we will not precipitate in
such a Case, but deliberate well upon it, before we give our Judgment. Take
back your Prisoner.

Upon Wednesday May 11th, Fitz-Harris was again brought to the Bar, and the
Attorney moved for Judgment on the Plea, and

The Chief Justice thus delivered the Opinion of the Court; Why, Mr
Fitz-Harris, you have pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court, that there was
an Impeachment against you, by the Commons before the Lords; and you do say,
that that Impeachment is yet in force; and by way of Averment, that this
Treason whereof you are Indicted, and that whereof you are Impeached, are one
and the same Treason; And upon this, the Attorney for the King has demurred,
and you have joined in demurrer; And we have heard the Arguments of your
Counsel, and have considered of your Case among our selves; and upon full
consideration and deliberation concerning it, and all thath has been said by
your Counsel; And upon conference with some other of the Judges; We are, three
of us, of Opinion, that your Plea is not sufficient to bar this Court of its
Jurisdiction; my Brother Jones, my Brother Raymond, and my self, are of
Opinion, your Plea is insufficient; My Brother Dol-been not being resolved, but
doubting concerning it; And therefore, the Court does order and award, that you
shall answer over to this Treason.

Thereupon he pleaded Not guilty, and the Court appointed his Trial to be upon
the first Thursday in the next Term.

Upon Thursday the 9th of June 1681.

Fitz-Harris being brought to the King's Bench Bar, the Court ordered the Jury
to be called; and Major Wildman being returned upon the Jury, and appearing;

The Attorney General demanded whether he were a Freeholder in Middle sere. He
answered, I was a Parliament Man, and one that voted the Impeachment against
this Person, and dare not serve upon this Jury; and he was set aside as not
being a Freeholder.

John Kent being called, said that he was no Freeholder, and the Chief Justice
declared, that then he could not be sworn of the Jury.

Then Gites Shute, Nathaniel Grantham, Benjamine Dennis, Abraham Graves, Henry
Jones, and Isaac Heath, were set aside, as not being Freeholders; And the Jury
sworn, were, Tho. Johnson, Lucy Knightley, Edward Wilford, Alexander Hosey,
Martin James, John Vyner, William Withers, William Clenve, Tho. Goffe. Ralph
Far, Samuel Freebody, and John Lockyer.


Then the Indictment was read, comprising several Treasonable passages, in a
Libel called, The true Englishman speaking plain English.

Then Mr Heath as Counsel for the King, opened the Indictment; and the Attorney
General enlarged upon it, and called the Witnesses.

Mr Everard testified, that he and Fitz-Harris became acquainted in the French
King's Service; and F. Harris invited him to frame a Pamphlet to reflect upon
the King; and gave him Heads and Instructions tending to it; and told him that
he should have forty Guineas, and a Monthly Pension, which should be some
thousand Crowns.

Fitz-Harris then demanded of Everard, Whether he was not put upon this to
trapan others? which Everard answered, with this question, Can you mention any
Person that I was to trapan? But being again asked, Whether he was put upon it,
to trapan the Protestant Lords and the House of Commons? He said, No, I was
not. I was put upon it by none but Pitz-Harris, of whom I asked, what will be
the use of this? and he said, We will desperse them, We know how; And that he
was to deliver it to the French Ambassador's Confessor, and it was to be drawn
in the Name of the Non-conformists, to father it upon all the discontented
party.

Mr Smith then gave evidence, that he was planted in a Closet in Everard's
Chamber, and saw him and F. Harris through a hole; and heard Everard read a
Seditions Paper to him, and enquire of him, what Heads he would have more, than
were there; To which Fitz-Harris repiled; that he would have him represent the
King as a Papist, and mentioned many other Traiterous things expressed in the
Libel; And that when Everard told him those were Treasonable things, Fiz-Harris
said, The more Treason the better.

Sr William Waller was then sworn, and declared, that he was placed in a Room
within Everards Champer, where through a crevass of the Door, and a Hole in the
Hangings, he could see him and Fitz-H. and he heard Fitz-H. enquire of Everard,
whether he had finshed the Paper, according to his Instructions; and Everard
produced two Papers, and gave him one; and after he had read a little in it,
Everard asked whether it was drawn according to his Instructions; and he
answered, It was, exactly done; And that Everard said, This is a business of
very dangerous consequence; what Reward shall, I have for running so great a
hazard; and he told him; I think I run an equal hazard with you, for you have a
Paper under my Hand, which will render me liable to danger; and Sr William
said, he saw Fitz-H. after several passages with his Pen, and then, the Paper
being produced, he declared it to be the same; And that Fitz-H. told Everard,
that the French Ambassador was to Recompense him for his pains.

Then Fitz-H. demanded of Sr William; Whether that were the Paper for which he
was Impeached, and Sr William answered, that at was, and that he read that
Paper in the House, And Mr Johnson. Foreman of the Jury, demanded whether
Fitz-H. stood Impeached upon the same Treasons in the Indictment; and Sr
William answered that he did, but being checked by the Attorney and Solicitor
General, he said, That as soon as he had communicated that Paper to the House,
the House proceeded to the Impeachment.

Then the Libel was read, in these Words, viz.

The true Englishman speaking plain English, in a Letter from a Friend to a
Friend.
I Thank you for the Character of a Popish Successor which you sent me, wherein
out Just Fears, and the grounds of them, are justly set out. But I am in
greater fear of the present Possessor, why do we frighten our selves about the
Evil that is to come, not looking to that which is at hand? We would cut off
the Budding Weeds, and let the Poisonous Root lie still; We would stop the
Channel of our Evils, and let the Fountain still run: My meaning is this, can
Pylades Know and Act all these Bloody Conspiracies, and not impart them to his
dear Orestes? if James be Conscious and Guilty, Charles is so too: Believe me,
these two Brethren in Iniquity, they are in Confederacy with Pope and French to
introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government, as all their Actions demonstrate:
the Parliament, Magna Charta, and Liberty of the Subjects are as heavy Voaks
which they would cast off to be as absolute as their Br. of France; and if this
can be proved to be their only aim and endeavor, why should not every True
Britain be a Quaker thus far? Let the English rise, and move as one Man to
self-defence, to open Action, and fling off their intolerable Riders. Blow the
Trumpet, stand on your Guard, and withstand them as Bears and Tigers, And since
there can be no trist given to this goodly couple of Popish Brethren, nor no
relief expected from a Parliament, Trust to your Swords in defense of your
Eives, Laws, Religion and Properties, like the stout Earl of Old, who told a
King, that if he could not be defended by Magna Charta, he would be relieved by
Longa Sedda.

Yet to convince the World that this Scottish Race is Corrupt Root and Branch,
and Popish from the very beginning, be pleased to consider these reasons
following.

The Grandfather of these Men, James the Scot, was of no Religion at the
bottom, but entered by a pretense of a Sham-Plot of the Papists against his
Life, whilst really he collogued with the Popish Party underhand; his Mother,
his Kindred and Companions were French and Papists when came into England, he
wrote to the Pope with great Submission, yet afterward thinking it for his
purpose to cajole the Parliament, and write against the Pope and Cardinals, he
sends a Scots. Bird to blind the Eyes of the Vatican Keeper with Money, and to
steal his Letters from off the Roman File; and then he crows as boldly as an
unsuspected Harlot for the Protestant Religion and Interest.

That Man's Son Charles the First, held a secret Correspondency with the Pope,
calling him his Dear and Holy Father, as is to be seen in his Letters recorded
in Rusworth's Collections? Were not his Wife and Courtiers Papists? Did he not
countehance and promote the Rebellion in Ireland? As the Irish Grandees and his
very Commissions testify and declare, was there not a Popish Plot, and an
Universal Conspiracy of the Papists discovered to him and his Confessor Laud,
and did they not piously stifle it lest they should have discovered the
Nakedness of their Mother Church? Whilst that goodly Protestant Prince
pretended to relieve the poor besieged Protestants at Rochel by his confident
Buckingham, did he not hold Correspondency with the French Cardinal how to
betray them for a Sum of Money (which his obstinacy with his Parliament made
him stand in need of.) But they who so ill approved themselves to be heads of
the Protestant Church, Charles and Laud, did they not loose their own Heads by
a manifest Judgment of God? And was not the false Heart of their Emissary
Buckingham, found out by an Assassins Kinfe?

But to come nearer to our purpose, these two goodly Imps of our days are stark
naught; arrived at the height of Wickedness, and of professed Arbitrariness and
Popery.

As for James, he was a Papist whilst he had a Regiment in the French, and
afterward in the Spanish Service beyond Seas. And as for Charles, he was
reported, e're he came into England, to have been reconciled to the Church of
Rome in one of the French Kings Country-Houses; and since they came in, how
have they wheedled and played fast and loose, in their profession of Religion
as Occasion and their Affairs required? Have they not all along maintained
secret Correspondency with France and Rome? As Coleman's Letters may
sufficiently instruct such who have not seen more secret Memoires.

But let us come to Examine their Actions which are a better proof of their
hearts, were not the Duke's Servants and Confidents all Papists? Witness his
Talbots, Patricks and other Irish Teags, were not the Duke and such of his
Creatures as were known Papists promoted to all public Offices of trust, both
at Sea and Land? Witness Bellasis now a Traitor in the Tower; did not James by
Coleman, Throgmorton and others, hold open Correspondency with the Pope and
Cardinals? and could Charles be Ignorant of all this? Nay he liked all so well,
that he hardly employed any about him but Papists, as Clifford whom he made
Treasurer; or employed any abroad but Persons of the same stamp, Witness
Godolphin whom he sent Ambassador into Spain, as he did others elsewhere, what
more obvious than that, though the Duke's Treachery against the Kingdom and
Protestant Religion be fully made out, and the People and Parliament seek to
bring him to a legal Trial, yet Charles obstructs Justice, and will not suffer
it? How can this be, but that he is joined in Will and Deed in all the Duke's
Villainies, and that he is afraid to be discovered and found out to be a Papist,
and a Betrayer of his People and the Protestant Religion? If he was heartily
concerned for our Religion, would he not oppose a Popish Successor, who will
Infallibly overthrow it? Can there be any thing more evident than that he
continues the Duke's Adherents, and those who were advanced by him, in all
Offices of Trust? And has he not turned out of his Council the most Zealous
Protestants, such as Shaftesbury, Essex and others, and introduced in their
Rooms other mere Tools, or those that are Popishly and Arbitrarily affected?
Has he not modeled all the Sheriffs and Justices throughout England in
subserviency to a Popish Design? Was not Sir William Waller and Dr.
Chamberlain, and diverse others turned out of the Commission in and about
London, merely for being Zealous Prosecutors of Priests and Papists? Does not
Charles all he can to hinder the further detection of the Popish Plot? And does
he not to his utmost discountenance the Discoverers of it, and suffer them to
want Bread? And does he not in the mean time plentifully encourage and reward
Fitzgerald and all the Sham-Plotters? Whereas Dangerfield had 8 l. a week
whilst a Forger of Plots against the Protestants, he is cast off with scorn,
and in danger of his Life since he laid open the Popish Engineer, Is not
Charles so much in love with his Popish Irish Rebels (therein treading in his
Fathers steps) that he promotes Montgarret Carlingford; Fitz-Ratrick and
others, who were the Heads of the Rebellion, to Honors and Preferment; though
Charles took the Covenant and a Coronation Oath to preserve the Protestaut
Religion, yet has he not palpably broken them? He made large promises and
protestations at Breda for the allowing a perpetual Liberty of Conscience to
Nonconforming Protestants, but he soon forgot them all: To what end was the
Act which was made soon after his Restoration, prohibiting any to call him
Papist, or to say he was Popishly inclined, and render such as should offend,
Guilty of a Praemunire, but to stop the Peoples Mouths when ever he should Act
any thing in Favor of Popery as he was then resolved to do?

Is it not manifest therefore, that Scotch Oaths, Breda Promises, Protestant
Profession, Liberty of Conscience, War with France, saving of Flanders is all
in Jest to delude Protestant Subjects? Is it not apparent that breaking of
Leagues, Dutch War, Smirna Fleet, French measures to favor their Conquests,
loss of Ships, War in Christendom, Blood of Protestants, reprieving of Popish
Traitors, is all in earnest, and done in favor of Popery? And are not his fair
Speeches, his true Protestant Love to Parliaments, just Rights, and English
Liberties, his pretended Ignorance of the Plot, and his Hanging of Traitors to
serve a turn but in mere jest? Are not his great Debaucheries, his Whoring
Courtiers, Popish Councils, Cheating Rogues, Hellish Plottings, his saving of
Traitors, his French Pensioners, his Nests of Whores and Swarms of Bastards,
his Macks, his Cut throats, his Horrid Murderers, his Burning of London and the
Provost's House too, his Sham-Plotting, his suborned Villains, his Popish
Officers by Sea and Land, his Struglings for a Popish Successor, his agreements
with France, his frequent Dissolutions of Parliaments, his buying of Voices,
his false returns, all of them designs to ruin us in good earnest, and in
favor of Arbitrary Government? And is it not in order to this Blessed end that
you see none Countenanced by Charles and James, but Church Papists, betraying
Bishops, Tantivy Abhorrers, barking Tonzers, Popish Scriblers to deceive the
People and six the Popish Successors Illegal Title? Are not Jesuits Counsels,
French Assistance to conquer Ireland, subdue Scotland, winn Flanders, beat the
Dutch, get their Shipping, be Masters of the Seas? And are not facing a
Rebellion, the letting the Plot go on, the endeavoring to retrieve the Popish
Cause by getting a Popish pentionary, abhorring Partiaments, who shall betray
their Country, enslave posterity and destroy themselves at last, means only to
save a Popish Traiterous Successor, and a present Popish Possessor? James and
Charles are Brethren in Iniquity, corrupt both in Root and Branch, and who
study to enslaver England to a French and Romish Yoke, is not all this plain?
Have you not Eyes, Sense or Feeling? Where is the Old English Noble Spirit? Are
you become French Asses to suffer any load to be laid upon you? And therefore
if you can get no remedy from this next Parliament (as certainly you will not)
and if Charles does not repent and comply with it, then up all as one Man. O
brave English Men, look to your own defense e're it be too late; rouse up your
Spirits, remember your Predocessors, remember how that the asserting of their
liberties, justified both by success and Law, the War of the Barons against
wicked Councillors who misled the King^. And will you now let that go which
cost them so dear? How many oppressing Kings have been deposed in this Nation,
as appears in Records referred unto in that worthy Patriots History of the
Succession; were not Rich. 2 d. And Hen. 6. both laid aside, not to mention
others, and was there ever such a King as this of ours? was not King John
deposed for going about to embrace the Mohammedan Religion, and for entering into
a League with the King of Morocco to that purpose? Though Mahometanism and the
King of Morocco, were no such Enemies to our Rights and Liberties as Popery and
the French King are. Is it not time then that all should be ready? Let the City
of London stand by the Parliament for the maintaining of their Liberties and
Religion in an extreme way, if Parliamentary ways be not consented unto by the
King, let the Counties by ready to enter into an Association, as the County of
York did in Henry 6th time.

Sr Philip Lloyd and Mr Bridgman, Clerks of the Council then testified; that
Fitz-Harris acknowledged the Paper of Instructions given to Everard, to be his
own handwriting.

The Prisoner then called his Witnesses; and Dr Otes testified, that after the
Business was talked abroad, he discoursed Everard about the Libel; and asked
him what the design of it was; and he told him it was to be Printed, and sent
by the Penury Post. to the Protesting Lords, and leading Men of the Commons;
and they were to be taken up, as soon as they had it, and to have it found
about them; And that Everard told him, the Court had a hand in it; and the King
had given Fitz-Harris Money already, and would give him more if it had success.

Sheriff Cornish was then called, and the Prisoner demanded of him, what the
King said to him, when he came to his Majesty from him from Newgate; whether
the King did say Fitz-Harris was employed by him, and received any Money, and
what for?

The Sheriff answered; when I gave his Majesty an account that I found the
Prisoner disposed to make a Discovery, he was pleased to tell me, he had often
had him upon Examination, and could make nothing at all of what he did say, or
discover to them, and that he had for near three Months before acquainted him,
that he was in pursuit of a Plot, and the King did say, That in as much as he
made great Protestation of Zeal for his Service, he did Countenance and give
him some Money.

Mr Attorney, (seeming to be under a surprise at this Evidence) demanded of the
Sheriff, whether the King ever declared that he saw Fitz-Harris in his Life, or
that he ever was in his Presence, Mr Sheriff answered, yes.

The Attorney said, Ay! but did the King say he ever saw him, before he was
Arrested for this Fact?

The Sheriff replied, yes, his Majesty said he came to him about three Months
before, and pretended he would discover a great Plop to him.

Then the Prisoner called Colonel Mansel, and demanded what he heard Sr William
Waller say, after the Discovery was made.

Colonel Mansel testified, that he heard Sr W. Waller say; that when he had
acquainted the King with this business, he told him, he had done a great piece
of Service, and gave him thanks; but that Sr William was no sooner gone, but
two worthy Gentlemen told him, that the King said, he had broken all his
measures, and he would have him taken off one way or another; And Colonel
Mansel added that Sr William said, That the design was against the Protestant
Lords and the Protestant Party.

Sergeant Maynard, upon hearing this, declared, that he did not doubt, that it
was against the Protestaut Party.

Mr Hunt being called by the Prisoner, said, that Sr W. Waller told him and
others, That the King gave him particular thanks for detecting Fitz-Harris; but
that he was told by two Gentlemen of undoubted Credit, that heard the King
speak it; that his Majesty was in extreme Passion, and said, He would give any
thing to take him out of the World; that he was an insufferable vexation to
him, and that he had broken all his measures; and that Sr William said the same
at Oxford, in the prefence of Sr Philip Harcourt, and of my Lord Radnor's Son,
Mr Roberts; and did also say, it was a design, to make these Papers Evidences
of Rebellion; and that this was the Counter part of Dangerfield's Plot; and
that he hoped he would not deny it, if he be asked, here he is.

Sheriff Bethel then testified, that Everard told him, he wrote the Libel, and
that before Everard knew him, or heard him speak a word in his days, he put in
an Information of Treason against him, at the instigation of his Mortal Enemy;
and it was so groundless, that though it was given in three years ago, he never,
heard a word of it till Friday last.

Mrs Wall was then called by the Prisoner; he demanded of her, whether he had
not conveyed some Libels and Treasonable Papers to the King by her means, and
received Money upon that account? but she would not acknowledge it.

He then asked her, whether it was not about Christmas was twelve Month, that
he gave her the Libel about the King and her Lady; and the King thanked him
extremely, and he had 250 l. given him? and he said to her, Come Mrs Wall,
don't think to trick me out of my Life, can you deny that I had the 250 l.
speak, had I the 250 l.

Mrs Wall answered, That was not the Question you ask's me at first, There was
250 l; I think it was 200, or 150, or 250 l. you know it was not for any Libel
-- you once told me, you could bring in People to the King and Duke's Interest,
that were very considerable, and the Secretary of State desited to know who
they were, and you named one Thomas Merry and my Lord Howard of Escrick; and
the Secretary desired me to get him in if I could.

Fitz-Harris then demanded of her, whether he did not come to her the Wednesday
before he was taken, and tell her he desired to speak with the King; and that
he had a Libel to present to him.

Mrs Wall answered, No, it was the Thursday; you desired me to bring you to the
Speech of the King, which was a thing you never desired before; and you said,
you believed you could say something to him, that might do him Service, but she
denied that he said any thing to her of the Libel.

Upon further questions put to her, she said that Fitz-Harris was never
admitted to the King, and that the King never took notice of him, or spoke to
him, by her means; and that the Money was paid for the bringing of my Lord
Howard, who came first to her two years ago; and whether it be a year and an
half since his Lordship met with the King, she said she could not tell.

Mr Cowling declared, That Mrs Wall told him, that the second or third night
before he was taken, Fitz-Harris came to her, to bring him to the King, but she
asked him why he did not go to one of the Secretaries, and he said that he
could not do that without being taken notice of, and that she then said to him,
Write down your Business, and I will carry it to the King; and he said, No, I
will not do that; and that she thereupon replied, I must then beg your pardon,
if I don't bring you to the King.

My Lord Howard then testified, That about ten or fourteen days before the
Sitting of the Parliament in October last; Fitz-H. applied to him in the King's
name, to have him wait upon the King, but that he declined it, and that he then
pressed his Lordship to wait upon the Duchess of Portsmouth, and when he came
to her, he found the King there; his Lordship added, that if the 250 l. were
given for bringing him thither, he feared the King did not think he deserved
it; That about ten days after he saw the King again by the means of Fitz-H. and
that when the Parliament was ended, he waited again upon the Duchess, and then
requested her to represent Fitz-H. his condition to the King.

His Lordship further acknowledged (upon the Question put to him by F. H.) that
he came to him the night before my Lord Stafford was Condemned, and told him,
the King desired his Lordship would go the next day, and give his Vote for my
Lord Stafford, and that he thereupon answered him, seeing there is so great an
account put upon it, If I had but breath enough to pronounce his Doom, he shall
die.

Here, Dr Otes desired leave to go away, saying, the Crowd was so great he
could not stand; upon which, Mr Attorney scoffingly said, my Lord, that may be
part of the Popish Plot to keep Dr Otes here, to kill him in the Crowd.

The Prisoner then demanded of the Duchess of Portsmouth's Porter, how long it
was since he paid him the Money from my Lady Portsmouth, but he said he could
not tell, it was so long.

The Earl of Arran was then called by the Prisoner, and acknowledged upon his
questions, that he did show him a Libel, (perhaps it was this) the day he was
taken, and his Lordship told him, he would do himself a mischief one time or
other by meddling with such Papers; and that they drank a Bottle or two of Wine
and parted, and that as soon as his Lordship came home, he heard Fitz-H. was
taken.

My Lord Conway and Seoretary Jenkins denied that the King did own that he had
employed Fitz-H. but my Lord C. acknowledged, that he had heard the King say,
he did formerly employ him in some Making a Protestant Plot, or so.
trifling things; and that he had got Money of him; and that, his Lordship
said, was for my Lord Howard's Business; He added, that the King never spoke
with him till after he was taken.

The Duchess of Portsmouth then appeared, and Fitz-H. asked her, Whether he
was not employed to bring Papers to the King, and amongst the rest the
Impeachment against her Grace; and he said that thereupon she told him, that it
was a great piece of service to bring those sort of Papers; and that he told
her he knew one Mr Everard, who knew all the Intrigues and Clubs in the City;
and could tell all the designs of my Lord of Shaftesbury, and all that Party;
and her Grace encouraged him to go on, and by her means he came to speak with
the King about it.

The Duchess answered, I have nothing to say to Mr Fitz-H. nor was concerned
in any sort of Business with him; he desired me to give a Petition to the King,
to get his Estate in Ireland, and I spoke three or four times to the King about
it, and he had the Money for Charity.

Hereupon Fitz-H. said, I am sorry your Grace is so much under Mrs Wall's
Influence; and then addressing himself to the Court said; I will tell you what
I know, since my Witnesses will not; I shall rely upon the Consciences of the
Jury for the Issue; Though my Lady Portsmouth, Mrs Wall and the rest say, that I
was not employed, nor recieved Money for secret Services, yet it is very well
known I did so; As to Everard, he told me, he was well acquainted with my Lord
Shaftesbury, and my Lord Howard, and he knew their Intrigues in several Clubs
in the City; I humoured him in his discourse, and discoursed him to reduce the
Paper he accuses me of, under some heads; And I no sooner had the Paper, but I
came to White Hall with it; and was advised to go to my Lord Clarendon, or Mr
Hide, and showed it to a Gentleman who was to give it to my Lord Clarendon, but
before he could get to him, I was taken; What I did was with design to serve
the King, according as I was employed, though both the Secretaries will not
declare it; These are great Persons that I have to do with, and where great
State matters are at the bottom, it is hard to make them tell any thing, but
what is for their Advantage; and so I am left in a sad Condition.

If the Jury Convict me, They overthrow the Law and Course of Parliaments;
Whereas if they bring me in Not Guilty, my Impeachment stands good still, and I
am liable to answer it before the Parliament; I hope you will consider the
Persons I have had to deal with, and that it cannot be made so plain, as in
matters wherein We deal with common Persons. I desire notice may be taken that
Sr William Waller declares, that for this very thing, I was Impeached by the
House of Commons.

Then the Solicitor General and Sr George Jeffryes summed up the Evidence, and
the Chief Justice directed the Jury, his Lordship, and the three other Judges,
Jones, Dolben and Raymond, telling them, that they were sworn to the Point,
whether Fitz H. were guilty of the Treason or not; but that it lay not before
the Jury, whether the Court have Authority to try him; that was a question
proper for the Judges determination, and they had determined it.

Thereupon, the Jury found him Guilty; Before the Sentence was passed upon him,
he said, that he thought it would be prejudicial to the Kings Service, that
Sentence should pass; before he had made an end of the Evidence he had given in
against my Lord Howard; but the Chief Justice said, They could take no notice
of any thing of that nature, and he was Sentenced to dye as a Traitor, which
was Execnted the 1st. of July, 1681.

An Abstract of the Examination of Edward Fitz-Harris, relating to the Popish
Plot, taken the 10th of March, 1680. by Sr Robert Clayton and Sr George Treby.
THe Examinant says that he was born in Ireland, and was bred, and is a Roman
Catholic; That he had a Commission, and Raised a Company of Foot in Ireland
for the French King's Service, and Conducted them into France.

That in 1672, going to take his leave of Father Gough an English Priest at
Paris, he told him, within this two years, you will see the Catholic Religion
Established in England as it is in France; the Examinant asking how that could
be, the King being a Protestant, he answered, If the King would not comply,
there was Order taken, and things so laid; that he should be taken off or
killed; That the Duke of York was a Catholic, and in his Reign there would be
no difficulty of doing it; That the Father then told him, that the Declaration
of Indulgence, was for the Introducing the Catholic Religion, and that to the
same end, the War was made against Holland, it being a Nest of Heretics; and
that Madam came over to Dover upon this Design.

That the Examinant, about February, 1672, had a Lieutenants Commission in
Captain Sidenham's Company, in the Duke of Albermarl's Regiment, in the
Black Heath Army; and that he knew many of the Officers to be Roman Catholics;
and that the Act passing to disable Roman Catholics, he and others of them
were forced to quit their Commands; that the common opinion amongst them was,
for the settling the Roman Catholic Religion in Engd. but that the measures
being broken, by means of the Peace with Holland, and the Duke of York's, and
other Catholic Officers quitting all Commands, and the King failing in his
expectations from them, the Roman Catholics came to a Resolutitn to Destroy
the King, as Father Parry, Confessor to the Portuguieze Ambassodor told the
Examinant in 1673; who put this Confidence in him being his Confessor; and that
the same Father repeated the same discourse to him with more assurance in 1678.
adding then, that the Business then was now near, and he should soon see it
done. That about April 1679. the Duke of Modena's Envoy having sworn him to
Secrecy, told him, That if he would undertake the Killing the King, he should
have 10000 l. which he refusing, the Envoy said, The Duchess of Mazarine
understands Poisoning as well as her Sister, and a little Viol when the King
comes there will do it; and that upon the King's Death, the Army in Flanders
and Parts adjacent to France, was to come into England to destroy the
Protestant Party, and that after that, there should be no Parliaments, and that
the Duke of York was privy to all these designs.

That about April 1680. Kelly the Priest whom he had known above 12. Years, and
had some times Confessed him, owned to him at Calis, that he was concerned in
the Murder of Sr Edmund-Bury Godfrey, and that the same was done as Prance had
related it.

That the Examinant had been six or seven Years acquainted Monsieur de Puy,
Servant to the Duke of York, and that he told him soon after the Murder of Sr
Edmund-Bury Godfrey, That that Murder was consulted at Windsor, and about that
time said, that the Duke was very desirous to come to the Crown, the King being
uncertain, and not keeping touch with them; and that De Puy said, there was a
necessity of taking off the King, and that it would be soon done; That the Duke
of York possessing part of the Examinant's Fathers Estate in Ireland, the
Examinant being acquainted with Father Bedingfeild, asked him, how he could
give Absolution to the Duke, till he had made Restitution; to which the Father
said, that every Penitent was supposed to know his own Sins, and to declare
them to his Confessor; to which the Examinant replying with warmth, But since
you know it, you ought to take notice thereof; the Father answered, be not
angry, for e're it be long you may be in a better condition.

That in March 1680. he met Father Patrick at Paris, and talking of a Rupture
that might be between England and France, the Father said, that the French
intended in such Case, to send Marshall Bellfonds into Ireland, with 10000
Foot, and 2000 Horse, and Arms and Ammunition for 30000 Men to be raised there;
and the Father promised the Examinant a Regiment of the Men to be so Raised,
and the design was to restore that Kingdom to its former Owners in Subjection
to France.

That Father Patrick desired him to send him all the Libels that came out in
London, and said, that Libelling the King was a thing necessary in order to
distaste and make him jealous of his People; that the Examinant knew Mr Everard
at Paris in 1665, and has since increased his acquaintance with him; and that
the Opinion of Father Patrick about Libelling the King, encouraged the
Examinant to concur with Everard, as to the Libel lately Written by Everard.

It was most evident from the demeanor of Fitz-Harris (from the first to the
last, after his apprehension) that he was ready to say, deny, affirm, or do any
thing to save his Life.

Mrs Fitz-Harris (his Widow) upon the 15th of August, 1681. deposed, that her
Husband, a little before his Execution, told her what great offers were made
him at first, to have charged the Libel upon the Earl of Shaftesbury, and my
Lord Howard; and that he advised her to do it, as the only means to save his
Life, though he protested at the same time, they were wholly innocent; and that
she was assured that she should have what Money she pleased, if she would
accuse those Lords of the Libel.

Nay, Fitz-H. himself, the very Night before his Execution, wrote a Paper which
he ordered to be delivered to his Wife, in order to prevent the spilling
innocent Blood; informing her, by whom he was advised to accuse those Lords,
and others of the Libels, and of having put him upon the discovery of the
Popish Plot; and that he had the promise of a Pardon to prevail upon him to do
it; but finding that he was deluded, he declared, as before God; that they were
innocent, and that what he had deposed against the Papists was true, and that
he had been only too sparing, in accusing great People among them.

It is observable, that for about fourteen days, between the time of the
Condemnation and Execution of Fitz-Harris, the poor wretch was wholly under the
management of Dr Hawkins of the Tower; in which time, the Doctor having held
several Consults with some at Windsor; there was modelled a Paper, stuffed with
abominable Malice and Falsehood, to serve the wicked Designs of that day, which
the Doctor after his Death, emitted to the World, under the Title of the
Confession of Fitz-Harris, and therein he is made to declare abundance of
extravagant Falsehoods, in particular.

That the Treason of the Libel came from the Lord Howard; But his Conscience
could not but witness, that he had at several times complained to Sheriff
Bethel, and Sheriff Cornish; that he had been pressed to accuse the Lord
Howard, and also the Earl of Shaftesbury, of the Libel.

Then the Sham Confession proceeds to a Protestant Plot (viz.) that the Lord
Howard told him of a design to seize upon the King, to carry him into the City,
and there detain him, till he had yielded to their desires; and that himself
and Haynes were privy to the design, and had several Meetings with the Lord
Howard.

A strange Tale of a Protestant Plot, between two Irish Papists and a
Protestant English Lord.

In the next place, this Mock-Confession is to persuade the World, that the
Protestant Magistrates of London, did endeavor to suborn him to make a
Confession that might confirm a Popish Plot.

It declares, That in Newgate the Sheriffs, Bethel and Connish came to him,
with a Token from the Lord Howard, and told him nothing would save his Life,
but discovering the Popish Plot; and greatly encouraged him to declare, that he
believed so much of the Plot, as amounted to the introducing the Roman
Catholics; or to criminate the Queen, his Royal Highness; or to make so much
as a plansible Story to confirm the Plot.

Besides, That as it has been heretofore observed, and is most undoubtedly
true; that Neither of the Sheriffs ever spoke privately with Fitz-H. until he
had been thrice examined by the Secretaries of State, and sworn to the
substance of his Examination, taken by Sr Robert Clayton and Sr George Treby;
So, this idle Tale in it self, could never deserve the least credit, in that it
made the Sheriffs so foolish and vain, as to think a Declaration from such a
Wretch as Fitz-H. of his belief of the Popish Plot, to have been of great
value, and that it was worth a high Reward, for him to have invented a
plausible story, to confirm the Plot, after the belief thereof, had been
confirmed by many Proclamations, by the Votes of four Parliaments, and the
Condemnation and Execution of several of the Plotters.

Further, Dr Hawkins his Paper brings in Fitz-H. charging it upon the Sheriffs;
that they extorted from him false Confessions about the Popish Plot; and it
makes him to speak thus; I finding my self in Newgate fettered, Monyless and
Friendless, and I could see no other refuge for my Life, but complying with
them (the Sheriffs) so, to save my Life I did comply.

But as soon as the Doctor had published this Sham, the falsehood thereof was
detected, and the World rightly informed in the matter; that Fitz-H. was never
fettered, or put in Irons; but was treated with all imaginable civility, for
which he thanked the Sheriffs, even with his dying Breath.

The Doctor's impudent Libel then fell upon Sr Robert Clayton and Sr George
Treby; and insinuates, that they would have induced Fitz-Harris to say more
than was true, and says, that what he deposed before them about Father Patrick,
was forced out of him, and was not true.

F. H. himself well knew, that Sr Robert Clayton and Sr George Treby, came to
take his Confession, upon his earnest importunity; and that after he had been
thrice examined by the Secretaries and Attorney General, and he had sworn
before them all the matters in substance, contained in the Examination by Sr R.
C. and Sr G. T. except that one passage about de Puy; and when that Examination
was read to the House of Commons, at Oxford; Secretary Jenkins acknowledged,
that he had confessed the same to the Lord Conway, the Attorney General, and
himself, except that about de Puy; yet, the Contriver of the Sham Retractation,
took no care to retract, or excuse his Swearing the same matters, before the
Secretaries and Mr Attorney; because, Reason of State did at that day require,
that not They, but the City Magistrates must be exposed.

Then, the impudence of Hell is assumed, to bring in Sr George Treby, inviting
Fitz-H. to accuse the Earl of Danby, and the Popish Lords in the Tower, by
speaking thus; do but you say it, We have have those that will swear it.

Had they been provided with false Witnesses, and had they had such an accursed
design; There was no need of Fitz-H. his saying any thing: Neither the false
Suggestions, nor the Perjuries, could have gained any weight or credit from the
Authority of Fitz-H. by his saying what they were to Swear.

To conclude, there are Persons who can unriddle this whole Mystery, and pull
off the Disguises and Vizors, wherewith this affair is even to this day
obscured; and therefore, I have made this Recapitulation of the foregoing
particulars, to incite those who are better able, to oblige the World, with a
more full knowledge of the vile Practices, with this poor, deluded, timorous
Wretch; and then it may be evident, that the Doctor gave him expectation, if
not assurance of Life, to the very last Moment that he drew breath.

Remarks upon the Trial of Mrs Elizabeth Gaunt at the Old-Bayly, London, upon
the 19th day of October, 1685.
WEre my Pen qualified to represent the due Character of this Excellent Woman,
it would be readily granted, that she stood most deservedly entitled to an
eternal Monument of honor, in the hearts of all sincere Lovers of the Reformed
Religion: All true Christians (though in some things differing in persuasion with
her) found in her a universal Charity and sincore Friendship, as is well known
to many here, and also to a Multitude of the Scotch Nation, Ministers and
others; who, for Conscience sake, were thrust into Exile by Prelatick Rage;
These found her a most refreshing Refuge; She dedicated her self with unwearied
industry to provide for their supply and support; and therein (I do incline to
think) she outstripped every individual Person (if not the whole Body of
Protestants) in this great City? Hereby she became exposed to the implacable
fury of the bloody Papists, and those blind Tools, who co-operated to promote
their accursed designs; and so there appeared little difficulty to procure a
Jury (as there were well prepared Judges) to make her a Sacrifice (as a
Traitor) to Holy Church.

Upon Monday the 19th day of October 1685, Mrs Gaunt was arraigned, upon an
Indictment, to this effect, (viz.) That she intending to disturb the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Kingdom, and to stir up Rebellion against the King, and to
subvert his Government, and depose and put him to death; for bringing her
Traytorous purposes to pass, she, well knowing James Burton to be a Traitor,
did secretly and Traitorously entertain and conceal him, and did give him Meat,
Drink, and 5 l. in Money, for his Maintenance and Sustenance.

She having pleaded Not guilty, the following Jury was sworn.

Tho. Rawlinson, Tho. Langham, Ambrose Isted, Tho. Pendleton, John Grice, Tho.
Oneby, William Cloudesley, Richard Holford, William Longboate, Steven Colman,
Robert Clavel and William Long.
Then Mr Attorney General said, The Prisoner is indicted for harboring Burton,
a great Traitor, and procuring a way for his escape beyond Sea, and giving him
5 l. to bear his Charges; She and her Husband were the great Brokers for
carrying over such Traitors, as my Lord Shaftesbury and others; He then called
James Burton, and demanded an account of him, whether he were engaged in the
matter of the Rye-House; and how Mrs Gaunt harbored him?

Burton testified, that Keeling brought him and Barber, and Thompson into the
company of Rumbold; It looks as tho Keeling had been employed at White Hall to
make, as well as to discover this Plot, for of the very small number accused of
it, We have him here, drawing in three at once.
That upon Keeling's discovery, he was put into the Proclamation for being at
that Meeting, and absconded about two Months, and then Mrs Gaunt came to
enquire of his Wife for him, who brought her to him; and she told him, that
there were some Persons about to make an escape, and she would have him go
along with them; and sent him (with Rumbold) to Rochford-Hundred in Essex, to
take Ship, but not liking the Vessel, and the Weather being bad, they returned
to London.

That many Months afterward, Mrs Gaunt came and gave him 5 l. and sent him in
a Boat to Gravesend; from whence he went in a Vessel to Amsterdam.

Mary Gilbert ( Burton's Daughter) was sworn, and said, that she met Mrs Gaunt
with her Father in Houndsditch, and they went to a House without Bishopsgate,
and that she there saw him with a Man that had but one Eye, and was full of
Pock-holes.

Burton's Wife then testified, that Mrs Gaunt came to enquire where here
Husband was, and she told her he was at her Daughter's; and Mrs Gaunt told her,
That if she were willing her Husband should go away, she would take care
therein; and Mrs Gaunt appointed them to meet without Bishopsgate.

The Lord Chief Justice Jones and Judge Wythens, and also the King's Counsel
(viz.) the Attorney, the Solicitor General, Mr North, and Crispe the Common
Sergeant, racked their Inventions to draw Burton and his Wife, to charge Mrs
Gaunt with the knowledge of his being in a Plot, or in the Proclamation; but
nothing of that could be made out; Nor is here any sort of proof, that Mrs
Gaunt harbored this ungrateful Wretch; or that she gave him either Meat or
Drink, as the Indictment charges her; And it must be further noted, that here
is only the single Testimony of Burton; of her giving him Money, and sending
him away; The Evidence being short in this,

The Chief Justice fell upon the Prisoner with ensnaring Questions; demanding
of her, What was the reason she would send Burton away? whether she gave him
Money? Whether she heard that his Name was in the Proclamation, etc?

Here Captain Richardson officiously interposed, saying, She says she is not
come here, to tell your Lordships what she did.

The Chief Justice then sum'd up the Evidence thus, Burton says this Woman was
very solicitous to send him beyond Sea; That her Husband being concerned in the
Plot, and she (as Burton believes) knowing that he could make some discovery
concerning her Husband, endeavored to convey him away; It is true, there is
not direct proof, that there was any particular mention that Burton was in the
Proclamation; but he and his Wife say, that they verily believe the Prisoner
knew that he was in the Proclamation; and she her self being examined, says,
that she might hear that he was in the Proclamation, and that his House was
searched, and he could not be found, and yet she conceals him; what could be
the meaning of this, but that she was very zealous to maintain the Conspiracy,
and was a great Assistant to all concerned in it? She will not tell you any
other cause, why she should be concerned to convey this Man beyond Sea; and
therefore, in all reason, you ought to conceive it was for this.

The Jury being thus sent out, and returning, Mrs Gaunt desired to be heard,
declaring, that she hoped they would not take any advantage against her, and
that she had some Witnesses to call; But,

Wythens said, It ought not to be done, you ought to take the Verdict; and so
the Jury pronounced her Guilty, and Jenner the Recorder passed this Sentence,

You are to be carried back to the place from whence you came, from thence you
are to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there you are to
be burnt to Death. Mrs Gaunt only said, I say, this Woman did tell several
Untruths of me; I don't understand the Law.

The Sentence was executed upon this Excellent Woman, upon Friday then
following, being the 23d of October 1685. When she left her Murderers the
following Memorial.

Newgate, 22d of October, 1685.
NOt knowing whether I should be suffered or able, because of Weaknesses that
are upon me, through my hard and close Imprisonment, to speak at the place of
Execution, I write these few Lines, to signify I am well reconciled to the way
of my God toward me, though it be in ways I looked not for, and by terrible
things, yet in Righteousness; for having given me Life, he ought to have the
disposing of it, when and how he pleases to call for it; and I desire to offer
up my all to him, it being but my reasonable service; and also the first terms
that Christ offers, that he that will be his Disciple must forsake all and
follow him; and therefore, let none think it hard, or be discouraged, at what
has happened unto me; for he does nothing without cause; in all that he has
done unto us; he being Holy in all his Ways, and Righteous in all his Works;
and it is but my lot in common with poor desolate Sion at this day; neither do
I find in my heart, the least regret of any thing that I have done, in the
service of my Lord and Master Jesus Christ, in favoring and succouring any of
his poor Sufferers, that have showed favor to his righteous Cause; which
Cause, though it be now fallen and trampled on, as if it had not been anointed;
yet it shall revive, and God will plead it at another rate, then yet he has
done, with all its Opposers, and malicious Haters; and therefore let all that
love and fear him, not omit the least duty that comes to hand, or lies before
them, knowing that Christ has need of them, and expects that they should serve
him; and I desire to bless him that he has made me useful in my Generation, to
the comfort and relief of many distressed Ones, that the Blessing of those that
have been ready to perish has come upon me, and I have been helped to make the
Heart of the VVidow to sing; and I bless his holy Name, that in all this,
together with what I was changed with, I can approve my Heart to him, that I
have done his Will, though I have crossed man's Will; and the Scripture that
satisfied me in it, is the 16th of Isa. 3, 4. Hide the Outcasts, betray not
him that wandreth; let my Outcasts dwell with thee. Obadiah 12.13, 14. Thou
should not have given up him that escaped, in the day of distress. But Man
says, You shall give them up, or you shall dye for it. Now whom to obey, judge
ye. So that I have cause to rejoice and be exceeding glad, in that I suffer for
Righteousness sake, and that I am accounted worthy to suffer for well-doing,
and that God has accepted any Service from me, that has been done in
Sincerity, though mixed with manifold Weaknesses and Infirmities, which he has
been pleased for Christ's sake to cover and forgive. And now as concerning my
Fact, as its called, alas it is but a little one, and might well become a
Prince to forgive, but, He that shows no Mercy, shall find none; and I may
say of it, in the Language of Jonathan, I did but taste a little Honey, and lo,
I must dye for it; I did but relieve a poor, unworthy and distressed Family,
and lo, I must dye for it. I desire in the Lamb-like Will, to forgive all that
are concerned; and to say, Lord lay it not to their Charge; but I fear and
believe, that when he comes to make Inquisition for Blood, Mine will be found
at the Door of the furious Wythens.
Judge, who, because I could not remember things, through my dauntedness, at
Burton's Wife and Daughter's witness, and my Ignorance; took advantage thereat,
and would not hear me, when I had called to mind, that which I am sure would
have invalidated their Evidence; and though he granted some things of the same
nature to another, yet he granted it not to me; my Blood will be also found at
the Door of the Unrighteous Jury, who found me Guilty upon the single Oath of
an Outlawed man; for there was none but his Oath about the Money, who is no
legal Witness, though he be pardoned, his outlawry not being recalled; and also
the Law requires two Witnesses in point of Life; and then about my going with
him to the place mentioned, it was, by his own Words, before he could be
Outlawed, for it was two Months after his absconding, and though in a
Proclamation, yet not high Treason, as I have heard; so that I am clearly
murdered by you; and also bloody Mr Atterbury, who so insatiately hunted after
my Life; and though it is no profit to him, yet through the ill will he bore me,
left no Stone unturned, as I have ground to believe, until he brought me to
this; and showed favor to Burton, who ought to have dyed for his own Fault,
and not to have bought his Life with mine: And lastly, Richardson, who is cruel
and severe to all, under my Circumstances, and did at that time, without all
Mercy or Pity, hasten my Sentence, and held up my Hand that it might be
pronounced; all which, together with the great one of all, King James the
second.
by whose Power all these, and multitudes of more Cruelties are done, I do
heartily and freely forgive, as done against me: But as its done in an
implacable mind against the Lord Christ, his Righteous Cause, and Followers, I
leave it to him who is the Avenger of all such Wrongs, and has said, I have
raised up one from the North, and he shall come upon Princes as upon Mortar,
and as the Potter treads Clay, Isa. 41.25. He shall cut off the Spirit of
Princes, and be terrible to the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 76.12. And know this
also, that though you are seemingly fixed, and because of the Power in your
Hands, and a weighing out your Violence, and dealing with despightful Hand,
because of the old and new hatred, by impoverishing, and by every way
distressing those you have got under you; yet unless you secure Jesus Christ,
and his holy Augels, you shall never do your business, nor your Hands
accomplish your Enterprises; for he will come upon you er'e you are aware; and
therefore, O that you will be wise, instructed and learn, is the desire of her
that finds no Mercy from you,

Elizabeth Gaunt.


Postscript.
SVch as it is, you have it from her, who has done as she could, O is sorry
she can do not better; hopes you will pity and cover weakness, shortnese, and
any thing that is wanting; and begs that none may be weakened or humbled, at the
lowness of my Spirit; for God's design is to humble and ^baseus, that he alo^^
may be exalted in this day; and I hope he will appear in the needful time, and
it may be reserved the best Wine tall last, as he has done for some before me;
none go^^^ to Warfare at his own charge, and the Spirit blows, not only
where, but when it lists; and it becomes me, who have so often grieved,
quenched and resisted it, to wait for and upon the motions of the Spirit, and
not to murmur; but I may mourn, because through want of it, I honor not my
God, nor his blessed Cause, which I have so long loved and delighted to love;
and repent of nothing about it, but that I served him and it no better.

Remarks upon the Trial of Mr Joseph Hayes, at the King's Beath upon an
Indictment of high Treason, for corresponding with Sr Thomas Armstrong.
MR Hayes was brought by Habeas Corpus upon the 3d of November 1684, from the
Gat^^house, and was arraigned, upon an Indictment to this effect, viz.

That he being a false Traitor against the King, etc the 31st of August, in the
31th Year of the King; knowing Sr Thomas Armstrong to have constired the death
of the King, and to have sted for the same; did traytorously relieve, comfort
and maintain him; and for his Relief and Maintenance, did pay the sum of 150 l.
against the duty of his Allegiance, etc. To this, he pleaded Not Guilty.

Upon the 21st of November 1684, He was brought to Trial, before the Lord Chief
Justice Jeffryes, Judge Holloway, Judge Wythens and Judge Walcot; and the Jury
being called, he prudently challenged the following Persons; which if he had
not done, it is more than probable, that he had dyed as poor College did at
Oxford.

Sr Thomas Griffith, Richard Ellis, Thomas Langham, Henry Whistler, Nicholas
Smyth, Thomas Soper, Tho. Passenger, Henry Minchard, Peter Jones, William
Crowch, Peter Devet, Henry Lodes, William Pownes, Charles Gregory, William
Peele, Richard Weedon, Thomas Pory, Tho. Peircehouse, Richard Burden, John
George, John Steventon, Robert Watkins, George Twine, Thomas Short, Robert
Townshend, James Bush, Walter Mastors, Thomas Larkham, Edward Cook, William
Fashion, John Flowerdew, John Greens, John Grice, Charles Fowler, and James
Smyth.
In all 35.

The Jury sworn, were, Samuel Sheppard, Daniel Allen, Rowland Platt, Adam
Bellamy, Daniel Templeman, William Dewart, Edward Pigget, Tho. Brailesford,
Edward Cheek, Edw. Underwood, Robert Masters, and William Warren.

It is likely that he would have challenged one, if not more of the last four,
but that he had challenged the number of 35. before these four were called; and
the Law allowed him not to challenge more.

Then, the Indictment being read, Mr Dolben as Counsel for the King, opened it
to the Jury.

Mr Attorney General then enforced the Charge thus; After Sr Tho. Armstrong had
fled, the Prisoner relieved and aided him with Money; and that, after he was
Indicted, and sued to the Exigent; besides, a Proclamation followed upon his
flight, which was a sufficient notice to all the King's Subjects; Sr Thomas
went by the Name of Henry Laurence, beyond Sea; by that Name the Prisoner held
a Correspondence with him, and sent him a Letter, dated the 21st of August, and
tells him, he had sent him a Bill of Exchange, for 165 l. drawn upon his
Brother, Israel Hayes, who was acquainted with Sr Thomas.

If it were not for these, receiving and nourishing of Traitors, they would not
lurk at Amsterdam, as they do. The Letter was taken about Sr Thomas, and we
shall prove it is the Prisoner's Handwriting, and that Sr Thomas received the
Money.

I hope you will take care, But like good Men, they took all the care they
could, to stop the Fountain of Blood, that to the scandal of the Nation had too
long issued from the Old-Bayly.
by Convicting this Gentleman, to stop the Fountain, that issues so much supply
to these Traitors, that lurk abroad.

Mr Hayes then affirmed, that he never knew Sr Thomas in his life.

Then, the Indictment against Sr Thomas was read, which was found the 12th of
July; and Mr Glover proved a Copy of the King's Proclamation against Sr Thomas
dated the 28th of June, 1683.

Then, Ezekiel Everis was sworn, and testified, that in August 1683, he was at
Cleve in Germany, with the Lord Gray, who went by the name of Thomas Holt, and
Sr Tho. A. came thither, by the Name of Mr Henry Laurence, and showed him a
Bill of Exchange, from England, upon Mr Israel Hayes in Amsterdam, for 160 l.
odd Money; and that it was, for 150 Guineas, paid in England; and he told him,
it was drawn by Joseph Hayes; and it was signed Joseph Hayes; and the Bill was
accepted, and he saw Israel Hayes his Letter to Sr Thomas, by the Name of
Laurence, which mentioned the sending the said sum to Cleve.

The Common Sergeant (Crispe) then delivered a parcel of Letters into the
Court, and swore that he received them of the Lord Godolphin, and they had been
ever since in his hands.

The Lord Godolphin then testified, that he received three Letters produced in
Court, from Mr Constable, Mr Chudley's Secretary, who told him they were taken
about Sr Thomas, that one of them, without any Name, mentioned 150 Guineas
returned to Henry Laurence.

Constable testified, that he was present, when the Scout of Leyden apprehended
Sr Tho. A. and that the Letters were taken out of his Pocket, and he himself
delivered them to Mr Chudley, who sealed them up and sent them, by him, to the
Lord Godolphin.

Charles Davis testified, that taking Boat from Amsterdam to Rotterdam, he met
Israel Hayes and Sr Tho. A. coming to take Boat, and Sr Thomas went with him in
the Boat, and he told him his Name was Henry Laurence.

Davis added, that he lodged a Month in one Briscowe's House at Amsherdam,
where there was a Club every Thursday; There were Mr Israel Hayes, Mr Henry
Ireton, one Wilmore, Emerton, Dare, and some other English Merchants; and he
heard them several times, abuse the King at the Table.

The Attorney General then showed Mr Hayes a Letter, saying, It may be he will
save us the labor of proving it; but Mr Hayes disowning it,

Mr Walpoole was called, and Mr Hayes said, he was my Servant, and went away,
after a rate, that possibly would not be allowed.

Walpoole testified, that he served Mr Hayes almost four Years and three
quarters, and did believe the Letter to be Mr Hayes his hand.

Mr Hayes said, My Lord, in matters of Treason, I hope you will not admit of
comparison of hands and belief, for Evidence.

The Chief Justice answered, Yes, no doubt of it.

Mr Hayes replied, It has not been so in other Cases, that have not been
Capital; as particularly in the Lady Carr's Case.

The Chief Justice said, that is a mistake, you take it from Algernon Sidney,
but without all doubt, it is good Evidence.

Judge Wythens said, Comparison of Hands was allowed for good Evidence in
Colman's Case.

Mr Hayes answered, That, with submission, vastly differs; Those Letters were
found in his own Custody; This was not found in my possession, but in another
Man's, and in another Nation.

Sr John Trevor, Counsel for the King, said, This Gentleman was a Trader with
the East-India-Company, and made Contracts with them, which are entered in their
Books; We will compare them with the Writing in this Letter.

The Common Sergeant then called Harman and Brittle, and demanded of them,
where the Books were; and they produced them.

Harman testified, that he knew Mr Hayes, and that he made several Contracts in
1683, and that he saw him in September 1683, subscribe his Hand to a Book of
the Companies, shown to him.

Brittle testified, that he is Porter in the Street to the East-India-Company,
and that he saw Mr Hayes write his Hand, to a Book shown to him.

Capt. Piercehouse produced a Note, Query, if not the same Peircehouse in the
Panel of the Jury.
which he said was Mr H. his, and that he supposed it to be his hand, and
compared it with the hand in the Book, and said, that he delivered the Goods
upon it; and Walpoole then said, he believed it to be Mr Hayes his hand.

Then Mr Sturdivant was called, and they showed him the Letter, and he said,
Here is Joseph Hayes writ, but I do not know it to be his Hand.

The Common Sergeant warmly said, that Mr Sturdivant swore he did know Mr H.
his hand, before the Grand Jury; but Mr Sturdivant affirmed, the Common
Sergeant was under a mistake.

Then Sr John Trevor called for Mr Hardresse, but the The Common Sergeant, as
has been elsewhere observed, upon the discovery of Keeling's Plot, in 1683,
boasted what work that Plot would make, when it came into the City; We now have
him pulling it into the City, by Head and Shoulders; and find him, in this
Case, appearing and exerting himself, in a three or four sold capacity, (viz.)
the Manager, (if not Contriver) of this prosecution; and a Counsel, Solicitor,
and Witness, against the worthy Citizen, now designed to destruction.
Common Sejeant answered, That he was out of Town, before he could be served
with a Subpena.

Then the Letter was read, it was subscribed Joseph Hayes, and dated the 31st
of August 1683. directed to Mr Henry Laurence senior, at Amsterdam; and began
thus, Sir, at your desire I have sent you a Bill, etc.

The Letter and the East-India-Books were then shown to the Jury, and to the
Prisoner.

Mr Hayes denied the Letter to be his Writing, and said, It Is very strange I
should not know my own hand; May not Counsel be admitted to plead, Whether
comparison of hands and belief, are any evidence in Criminal Causer? I have
been informed, it has been denied to be evidence.

The Chapter Justice told him he was under a mistake; some body has put it into
your Head, and pussed you up with a vain Story; there is no such thing, It Is a
Fiction, a mere Whim, only said by Mr Sidney, and no ground in the World for it.

Mr Hayes replied, Was it not so in the Case of my Lady Carr? there is a Record
of that I suppose.

The Chief Justice affirmed, it was not so, and said, Don't talk of it, It was
in Trinity Term 1669. Anno 21 Car. 2.
there was no such thing at all -- Comparison of hands was allowed for good
proof, in Sidney's Case; We must not alter the Law for any Body.

Mr attorney General said, Besides this comparison of hands, We shall give an
account of the Correspondence of the Prisoner's Brother, and that he received
the Money of him; and then said, Mr Common Sergeant, Where had you this Papery?

The Common Sergeant, to show his care and zeal in this matter, said, Pray have
a care of the Papers; and then gave evidence that he had them from my Zord
Godolphin, and said, This is an Account of the Receipt and Disbursement of the
Money; Show it Mr Constable.

Constable said, This is one of the Papers was taken out of Sr T. A's Pocket.

It being shown to the Jury, one of them demanded, whether any one proved the
hand, that was in that Note?

The Attorney answered, No, but Everis swears, that Sr T. A. showed him a Bill,
subscribed Joseph Hayes; for so many hundred Guilders.

The Common Sergeant said, He says it was 160 odd Pounds; now the sum of this
Note is 161 l. 5 s. which is the change of 150 Guineas.

Mr North concluded, saying, We have done at present.

Mr Hayes then said, Here is no body proves this Letter to be my hand,
positively; They only prove it by similitude, and comparison, and belief.

I conceive there is but one Witness, that that Letter was found in Sr T. A's
hands. Everis says, he saw a Bill had my Name to it; Sir, you did not know me,
nor ever saw my hand.

Everis answered, No, never in my Life.

Mr Hayes then said, It Is only an evidence of Reputation; he heard it was my
Bill; you saw no Money paid upon it, did you?

Everis, No; but I saw a Letter from Mr Israel Hayes, that gave some account of
it.

Mr Hayes said, All this is but Similitude and Circumstance; and I thought in
case of Treason there ought to be two Witnesses, and hope you will let it be so
here; -- here is no evidence but the Letter, and that is not two Witnesses;
There is no body has proved, the knowingly, in the Indictment; that runs, that
I knew Sr T. A. and his Treason, that ought to be proved, but I am sure it is
not; your Lordship says that the Indictment and the Proclamation, are
sufficient notice, that he was a Traitor; that may admit of Counsel to debate
it; There ought to be Witnesses that could show me to be concerned with him;
which no Body in the World can prove; or that I ever saw him; and that Witness,
that says he saw the Bill, or this Letter, does not know that I wrote it. There
are them that say, they heard of Money paid upon this Bill, but there is not
one of them says, he saw any Money paid; and these are several Witnesses, every
one to a several thing.

Here is no proof, but by the East India Porters, and those who say, they
believe this Eetter to be my hand; No body says he saw me write this Letter, or
had any Correspondence with Sr T. A.

If they pretend there was Money paid beyond Sea; Is this Indictment well laid;
for it is laid to be paid in London? The payment of Money beyond Sea, can be no
evidence of the Fact upon this Indictment, for the Jury of London; are to
enquire of matters arising in London only; If I am to be tried for payment of
Money boyond Sea, the fact should have been laid there, and the Trial were to
proceed upon the Statute of 35 H. 8. cap. 2. The Indictment should be taken, by
Special Commission, from the King; and the Trial be in the County, that the
King should choose; I desire Counsel upon this point.

Lord Chief Justice, No, it is an idle Whim, and I would fain know the Counsel,
that put that foolish Notion into your head.

Mr Hayes. If you will allow me Counsel, you shall hear who they are; I have
been informed the Law is so.

Chief Justice. We are of another opinion: If any whimsical Notions are put
into you, by some Enthusiastic Counsel, the Court is not to take notice of
their Crochets.

Mr Hayes proceeded, and said, The Witnesses are Strangers to me; There is is
one that has been sworn, to whom I have paid several thousands of pounds, that
says he does not believe it to be my hand; then he called Mr Sturdivant, who
looking upon the Letter, said, I do not believe it to be his hand; I have had
dealings with him, and he has given me many Receipts.

Mr Hayes then said, There have been a great many Forgeries; and this Letter is
forged; there have been Forgeries so like, that the Persons themselves have not
known their own hands.

Chief Justice. Every body knows, that a hand may be counterfeited, very like;
in Mr Sidney's Case, Mr Wharton, a young Gentleman, not above one or two and
twenty, said, he could undertake to counterfeit any Man's hand whatsoever.

Mr Hayes then told the Jury, that he was not a Man of that Quality, to give Sr
T. A. 150 Guineas.

Chief Justice. We all know you have been a very The resolution in that day,
was to enslave the City and the Nation, and every one who was found to
withstand it, was treated with this sort of Language, and then made a Traitor,
if they found an opportuniry, unless by chance, as in this case, a Jury failed
them.
active Man, a busy Fellow about the City; as forward a Spark, as any I know,
of a great while. I don't know what you talk of your Quality, but We know your
qualifications, you have always been factious and turbulent, against the King
and the Government.

Mr Hayes then affirmed, that he neither gave, nor lent, nor returned, any sum
of Money to this Person; and then called Mr Langley, who testified, that a
Letter was Counterfeited, and a Bill of Exchange for 450 l. and so exactly
like, that if he had not known of it before he saw it, he must have owned it,
for his hand; and the party that paid the Money, paid it in his own wrong, for
he never drew any such Bill.

Mr Hayes added, Mr Common Sergeant had my Books several days in his hands,
where there is an Account of 20000 l. between my Brother and me; and if I would
set my hand to such a Letter and Bill, and write my Name at length, is it not
as reasonable that I should put the Name of Laurence in my Books; and if it
were there, it would appear.

Indeed, here is an Account produced, of diverse parcels of Money disbursed, in
little sums; but, I appeal to the Merchants, whether ever any Bill of Exchange,
was ever paid, in such parcels; No foreign Bill, was ever paid by 3 l. or 5 l.
or 20 l. at a time: it must be paid at the day, or it will be protested -- here
is a computation of a sum, like to the sum in the Bill; but these are
Suppositions, and not proof.

Then Mr Hayes called Alderman Jeffryes, to speak to his Reputation and
Conversation; who said, that he had known him many Years, and never knew any
hurt by him.

The Chief Justice demanded of the Alderman, whether he had been at any of the
Elections at Guild Hall for Mayors or Sheriffs, when Mr Bethel and Mr Cornish
and them People were chosen; and whether he had seen Mr Hayes there, and how he
did behave himself? It is true, that he was, upon every occasion, active in the
maintenance of the City-Rights; and his Lordship, and the Common Sergeant had
ever been as forward Sparks on the other side; and that made them so intent,
upon the destruction of every well deserving, worthy Citizen, whom they could
draw under an Accusation.
A very forward active Man, I will warrant you.

Alderman Jeffryes answered, I suppose I may have seen him there, but I cannot
say any thing to his behavior.

Then Mr Hayes called Mr Pollet, Mr Lloyd, Mr Withers senior, Mr Withers
junior, and Mr Hugh White, who gave a fair account of his dealing and
Conversation. He then said, that he would trouble the Court with no more
Witnesses.

Mr Attorney General then said, that he would call one Witness more against
him; and ordered Atterbury the Messenger to be sworn, and the Letter was showed
to him.

Atterbury said, that he apprehended Mr Hayes, and brought him before the King,
and was present when the Letter was showed to him, and the King and Lord Keeper
North, pressed him to own, whether it was his hand or no; and he said, he
should say nothing to it, if they could prove it upon him well and good.

Mr Hayes contradicted this Mischievous and Bloody Man, saying, his Majesty was
not there.

Atterbury answered, As I remember, the King was there; but by and by said, he
did only imagine the King was there.

The Chief Justice then backed Atterbury's Evidence, saying, I was there, what
he says is true; you said, I am not bound to accuse my self; it is true, you did
deny that you knew Laurence or Armstrong; and it is as true you would not
absolutely deny the Letter, but said, you were not bound to accuse your self.

Mr Hayes then said, My Lord, I did hope, that in point of Law, my Counsel
should have been heard to those things I mentioned; and I wish you would favor
me in it; But that being denied him, he addressed himself to the Jury, saying,
Nothing has more troubled me, since my Confinement, than the imputation of high
Treason, a thing I always detested; I never knew any, the least thing of the
Conspiracy, but by the Trials, or other printed Papers; not one of the
Conspirators, who have come in, or been taken, have charged me in the least;
nor did he himself accuse me, with whom I am charged to have this
Correspondence. Gentlemen, I desire you to consider, that it is my Life is
concerned, and I beg you would consider what these Witnesses have testified;
They are not positive in any respect, nay, there are not two, to any one thing
that is charge; Constable says, the Letter was found amongst Sr T. A's Papers;
he says no more; and here are not two Witnesses to that; Everis tells you, he
saw this Bill, but did not know my hand; There is No body tells you I wrote
this Letter, but it is found in another Man's dustody, in another Nation.

Gentlemen, it is very hard, that by comparison of hands, a man's Life should be
in danger; when, in lesser Crimes, it has been denied to be good evidence; and
none of you can escape the same danger, if this be allowed to be evidence; for
your hands may be counterfeited, as well as mine.

If there had been any probability of my knowing him, it had been something;
but there is not one that testifies, that ever I knew him, nor indeed did I;
There is a great deal of Circumstance made use of, upon the account of his
acquaintance with my Brother, in Holland; but, it is strange, there should not
be some evidence, of a further Correspondence between him and me, if there were
that intimacy, that such a Letter as this does import.

I must, with Reverence to the divine Majesty say, and I call God, Angels and
Men, to witness the truth of it; as I shall answer it to him, before whom, for
ought I know, I am quickly to appear; that I never in my Life spoke with Sr T.
Armstrong, nor was ever in his Company, nor ever wrote to him, by the Name of
Laurence, or any other Name; And I do solemnly say, in the presence of God,
that I never gave, sent, lent, paid, or ordered to be paid, any Money, directly
or indirectly, to Sr T. A. or H. Laurence, or to him by any other Name, or to
his use; I speak it without any counterfeiting or equivocation.

Gentlemen, There have been Overtures, if I would say some things, that my Life
might be saved; and it is not to be believed, that I would run the Risque of my
Life, if by speaking the Truth, I could save it --

The Chief Justice did here appear enraged, and interrupted him, saying, What
do you mean by this?

Mr Hayes. I say --

Chief Justice. Ay, but you must say those things that are decent and fit for
us to hear; you must not insinuate, as if the Government would make any such
Compacts as you talk of.

Mr Hayes. I say that Mr Foster told me --

Chief Justice. If you offer that, I can tell you a Story, that perhaps you
will be very unwilling to hear; on my word, 'twill be very unpleasant to hear
it; you had better let those things alone, for you will but draw a load upon
you.

Mr Hayes. I beseech your Lordship to hear me --

Chief Justice. Yes, I will hear you, provided you keep within due bounds, but
we must not suffer these things.

Mr Hayes. I say nothing but this, It has been told me, the way to save my Life
is to confess.

Chief Justice. As you represent it, it is a reflection upon the Government --
you talk of Overtures having been made you; don't make me say, what I have no
mind to say.

Mr Hayes. I say, Mr Foster by Name told me, there was no way for me to escape,
but by Confession.

Chief Justice. You had best call Mr Foster, to know how he came to tell you
so; If you do, I will tell you of another thing, of The Story of the 4 or 5000
l. was this, an eminent Papist, very acceptable to King Charles the second,
undertook to some of the Friends of Mr Hayes, that a Pardon should be had, for
4000 Guineas to the King, and 1000 to himself; but he afterward declared, that
the King had refused him therein, and told him, that he was advised, that he
had better give that Popish Friend 4000 l. out of the Exchequer, than pardon
Hayes; but that he gave his Royal Word, that the Overture should not hurt Mr
Hayes; nevertheless, the murdering Adviser of that King, does here publish it,
to insinuate the Prisoner's guilt.
4 or 5000 l. that was offered for your escape, you had better forbear, or else
I shall put you in mind, of a Brother of some Body, that is at the Bar.

Mr Hayes, My Lord, I was told that was the way; Gentlemen of the Jury, I have
declared to you the whole truth, with all the solemnity that becomes any
nnocent Man, and not an ill Man -- Besides, that you have heard, in all this
evidence, is nothing but Circumstance and Hearsay; and shall a Man's Life be
taken away, for I believe, and I think, or I have heard?

Gentlemen, I know you are my Fellow Citizens and Fellow Christians, and of the
same Reformed Religion that I am; and I hope you are sworn into this service
without any prejudice against me; but with an impartial Resolution to do
Justice; and therefore I cheerfully leave the matter with you; I am sure, that
if God help me and deliver me in this Exigency, that it is he and you under
him, that preserve my Life --

Gentlemen, The great Incertainties, Improbabilities and Consequences in this
case, I hope will be weighed by you; and make you the better to consider the
proof, which is made, by none but such as are Strangers to me; since then, they
know me not, I hope you will weigh it, before you give it against me; We must
all dye, and I am sure it will be no grief to you, to acquit a Man that is
innocent; I leave it with you: The Lord direct you.

Then Jenner the Recorder, to aggravate the matter spoke thus; The Treason
charged on the Prisoner, is of that sort, that if he be guilty; he will be a
just example, to terrify others from doing the like; for if Traitors had not
persons to supply them with Money abroad, it may be, they would not have so
much Courage to run away.

We have satisfied you, that Sr T. A. was indicted, that an Exigent was gone
against him, upon that account; here was a Proclamation, and Sr T. A. named in
it; and so, at his rate of talking, the Recorder repeated the Evidence of the
Witnesses, and concluded.

Gentlemen, We think that his defense has been so little, and our proof so
strong, that you have good ground to find him Guilty.

The Chief Justice, then summed up the matter to the Jury, in a Speech of of a
vast length, which was in substance this.

Gentlemen of the Jury, This is an Indictment of high Treason, against the
Prisoner at the Bar; and you are to try it, according to your evidence; The
Prisoner's affirmation of his innocence, is not to weigh with you. Nay,

I must tell you, I cannot, but upon this occasion, make a little Reflection
upon several of the horrid Conspirators, that did not only, with as much
solemnity, imprecate Vengeance upon themselves, if they were guilty of any
Treason; but thought they did God Almighty good service in that hellish
Conspiracy: It is not unknown, one of the Persons proscribed in this
Proclamation, did declare, they should be so far from being esteemed Traitors,
That they should have Trophies set up for them; and all this, under the
pretense and enamel of Religion: Nay, I can cite to you, an instance of another
of the Conspirators, that after a full and evident proof, and plain Conviction,
of having an hand in it, when he comes upon the Brink of Death, and was to
answer for that horrid fact, before the great God, he blessed Almighty God,
that he dyed by the hand of the Executioner, with the Ax, and did not dye by
the Fiery Trial: He blessed God, at the place of Execution, that he dyed a
Traitor against the King and Government, rather than dyed a Martyr for his
Religion.

I think it necessary to make some Reflection upon it, when Men under the
pretense of Religion, are wound up to that height, to foment Differences, to
disturb and distract the Government, to destroy the Foundations of it, to
murder his sacred Majesty, and his Royal Brother; and to subvert our Religion,
and Liberty and Property; and all this carried on, upon pretense of doing God
good service.

You are to go according to evidence; as the Blood of a Man is precious, so the
Government also is a precious thing; the Life of the King is a precious thing;
The preservation of our Religion is a precious thing; and therefore, due regard
must be had to all of them.

I must tell you, in this horrid Conspiracy, there were several Persons, that
bore several parts; Some, that were to head and to consult; there was a Council
to consider; Others were designed to to have a hand, in the perpetrating of
that horrid Villainy, that was intended upon the Persons of his Sacred Majesty
and his Royal Brother, and with them, upon the Persons of all his Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, that acted with duty, as they ought to do; There were others,
that were to be aiding and assisting (as in the case of the Prisoner, if you
find him guilty) aiding, abetting, assisting by Money, or otherwise, or
harboring any of those Persons, that were concerned therein.

Then he recounted the Evidence given against the Prisoner, and made such
Remarks upon the same, as he thought fit.

The Jury withdrew, and spent two hours in consideration of the matter; and
then returning, gave their Verdict (to the disappointment and vexation of the
Chief Justice, Common Sergeant and others) that the Prisoner was Not Guilty.

Mr Attorney General thereupon said, My Lord, though they have acquitted him, yet
the Evidence was so strong, that I hope, your Lorship and the Court will think
fit, to bind him to his good behavior, during his Life.

The Chief Justice answered, Mr Attorney, that is not a proper Motion, at this
time.

So the Prisoner was discharged, after he had been imprisoned five Months.

Though Mr Hayes, to the eternal Honor of some good Men, who were upon his Jury,
came off with his Life; he was by this Prosecution, beaten out of as good and
valuable a Trade, as most Linen Drapers in London had; and was, by
consequence, highly impaired in his Estate.

About the same time, Mr Roswell, a very worthy Divine, was tried, for
Treasonable Words in his Pulpit, upon the Accusation of very vile and lewd
Informers; and a Surry Jury found him Guilty of high Treason, upon the the most
villainous and improbable evidence, that had been ever given, notwithstanding Sr
John Talbot (no Countenancer of Dissenters) had appeared with great generosity
and honor, and testified, that the most material Witness, was as scandalous
and infamous a Wretch as lived.

It was at that time given out, by those who thirsted for Blood, that Mr Roswel
and Mr Hayes should dye together; and it was upon good ground believed, that
the happy deliver ance of Mr Hayes, did much contribute to the preservation of
Mr Roswel; though, it is very probable, that he had not escaped, had not Sr John
Talbot's worthy, and most honorable detestation, of that accursed Villainy;
prompted him, to repair from the Court of King's Bench, to King Charles the
second; and to make a faithful representation of the Case to him; whereby, when
inhumane bloody Jeffreyes, came a little after, in a transport of Joy, to make
his Report of the eminent service he, and the Surry Jury had done, in finding
Mr Roswel guilty; the King (to his disappointment) appeared under some
reluctance, and declared that Mr Roswell should not dye. And so he was most
happily delivered; and being, by this remarkable Providence of God, still
alive; he would (at least in my opinion) do a very useful and seasonable piece
of service to this Age, and to those which are to succeed; in publishing a full
Account of the whole Proceedings against him.

Remarks upon the Trial of Mr Charles Bateman, at the Old-Bayly, Upon the 9th
day of December 1685, before the Lord Chief Justice Herbert, etc.
IT was very well known that Mr Bateman, as a good Citizen and true Englishman,
had constantly asserted and stood up for his native Rights and Privileges; and
by consequence, he became obnoxious to those, who had conspired and resolved
the ruin thereof, and of the Protestant Religion with them.

It is an undoubted truth, that this worthy Citizen's seasonable and necessary
endeavor (with many others of eminent desert) to withstand the fatal
Usurpation of Sr. John Moore, in imposing Sr Dudly North and Sr Peter Rich,
upon the City for Sheriffs, in the year 1682, did expose him to the implacable
rage of the Conspirators.

Our Parliaments and Courts of Justice had been for some years, most
strenuously attempting to extirpate the hellish Popish Plot, and accursed
Popery; but there were then found Miscreants, who set themselves to run the
Kingdom upon a wrong scent; and they never wanted a Protestant Plot, when it
might cover and secret their own; and all wise men saw them ready to start one,
when Sr John Moore had constituted proper Sheriffs.

At that time the Earl of Shaftesbury, well knowing that his Innocence would
not be able to guard him, against hired and suborned Rascals, and packed
Juries; and he remembering what base and villainous Arts had been used to destroy
him; his Sagacity prompted him to put himself out of the reach of that
implacable rage, which had so long pursued him; and in order to it, he
concealed himself, for some time, in Mr Bateman's House; and afterward (till
he retired into Holland) in the house of that worthy upright Englishman
Captain Tracy, in Goodman's Fields, whose Life was therefore threatened, and
eminently endangered, but the divine Providence delivered him, after he had
suffered a long and close Imprisonment (in Irons) in Newgate, under the Tyranny
of Richardson.

Mr Bateman was also the Refuge of that eminent and well-deserving Citizen Sr.
Patience Ward, whose innocence could not defend him against those wrathful
Enemies, with his undaunted appearance against Popery, had stirred up against
him; He retired to Mr Bateman's House, and was, by him concealed, until
discovered by that Blood-hound Atterbury.

About that time (viz.) in June, 1683, the Conspirators had brought Keeling's
Plot upon the Stage; and thereupon, Mr. Bateman was taken up by Atterbury, and
carried before King Charles the second, and there accused by He swore many of
his Neighbors into Prisons and Irons, though till now ( Rouse excepted) no man
was ever tried upon his Evidence.
Lee the Dyer. The King had declared of that infamous Varlet, that if he were
not checked, he would swear all mankind into the Plot; Nevertheless, the King
demanded of Mr Bateman, whether the Earl of Shaftesbury and Sr Patience Ward,
did lodge at his House; which Mr. Bateman acknowledging; he was committed
Prisoner to the Marshalseas, and there kept eighteen Weeks; and then, there
being no Prosecution, he was discharged upon Bail.

At the time of the Duke of Monmouth's Landing, not only the Prisons about
London, but the Halls of many of the City Companies, were filled by the then
Lieutenancy, with the best Citizens; under the imputation of being Traitorously
affected, or Enemies to the Government; without any manner of accusation; and
amongst them, Mr Bateman was imprisoned in Cloth-workers-Hall; but, being
discharged from thence; in a short time afterward, Atterbury (who in that day
took up whom he pleased) fetched him from his House at Highgate, and kept him
some time Prisoner in his own House (which he made a Goal, as long as Men would
feed his Avarice) and then delivered him over to Richardson, by whom he was
kept in a close Room, (with the Windows boarded up) sixteen or seventeen Weeks,
before he was brought to Trial.

That Mr Bateman, was a Person of very good sense and understanding, will not
be denied, by any Man to whom he was known, but by the rigor, severity and
inhumane usage, wherewith he was treated, during his long Imprisonment; he was
found, at the time of his Trial to be very much shattered in his understanding,
and very incapable of making a defense; and that defense which he made, was by
the assistance of his Son, a very young Man, of about twenty years of age.

The Jury returned and sworn to pass upon him were, Richard Aley, Richard
Williams, John Cannum, Patrick Barret, John Palmer, James Raynor, Edward
Rhedish, George Lilburne, Daniel Fowls, Peter Floyer, Laurence Cole, John
Cooper.


Mr Phips opened the Indictment, to this effect, (viz.) That the Prisoner, the
30th of May 1683, traitorously, with other Rebels, conspired to depose and kill
the King, and to change and subvert the Government; and did promise and
undertake to be assisting and aiding, in the apprehending the King, and in
taking and seizing the City of London, and the Tower; the Savoy and Whitehall.

Then Sergeant Selby and Mr Moloy, aggravated the charge in the Indictment, And,

Josia Keeling witnessed, that Rumbold Note, all this is hearsay, and no manner
of Evidence against the Prisoner. Keeling had heard it discoursed, but for
ought appears, it might be by Secretary Jenkins, for he named no Body.
said he had a House, very convenient to plant Men in, to seize the King; and
that he had heard it discoursed, that Mr Bateman was looked upon, as a Person
fitting to manage one Division, in order to an Insurrection, to seize the
Tower, etc.

Tho. Lee the Dyer, testified, that, he being acquainted by Goodenough, This
Lee at the same time, that he swore against Mr Bateman, also offered to swear
Treason against a Person with whom (to my certain knowledge) he never exchanged
one word in his Life, and who never was in company with him, nor otherwise seem
by Lee, than at a considerable distance, in a Coffee-house.
how the City was to be divided into twenty parts, and managed; he the said
Lee, nominated Mr Bateman, as a fit Man, to manage one part; and thereupon, he
was desired by Goodenough, to speak with him about it; and that when he
discoursed him, he plainly apprehended Mr Bateman was no stranger to it, nor
boggled to give his consent.

That he went with Mr Bateman to the Duke of Monmouth's House; and after he had
had some discourse with one of the Duke's Servants; he came to him, and told
him, the Duke was willing to engage in the business; and had Horses kept in the
Country, to be in readiness, when matters should come to extremity.

That he the said Lee and Mr B. went to the Devil-Tavern; and there Mr B.
proposed the seizing the City, Tower, Savoy and Whitehall, and the King's
Person; And that Mr B. told him, at the Half-Moon-Tavern in Aldersgate Street,
that if he could but see a Cloud as big as a Man's hand, he would not be wanting
to employ his Interest.

That Mr Bateman had told him, Just as likely a story as that of Colledge's
Plot, in his single person, to seize the King at Oxford.
that he intended to take an House near the Tower, to place Men in, in order to
surprise it.

Mr Bateman objected to this evidence, that if he had been guilty of such
discourse, he had been fit for Bedlam; and if Lee had heard him speak such
words, he wondered he had not sooner accused him.

Richard Goodenough then witnessed, that in discourse with Mr B. at the King's
Head-Tavern in Swithens Alley, about the intended Insurrection, M. B. promised
to use his interest in raising Men; and to be assisting in surprising the City,
Savoy, etc. and in driving the Guards out of Town.

Mr Bateman having subpenaed Sr William Turner, to give an Account of an
Information, given in upon Oath before him; by one Barker, above two Years
before; that Lee would have suborned him against the Prisoner; Sr William would
testify nothing thereof, but said, that it being above two Years since, he
could not charge his memory, with any of the particulars contained therein.

Mr Tomkins, Sr William Turner's Clerk, being asked about Baker's Information,
said, there was such an Examination taken, Anno 1683; but, to the best of his
remembrance, it was returned before the King and Council; and he could not give
any account of the particulars.

Baker being called, declared, That being in Lee's company, in the year 1683,
Lee would have persuaded him, to insinuate himself into Mr Bateman's company;
and he demanding of Lee, to what end he should do it, and about what he should
discourse; Lee told him, he might talk about State matters, Lee, by these
horrid practices, made himself a great Man, being put into the place of a
Messenger, which he enjoyed till of late, tho some time before he became a
Witness, he borrowed Money to buy Bread for his Family.
and by that means he would find a way to make him a great Man, and Baker
testified, he was examined about this, before Sr William T.

The Court, upon this Evidence, declared, that what Baker said, A wicked, but
customary practice of that day, to abet and justify Suborners and Trapans.
was nothing to the purpose, but that Lee had a design therein, to make a
discovery of the Conspiracy, if he could have procured a Witness to corroborate
his Evidence.

The Jury being sent out, without Hesitation, brought Mr Bateman in guilty of
the Treason, (though it is certain King Charles laughed at Lee's evidence.)

It being demanded of Mr B. what he had to say, why Judgment should not be
pronounced; He desired to know whether Mr Goodenough was fully pardoned; and he
was answered, that as for the Outlawry, he was pardoned; and for any thing
else, he was not prosecuted; and then, he was condemned, and was executed upon
the 18th of December, 1685.

That the matter relating to Sr William Turner, may appear in it its true
Light; I shall subjoyn the following account thereof.

Mr Bateman's Son, having (as he thought) very providentially heard, that Baker
had, about two Years before, given an Information, upon Oath, to Sr William
Turner, of the Villain Lee's tampering with him, to ensnare and accuse Mr
Bateman; The Son was advised by Counsel, to apply himself to Sr William; and in
several attendances upon him, when he was engaged in other matters, and his
Books of Entries lay upon his Table; he turning over the Leaves, found the
Entry of Baker's Information, about Lee's attempting to suborn him, against Mr
Bateman.

The Son thereupon, in the first place, applied to Tomkins, Sr William's Clerk,
to get a Copy of that Information; and did once think him inclined to let him
have it; but at last, he told him he must ask Sr William: Thereupon he applied
himself to Sr William for it, who demanded of him, Whether it were against the
King; and young Mr Bateman answered him, No; it may save the Life of one of his
Subjects; whereupon Sr William said, You shall not have it.

The only Refuge then was, to subpena Sr William Turner, and his Clerk; which
was done; and Sr William being examined, and saying, he could not charge his
Memory with any of the particulars in the Information of Baker; young Mr
Bateman said, Let the Book be sent for, it is in such a Book, and such a Page.

Whereupon, Herbert the Chief Justice in a passion, commanded young Mr Bateman
to be removed out of the Court, as he was.

If the truth of what is here related, in reference to Sr William Turner, be
any way doubted, it will evidently, and beyond control appear, by the
Proceedings before the House of Lords, where it has been very lately made out,
by Mr Bateman's Son, and also by another Witness, who was privy to the whole
transaction thereof, with Sr William Turner.

Mr Bateman being thus condemned to Death, by the foregoing wicked Practices;
expressed himself thus to his Son, Richard, Your Father needs not to dye, if he
will accuse others, but he dies because he will not be a Rogue. And 'twas most
undoubtedly true, as it is, that a greater Rogue lives not, than this Lee, (Mr
Bateman's first Accuser) who having miscarried in his cursed Attempt to suborn
Baker, is now seconded by Goodenough, who was brought with a Halter (in effect)
about his Neck, to swear this good Man out of his Life.

In relation to the Witnesses and their Evidence, some things deserve to be
further remarked.

The late King James had no sooner possessed himself of the Throne, but by his
order, and special recommendation, a most malicious Tract was emitted to the
World, under the Title of Atrue Account and Declaration of the horrid
Conspiracy against the late King, his present Majesty, and the Government; The
temporizing Penman (who ever he was) showed more Art than Honesty, in
compiling that History, and omitted nothing therein, which might serve the turn
of Popery; but most wickedly magnified the Evidence of the Conspiracy he
treated of. His loose and virulent Pen runs thus, as to Keeling, one of the
Witnesses in the case before us;

Josia Keeling (a most perverse Fanatic) was the Man whom God chose to make
the first discoverer; It pleased the divine Goodness so to touch his Soul, that
he could not rest till after much conflict in his mind, he had fully determined
to discharge his Conscience of the Hellish Secret.

Now the truth of it is, Keeling was found, about that time, to be under some
Conflict; but it was with Satan and his Instruments; who quickly vanquished and
made him a Witness; as has been lately made out beyond contradiction; by the
Testimony of many unblemished Persons, before the House of Lords (of which more
in it is proper place) he had indeed before that time, frequented an Assembly
of Christians, who dissented from the Church of England; but being thrown out
(as a perverse Fanatic) he made his way by a Profligate Fellow, like himself,
one Peckham; to Sr Leoline Jenkins the Secretary of State, who listed him of
his Church, and the first in his Roll of Witnesses; and since he became so,
it is notoriously known, that he has given up himself to all manner of Vices,
and is a profane lewd debauchee.

This Keeling is brought in as the first Witness against Mr Bateman; though his
Evidence, touched him no more in Law, than it did every of the Jurymen; and it
is remarkable, Page 1. etc. of the true Account, etc.
that in the four Informations, which he at several times gave in to Jenkins,
Mr Bateman is not so much as once named, and yet we here find Keeling a witness
against him.

The forementioned bitter and malicious History does likewise present us at
large, Page 34. of the true Account, etc.
(as it did Keeling's) with the Information of Lee the dyer, against Mr
Bateman; therein Lee swears, that he told Mr B. a story he had from Goodenough,
of our Rights and Privileges being invaded; and that some Gentlemen had taken
into consideration, how to retrive them, etc. That Mr Bateman thereupon told
him, he must have a care, and speak at a great distance; that he was willing to
assist, if he could see but a Cloud as big as a Man's hand; And that Mr B. told
him, that the Duke of Monmouth told him the said Mr B. that he was glad that he
came acquainted with those Protestant Lords; and that Mr B. assured Lee, that
the Duke was very right for the Protestant Interest; and that we need not
mistrust him; And Lee added, in that Information, That Goodenough told him,
that they must seize the Tower, and take the City, and secure the Savoy and
Whitehall, and the King and the Duke.

The Case, as to poor Mr Bateman, was much altered, between the time of Lee's
giving the foregoing Information, and this Trial; for at first, the managers
were for hanging Goodenough, (of whom, the Author of the True Account, page 55.
says, that he, with monstrous Impiety, maintained and recommended the Murder
of the King and the Duke, as a pious design, and a keeping of one of the ten
Commandments, and the best way to prevent shedding Christian Blood) rather than
Bateman; and to that end, Lee's main force was then bent against Goodenough;
but now, it being found, that Goodenough (and the City- Juries of that day)
could hang Alderman Cornish and Bateman (and also Sr. Robert Peyton could they
have caught him) the story, of a Cloud as big as a man's Hand, is expatiated,
and breaks in a dreadful storm upon Mr B. That, of the Duke of Monmouth's being
right for the Protestant Interest, is now mightily improved; and Bateman made
to have said, The Duke would engage in the business, and had Honses in
readiness, etc. And, that he the said Bateman, would take an House near the
Tower, in order to surprise it, etc.

As matters were at first concerted, the Evidence ran thus, Goodenough told
Lee, that they must seize and secure the Tower, the City, the Savoy, Whitehall;
the King and the Duke; Now Lee swears (and Goodenough backs him in it) that all
this discourse of seizing and securing, etc. proceeded from Mr Bateman.

To conclude, the whole was a hellish Contrivance to destroy the most valuable
men of the Age, and with them the Protestant Religion; and the wicked History I
have mentioned, is a lying and most malicious Libel, upon the great and noble
Names and Families of the D. of Monmouth, the Earls of Bedford, Leicester,
Essex, Shaftesbury, Argyle, and others; and also upon the present learned
Bishop of Salisbury; and therefore, seeing that Author does not unwrite it,
it is pity that it is not condemned to be burnt by the hands of the
Common-Hangman; And should it receive that deserved Sentence, the Executioner
is hereby advertised, that he may find the Book in Custody (unless escaped
since the Prince of Orange's Landing) and also in Irons; it being affixed,
(very fairly bound) with a Chain (not far from Newgate) at Sadlers Hall; with
an Inscription on the Title Page, The Gift of Mr Not of the Pall Mall.

Remarks upon the Trial of the Right Honorable Henry Lord. Delamere, upon the
14th Day of January 1685. Before the Lord Jeffryes, Lord High Steward on that
occasion.
SOon after the defeat of the Duke of Monmouth, in the Year 1685, a
Proclamation was issued, requiring my Lord Delamere to render himself, which
his Lordship accordingly did; and upon the 26th of July 1685, the Earl of
Sunderland, Secretary of State, committed him to the Tower for high Treason.

The Parliament sitting in November following, the House of Lords began to
enquire into his Lordship's case, but were quickly after prorogued to the 10th
of February following, and never sat more.

The County Palatine of Chester, did, at that time, furnish the Conspirators
with as good Juries, as could be packed in the City of London, by Sr John
Moore's Sheriffs; as is well known to the right honorable the Earl of
Macclesfield, my Lord Delamere, Sr Robert Cotton, and many other eminently
deserving Patriots of Cheshire.

Thither, was a Commission of Oyer and Terminer speeded, and an Indictment was
preferred against his Lordship, before Sr Edward Lutwich, Chief Justice of
Chester, and the Bill was readily found against him, by a well prepared and
instructed Grand Jury. Thereupon his Lordship was brought to Trial, before the
Lord Jeffryes, High Steward, and the following Peers (viz.) Laurence, Earl of
Rochester, Lord high Treastrer of England.
Robert, Earl of Sunderland, Lord President of the Council.
Henry, Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England.
James, Duke of Ormond, Lord Steward of the Household.
Charles, Duke of Somerset.
Christopher, Duke of Albemarle.
Henry, Duke of Grafton.
Henry, Duke of Beaufort, Lord President of Wales.
John, Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Chamberlain of the Household.
Aubery, Earl of Oxford.
Charles, Earl of Shrewsbury.
Theophilus, E. of Huntington.
Thomas, E. of Pembrooke.
John, E. of Bridgewater.
Henry, E. of Peterborow.
Robert, E. of Scarsdale.
William E. of Craven.
Richard, E. of Burlington.
Lovis E. of Feversham.
George, E. of Berkley.
Daniel, E. of Nottingham.
Thomas, E. of Plymouth.
Thomas Viscount Fanconberg.
Francis Viscount Newport, Treasurer of the Household.
Robert, Lord Ferrers.
Vere Essex, Lord Cromwell.
William, Lord Maynard, Comptroller of the Household.
George, Lord Dartmouth, Master General of the Ordnance.
Sidney, Lord Godolphin.
John, Lord Churchill.


Who being called over, and appearing, the High Steward began thus;

My Lord Delamere, you stand indicted of High Treason, by a Bill found against
you, by Gentlemen of Great Quality and known Integrity, within the County
Palatine of Chester, the place of your residence, and the King has thought it
necessary, to order you a speedy Trial.

My Lord, if you know your self innocent, do not despond, A Complement which
Jeffryes never put upon any Man before.
For you may be assured of a fair and patient hearing; and a free liberty to
make your full defense.

He then ordered the Indictment to be read, which was to this effect, (viz.)

That my Lord D. as a Traitor against King James the second, the 14th of April
last, conspired, with other Traitors, the deposing and death of the King, and
did traitorously assemble, consult and agree with the Lord Brandon and other
Traitors, to raise Money, and procure Armed Men, to make a Rebellion, and to
seize the City and Castle of Chester, with the Magazines; and that upon the
27th of May, he took a Journey from London, to Mere, to accomplish his
Treasonable intentions; and that upon the 4th of June, he incited diverse to
join with him in his Treason.

To this Indictment his Lordship pleaded Not Guilty.

Jeffryes then addressed himself to the Lords, to this effect; Note, my Lord
Delamere was at that time in the House of Commons, and a great Promoter of the
Bill of Exclusion.
That their Lordships could not but remember the insolent Attempts made upon
the unalterable Succession to the Crown, under the spetious pretense of
Religion, by the fierce, froward and Fanatical Zeal of some of the Commons,
which had been often found the occasion of Rebellion.

That, that not prevailing, the Chief Contrivers of that horrid Villainy,
consulted how to gain the advantage by open force; and in order thereto, had
several Treasonable Meetings, made bold and riotous The Duke of Monmouth's
progress into Cheshire and the West.
Progresses in several parts of the Kingdom, to debauch the minds of the
well-meaning, though unwary part of the King's Subjects.

That God frustrated their evil purposes, by bringing to Light that cursed
Conspiracy, against the Life of the late King and his present Majesty.

That one would have thought, these hellish and damnable Plots, could not have
survived the just Condemnation and Execution of some of the Innuendo, Lord
Russel, Col. Sidney, etc.
Chief Contrivers of them; especially considering, that no sooner the present
King was seated in his Throne, but he endeavored to convince the world, that
he had quite forgot those impudent and abominable Indignities, that had been
put upon him, only for being the best of Subjects, and best of Brothers; and
also gave the most benign Assurances imaginable, that he would approve himself
the best of Kings.

And, to evince the reality of his gracious Resolutions, he called a
Parliament, and there repeated, and solemnly confirmed, his former Royal
Declarations, of having a particular care of maintaining our Established Laws
and Religion.

And yet, at that Juncture, that wicked and unnatural Rebellion broke out; and
thereupon, the Arch-Traytor Monmouth, was, by a Bill brought in the lower
House, and passed by the general consent in both Houses, and I could wish, my
Lords, for the sake of that Noble Lord at the Bar, that I could say, it had
passed with the consent of every particular The Lords are here told, that my
Lord Delamere opposed the Bill to attaint the D. of Monmouth.
Member of each House) justly attainted of High Treason.

After this harangue, he concluded thus, My Lords, what share my Lord at the
Bar had in those other matters, I must acquaint you, To what end then, was this
malicious Tale told?
is not within the compass of this Indictment, for which you are to try him;
for that is a Treason, alleged to have been committed, in the present King's
Reign.

Then Sr Tho. Jenner, the Recorder of London opened the Indictment.

The Attorney General then aggravated the Charge, saying; We crave leave to
give a short Account of a former The Plot in 1683.
design; -- Cheshire, the Province of this Noble Lord, was one of the Stages,
where that Rebellion was principally to be acted; and preparatory to it, great
Riotous Assemblies and Tumultuous Gatherings of the People, were set on foot by
the Conspirators.

We shall prove, that a little before the Rebels came over, this last Summer,
the Duke of Monmouth dispatched one Jones into England, to let his Friends
know, that though he had intended to go into Scotland, and begin there, he was
resolved for England; with this he was to acquaint some Lords, particularly the
Prisoner; And also to acquaint them, that they should have notice four or five
days before, of the place of his Landing, and that then the Lords should
repair immediately into Cheshire, there to wait for the News.

We shall give you an account, that the late Duke of Monmouth looked upon
Cheshire as one of his main supports; and upon my Lord Delamere, as a principal
Assistant there.

Jones was to communicate his Message to Captain Mathews, who was to transmit
it to this Lord, and those concerned with him; Jones arrived upon the 27th of
May, but Mathews, (nor Major Wildman, to whom he was to apply, in the absence
of Mathews) was not to be found; Thereupon he sends for one Disney, since
executed for Treason, and one Brand, whom your Lordships will hear of; and
communicates his Message to them, and they undertake to deliver it to the
Persons concerned.

That very night, My Lord, this same Brand and Disney met this Noble Lord, and
give him an account of the Message; and as soon as ever he received it, upon
the 27th of May, at ten at Night, my Lord dispatches out of Town, with only one
Servant, and two other Friends that he had picked up.

With all these Badges of Plot and Design, does my Lord Delamere set out, the
same night Jones came to Town; he chose to go all the By-Roads, and went with
great speed, to repair into Cheshire, by the name of Brown, by which he was
known among all his own Party; by that name, several of the late Duke of
Monmouth's Traiterous Declarations, were sent for, to be sent to him, or by him
into Cheshire.

When he comes into Cheshire, he actually sets about the work, to put that
County in a forwardness, This means the impudent, but ridiculous story of
Saxon, which could never obtain upon any, but the Credulous Prosecutors of this
Noble Lord, who were disposed to believe any thing.
to assist in the Rebellion; endeavors to stir up the People to join with him;
and acquaints one that he employed in that Affair, that he was engaged to raise
so many Thousand Men, and so much Money to be ready by such a day.

My Lords, We shall plainly show you all this in plain proof.

Then Mr Attorney called their old Drudge at swearing, my Lord H. of E. and
demanded of him, his often repeated History, of a design of an Insurrection, that
was to have been, in the late King's time, and what share Cheshire was to have
in it?

The Lord H. told his thrid-bare history of the Plot, in 1682, and 1683; but
not a word of Cheshire; and said, that he knew nothing concerning my Lord
Delamere.

The Lord Gray was then called, and said, That about the time of the contested
Election of Sheriffs, The Duke of Monmouth and Earl of Shaftesbury, resolved,
that they would make what interest they could, to procure a Rising in three
several parts of the Kingdom at once; one in Cheshire, whether the Duke of
Monmouth was to betake himself, and there to be advised by my Lord
Macclesfield, my Lord Brandon, my Lord Delamere that then was, and the
Prisoner; what Gentlemen to apply to, for joining in the Design; The second was
in London, which was assigned to be the Province of my Lord Shaftesbury; and
the third in the West, under the care of my Lord Russell, and that the Duke
accordingly, went his Progress into Cheshire.

That soon after Mr Crag came over to Holland, (as I was informed) from Major
Wildman, and gave an account that Men and Money were prepared; thereupon, the
Duke sent over Captain Mathews, to Major Wildman, to desire him to meet with my
Lord Macclesfield, Lord Brandon, Lord Delamere, and I think Mr Charleton; and
acquaint them, that he had ordered his own Affairs, to join with the Earl of
Argyle.

He likewise sent Crag with a Message to the same purpose, to other Friends in
London; and he dispatched away one Battiscom, into the West, to prepare things
there.

When Crag returned to the Duke, he gave him an account, that Major Wildman had
procured a Meeting with those Lords and Gentlemen, who were all of opinion,
that the Duke should go for Scotland; That Crag said the Prisoner was there.
There was also a particular Message from Major Wildman to the Duke, that he
desired, he would bring over with him a Broad Seal, to seal Commissions with;
And would take upon him the Title of King --

Jones came some time after Crag returned, and gave an account of other things,
conformable to what Crag had said, and was sent again to England by the Duke,
to give an account that he was ready to Sail, and would land by that time he
could get thither.

The Attorney General demanded of the Lord Gray, upon whose assistance the Duke
of Monmouth relied.

He answered, I suppose few will believe we were so weary of our Lives, (...)
to come and throw them away with threescore, or a few more, Men; except we had
expectation of good As^istance -- The Duke did very much depend upon Cheshire,
and upon my Lord Macclesfield, my Lord Brandon, and my Lord Delamere.

Mr Nathaniel Wade being sworn, ^estified, that after the death of King
Charles, Captain Mathews came to Am^terdam, and brought word that the Duke of
Monmouth would shortly come ^hither, to consult with my Lord Argyle; and
thereupon Mr Wade was sent into Freezland, to desire the Earl of Argyle to ^ome
to Amsterdam, which he did.

That the Duke and his Lordship, ha^ing concerted matters, the Duke sent
Captain Mathews, to England; who amongst other things, was to go to the Duke's
Friends in Cheshire, amongst whom my Lord Delamere was named; and the business
was, to desire them to ^ssist him when he should land.

That a little after Captain Mathews went, Crag came over from Major Wildman,
to desire them to endeavor a good understanding between the Duke and Argyle,
who were then at some difference; That a little after, he was sent back to
Major Wildman, to desire him to assist them with some Money; and he went and
returned, but brought no Money; that thereupon, Crag was sent again by the
Duke; because he did not send him at first; the sum demanded was 6000 l. or
4000 l. and at last he sent for 1000 l.

That Crag returned with answer, that they could not assist them with Money,
for that they did not know, to what end they should have Money, but to buy
Arms, and for that the People were well provided already. Whereupon the Duke
sent Crag, and pawned all his Jewels, and fitted out three Ships, laden with
Ammunition; and resolved to go for England, having so promised the Earl of
Argyle; and desired (by Mr Crag) that since the Lords and Gentlemen who were to
assist him, had sent no Money; they should repair into their own Countries, to
be ready when he should come.

That after the Duke Landed, he so ordered his march, as most conveniently to
meet his Cheshire Friends; and in pursuance of it, They came to
Keinsham-Bridge, where a Party of the King's Horse set upon them, and the
Duke's Party took some Prisoners; but went not over the Bridge, thinking it
advisable, not to let the King's Army join, but to go back and engage those
that were come together.

That before Crag's going last away, Jones came over, to know why We stayed so
long; and he was dispatched to acquaint them, the Duke was coming; and was
directed to Major Wildman; and amongst the rest, to my Lord Delamere, my Lord
Macclesfield, and my Lord Brandon, to raise what Forces they could to assist
him.

My Lord Delamere then, declared, that he had never seen Mr Wade's face.

Then Richard Goodenough witnessed, That Mr Jones was sent to my Lord Delamere,
to give him notice to be ready against the Duke's Landing; and to take care to
secure himself, that he might not be seized in Town.

That they were informed in Holland, that my Lord Delamere was one of the
Lords, that had promised to draw his Sword in the Duke's behalf; and that the
Duke told him, that he hoped my Lord Delamere would not break his promise with
him.

The High Steward said, My Lord Delamere, will you ask him any Questions.

My Lord Delamere answered, No my Lord, I never saw his face before.

The High Steward replied, That is pretty strange, so famous an Undersheriff
of London and Middlesex, as he was.

Mr. Jones being next sworn, testified, That he went to Holland (where he had
business) about the latter end of April last.

That Mr Disney had darkly communicated to him, that there were intentions of
doing something; and desiring to know more of the Design, the night before he
went, he acquainted Disney with his intended Journey, and that he intended to
see the Duke of Monmouth, and if he had any Message to him, he would deliver it
safely.

That Mr Disney told him all the Message he should deliver, was, To desire the
Duke to keep to the last conclusion, which he would find in a Letter, that had
been sent to him, by the Crop-hair'd Merchant; which Message was, That the
Duke's Friends, would not by any means have him come for England, but to
continue where he was; or if he thought fit to go for Scotland they approved it.

That when Jones came to the Duke, and delivered the Message, he was in a great
Passion, and reflected very much on Major Wildman, and said, 'twas too late to
send such a Message now, for he was resolved to come for England, and would
make Wildman Hang with him, or Fight for it, with him; That Wildman did think
by tying his own Purse, to tie his Hands, but he should find it should not be
so.

That the Duke told him, Money was very short, and he had pawned all he had, to
raise what Money was raised; That he would be glad Jones should return to
England, as soon as he could; and that he should tell Wildman, that he would
come for England, and he should either Fight with him, or Hang with him; and
that was all he had to say to him.

That going again to the Duke, the same evening, he told him he would have him
stay till Tuesday morning; That then (the Duke being gone out of Town) the Lord
Gray told Jones from the Duke; That he intended to be in England within nine
days; and bid him remember to tell Brand, that when he heard the Duke was
Landed, he should acquaint Sr Robert Peyton with it, but not till he was
Landded.

That Jones missing passage to England from Roterdam, he returned to Amsterdam,
and went to the Duke, and told him the reason why he was not gone; and the Duke
said he was glad he was not gone, for he had a further Message, and would have
him stay two or three days.

That upon the 21st of May, the Duke ordered him to come to him in the Evening,
and when he came, the Duke took a Paper that lay upon the Table, and sensed it,
and told him, that when he came to London, he must see for Captain Mathews, and
desire him to acquaint my Lord Macclesfield, my Lord Brandon, and my Lord
Delamere, that he was resolved to set out the next Saturday morning.

That the Duke then said, that Mathews was to send one Post to that place that
was named in the Note, to receive Intelligence of his Landing; and that News he
designed, should be brought to his Friends here, 24 hours before the Court had
notice of it; and those Lords were to be in readiness, and as soon as they knew
he was Landed, they were to repair to their Posts to assist him.

That Jones asked the Duke, what he was to do with the Paper, who said, I do by
you, as Princes do by their Admirals, they have their Commissions sealed up,
and not to open them till at Sea; so I deliver your Instructions sealed up,
which you are not to open till you are at Sea; and when you have opened and
read what is contained in them, I would have you tear the Paper, and throw it
into the Sea, least you be surprised and fearched at your Landing; And that the
Duke ordered him, that if he missed of Captain Mathews, he should deliver the
Message to Major Wildman.

That the Instructions in the Paper were to this effect, (viz.)

Taunton is the place to which all are to resort, The Persons to be acquainted
with the time of Landing are the Lord Macclesfield, the Lord Brandon, and the
Lord Delamere. The place to send the Coach to, is to Mr Savage's, the Red Lion;
The Post is to return to Captain Mathews, or as he shall appoint.

Jones added, that he came home the 27th of May, (the Wednesday forthnight
before the Duke Landed) and Disney came immediately to him, and told him, that
Captain Mathews and Major Wildman were both out of Town; whereupon he delivered
the Message to Disney, and left it to him to convey it to the Lords concerned.

That Disney met him the same night in Smithfield, with Mr Crag, Mr Lisle, and
Mr Brand; and Disney took Jones and Brand aside, and asked Jones, what was the
place to which the Post was to go.

That Jones met the Duke at Lyme, and told him what he had done with the
Message, who said he was satisfied he had done what he could, but seemed
troubled that Mathews was out of Town.

It being demanded of my Lord Delamere, whether he would ask Jones any
Questions, his Lordship answered, No, I never saw his face before.

Mr Story. (the Duke of Monmouth's Commissary General) testified, that Mr Brand
( who lived about Bishopsgate, and was killed at Keinsham Bridge) told him,
upon the 28th of May last; that Mr Jones was returned from Holland, and brought
a Message from the Duke, and that he the said Brand was to go to Taunton, to
expect, from Mr Dare or Mr Williams, the account of the Duke's Landing.

That Brand told him, that Jones his Message was delivered to Disney, who went
and had some discourse with my Lord Delamere, and that that night, his Lordship
went out of Town, and two Friends of Mr Brand's went with him, and conveyed
him, by a By-way, through Enfield-Chase, toward Hatfield.

That Story went out of Town, the 28th of may, and overtook Brand that night;
That he heard the Duke of Monmouth say at Shepton-mallet, that his great
dependence was upon my Lord Delamere and his Friends in Cheshire; but he was
afraid they had failed him; and he said, he could have been supplied otherwise,
but that he had a dependence upon them.

My Lord Delamere then demanded of Story, whether he knew one Thomas Saxon.

Mr Story answered, yes, my Lord, I was a Prisoner with him in Dorchester
Prison.

The Attorney General then called Vaux, and said, My Lord; this is an unwilling
Witness, and we are forced to pump all out of him by Questions. And then
demanded of him, what day it was my Lord Delamere sent for him.

Vaux answered, It was the 26th of May, his Lordship sent for me to the Rummer
Tavern in Queen Street; and the next day I went out of Town with him, about
nine or ten in the Evening; My Lord went by the name of Brown; We got to
Hoddesden about twelve at night.

Mr Attorney demanded whether they went next; whether my Lord Delamere was
going; and whether that was the direct Road to Cheshire?

Mr Vaux answered, We then went to Hitchin, and I returned home the next day;
My Lord was going to see his Son, who was sick in the Country, and we made that
the way, it being the freest Road from Dust.

Mr Edlin then testified the same in substance with Mr Vaux, that upon the 27th
of May, he went with my Lord Delamere to Hoddesden, etc.

Mr Attorney then said, my Lord, to confirm and explain this Evidence, I shall
prove, that this Gentleman went by the name of Brown, in the Cant of those that
were engaged in this Business; that the name was known as his name, by all the
Party, and called so constantly in their Letters and Messages.

Tracey Paunchforth being called, witnessed, That he was at Disney's house, the
14th of June, with Joshua Lock, one Hooper, and one Horsley; and Lock stayed
for some of the Duke of Monmouth's Declarations, which were finished about nine
of the Clock, and three were delivered to him; and there was a discourse of
having them sent into Cheshire, to one Mr Brown, whom he understood to be my
Lord Delamere; and Mr Disney used to mention him by the name of Brown.

That Paunchforth was at the Castle Tavern, with Mr Vermuyden, his Brother
Babington, and Mr Manning; but there was no mention (as he remembers) of my
Lord, or Mr Brown, but only something in relation to the Duke's Landing; and Mr
Vermuyden who also went by the name of Brown) said, he did not know where he
was to Land.

Babington (the Betrayer of that worthy Gentlemen Mr Disney) then swore, That
when he first knew of any of the Transactions, he was with Mr Vermuyden, his
Brother Paunehforth, and Mr Chadwich; where there was discourse of Mr Brown,
and that his Uncle Vermuyden afterward told him, it was my Lord Delamere; and
ordered him to call my Lord by that name.

That he was at Mr Disney's, over the water, with Paunchforth, and Horsley; and
Disney showed him a Declaration that was not quite perfected; and some body
said, some of the Declarations were to be sent to my Lord Delamere; and Mr
Disney said he was afraid my Lord Delamere was not capable of doing that
Service that was expected from him in Cheshire, for want of some of those
Declarations, which would be mighty useful to inform the People. And that
Disney said, he hoped to have 500 Printed in twenty four hours, and a good
number of them were to be sent to my Lord Delamere.

Hope (of the three Tuns in Coventry) then witnessed, Non hos^es ab
hospitetutus; Those who travel that Roid, will do well to beware of such a
Landlord, for he kept a Diary, and was a Spy upon this Noble Lord.
that my Lord Delamere upon the Sunday before the Coronation, came Post to his
House, toward Cheshire; and sometime after that, he came down Post again; and
a little after went up Post, and told him he went down another way: and upon
the 21th of June (the Sunday sennight after the D. of M. landed) he came down
Post again; and then his Lordship told him, that it was said the Duke of
Albemarle was killed, and that the D. of M. had several Field Pieces, and Arms
for near 30000 Men; and that his Lordshap showed him in a Mapp, which way
Monmouth went; and pointed out such and such Towns, that he was possed of; and
withal said, That he feared there would be many bloody Noses, before the
business was at an end.

Mr Attorney the called Thomas Saxon, and said, Pray Mr Saxon, Their dependence
was upon this well instructed witness therefore he is Mr Saxon, and those
before him were only Wade, Jones, Vaux, etc.
will you give an account what you know of my Lord D. the Prisoner at the Bar,
concerning any Insurrection or Rebellion designed by him in Cheshire, and when?

Saxon swore, that he was sent for to Mere, my Lord Delamere's House at the
beginning of June, (he believes the third or fourth day) and was conveyed into
a Tower Room, where were my Lord D. Sr Robert Cotton, and Mr Crew Offiey; who
told him, he was recomended to them by my Lord Brandon, who said, he was an
honest useful Man, and they hoped he would prove so; For they had sent to the
D. of M. and received an answer by Jones; and as soon as they had an answer, my
Lord D. came down Post under another Name (being conveyed through Moore-Fields)
to raise ten Thoufand Men for the D. of M. in Cheshire, by the 1st of June, but
they found they could not raise them till Midsummer, for they must have time to
raise 40000 l. in that Country, to maintain the Men.

That they asked him to undertake to carry a Message to the D. of M. and he told
them he would; and my Lord D. gave him eleven Guineas, and 5 l. in Silver for
his Journey; and he went and delivered the Message to the Duke.

The High Stemard demanded of Saxon, His Lordship was well apprised of the
Answer their Witness would make, and to them who discern it, in this Question,
it may well seem strange, that they should bring this great Man to Trial, upon
such nauseating Evidence, as some had put into this Varlets Mouth.
how he came to be recommended to them, by my Lord Prandon; and whether he were
acquainted with my Lord Brandon? [Saxon though a very willing Witness, had forgot
to tell the Story of drinking Ale with my Lord Brandon; and therefore, the
Monster, then called his Grace, pumps it out by this Question.] Saxon (knowing
what my Lord wanted) answered, I was acquainted with him; the first time I was
with him, was at Over; the next time was at my Lord's House.

The Attorney General thereupon said, Ay, pray tell my Lord, how you became
acquainted with my Lord Brandon.

Saxon said, Upon Monday in Easter-Week last, being at Over, my Lord sent for
me, to drink a Glass of Ale, and take a Pipe of Tobacco with him; and when I
came, my Lord told me, he had a desire to be acquainted with me; so We drank a
considerable while; and my Lord discoursed, how unfairly the Elections of
Parliament Men had been carried; which had so exasperated the Country, that
they were resolved to rise in Arms, under, pretense of maintaining the
Christian English Liberties, and that they had a design to send for the D. of
M. and make him King; and that they must use such men as me, that were Men of
Interest in the Country, to stir up the People to rise in Arms; And if I would
come the next Monday to his 'Twas happy that my Lord Delamere never took a pipe
with this Villain; nor courted his Acquaintance.
House, he would tell me more of the business; and I went accordingly, and he
told me a great deal to the same purpose, and showed me a Letter that he had
written to the D. of M. which I afterward saw at Bridgewater.

My Lord D. then said, I desire to know when was the first time that he
declared this, he has now sworn against me, and to whom?

Saxon answered, I suppose I told Mr Storey of it first, at Dorchester, after I
was taken Prisoner for the Rebellion: and I think it was a forthnight, after my
acquaintance with him, (I lay with him in the same Bed.)

My Lord D. demanded when was the first time he made Oath of this, and upon
what occasion?

Saxon said, I remained a Prisoner at Dorchester, from the 10th of July to the
beginning of the last Term, when I was removed to Newgate; and I gave my first
information before is Majesty's Counselors, who were sent To instruct him, he
would have said, but that it must be Perjury throughout.
to take my Examination, immediately after I was brought to Newgate.

My Lord D. then demanded, Whether ever he had employed him about any of his
Concerns, that should give him an occasion of trusting him with such Secrets?

Saxon answered, I never was in his company but only then; and then, as
recommended by my Lord Brandon; for they said; they must make use of such as
me, to make their Desigus known to the Country, for the accomplishing what they
did intend.

I was to inform the Country of the time of Rising; my Acquaintance abounded
that way; and by their discourse, they had got Men in every place, to acquaint
the Country when they should rise.

My Lord D. then said, I desire to know who was the Messenger was sent for him
to my House?

Saxon answered, I asked his Name, but the would not tell me; he said he was a
Tenant to my Lord, and had been employed in such businesses for my Lord's
Father Sr George Booth; he was a Lame Man in one Arm, for he had his Hand shoe
away at the Siege of Nantwich.

My Lord D. demanded what time of day or night it was, when he came to his
House; and whether, when he came, he alighted at the Stables or not; and who
took his Horse; and at what Door he was let in; and who let him into the House?

Saxon said, It was just when it began to be dark; that he alighted just at the
Old Buildings; and that the Man that eaine with him, took his Horse; and he
went into the House, and brought out a Candle; that he never was at the House
before, and cannot tell which Door he went in at; That the Man went with him
just to the Door, and let him within the Door; and he saw no other man, but
that man, till he came into the Room, where my Lord; and the two Gentlemen were.

My Lord D. asked him, whether no body else but they were there?

Saxon answered. No; you were so wise, you would let no Body be by.

Mr Attorney then said, My Lord, We shall give no more evidence at present, but
shall rest here, till We see what defense this Noble Lord will make for himself.

My Lord Delamere then proceeded, saying, May it please your Grace, and you my
Lords; It is an Offense of a very high nature for which I am this day to
answer, before your Lordships; yet I thank God, I am not afraid to speak in
this place, because I am not only very well assured of my own innocence, but
also well assured of your Lordships Wisdom and Justice, which cannot be imposed
upon, or surprised by Instnuations and slorid Har angues, nor governed by any
thing but the Justice of the Cause. -- I think that in matters relating to the
Church, and the things enjoined therein, few have conformed more in practice,
than I have done; and yet I am not ashamd to say, that I have always a ten
derness for all those who could not keep pace with me; and Charity for those
that have out gone me, and differed from me, though never so far, nay, though of a
different Religion; for I always thought Religion lay more in Charity than
Persecution. -- In every public Trust, I was faithful in the discharge of it,
for I never voted nor spoke in any manner but as my Conscience and Judgment did
dictate to me. I have always made the Laws the measure of my Loyalty, -- and
have endeavored as far as in me lay, to live peaceably with all men.

This, my Lords, was not only the dictates of my own Inclination, but it was
the Principle of my Father, and the Lesson that he taught me -- Whosoever did
know him, I dare say did believe him to be a good Man. For my part, I
endeavored always to imitate his Example, and that I hope, will go very far,
to vindicate me from the imputation of being inclined to any such Crime as I
stand charged with.

Here have been a great many Witnesses, and a great deal of Swearing, but
little or nothing of legal Evidence to affect me; for there is but one Man that
faith any thing, home and positively against me; All the rest are but
Hear-says, and such remote Circumstances as may be tacked to any Evidence,
against any other Person; but are urged against me, for want of greater matters
to charge me with; and therefore, I hope the produced and pressing of these
things against me, is rather a strong Argument that I am innocent, and that
there have been mischievous and ill Designs of some against me; than that I am
guilty: Had they had geater matters, your Lordships would have been sure to
have heard of them.

My Lord of Nottingham, when he sat in the same place, that your Grace does
now, at the Trial of my Lord Cornwallis, speaking to the Peers, had this
passage.

I know your Lordships will weigh the fact with all its Circumstances, from
which it is to receive its true and its proper doom; your Lordships are too
just, to let pity make any abatement for the Crime, and too wise, to suffer
Rhethorick to make any Improvement of it; This only will be necessary to be
observed by all your Lordships, That the fouler the Crime is, the clearer and
plainer ought the proof of it to be 3 There is no other It Is then great pity
that the Law, as to this is not altered, and every English man (who may have
what Counsel he will in a Cause of 40 s. value) allowed Counsel, when he is
concerded for his Life.
good reason can be given, why the Law refuses to allow the Prisoner at the
Bar Counsel, in matter of Fact, when Life is concerned, but only this; because
the Evidence, by which he is condemned, ought to be so very evident, and so
plain, that all the Counsel in the World should not be able to answer it.

My Lords, I think the Evidence given against me does not come up to this; and
I hope your Lordships will regard this of my Lord Nottingham's, as more worthy
of your consideration, than the fine Flourishings and Insinuations of the
King's Council, which tend (if it be not so designed) rather to misguide your
Lordships, than to lead you to find out the truth.

My Lords, I shall begin with Saxon, for he I perceive is the great Goliath,
whose evidence is to maintain this Accusation, and if I cut him down, I suppose
I shall be thought to have done my own business; I shall first call some of his
Neighbors who have conversed with him, and know him.

My Lord Delamere then called Six Witnesses, who proved Saxon to be a very ill
Man, and to have been guilty of Forgeries, and several Cheats.

That being done, his Lordship said, I shall pass over this part of my
Evidence, though I have many more Witnesses to this point, and come to matter of
fact, to encounter this positive proof against me.

Saxon has testified, that about the 3d or 4th of June, he (as on extraordinary
Person, being confided in) was sent for by me, to Mere, where he found me, Sr
Robert Cotton and Mr Offley; who employed him to transact the stiring up the
Country, to rise and join with the D. of M. Now I will prove, that Sr Robert
was not in Cheshire for several Months, both before and after the time he
speaks of; and I shall prove he was then in London at that time.

Mr Billing (Sr Robert Cotton's Steward) testified, that Sr Robert came to
London the 10th of April last, and that he saw him constantly once or twice a
day; That about the end of July, he went for three days to Epsam, and came to
Town again, and continued here, till he was committed to the Tower, and never
was in Cheshire, since the 6th of April last.

Margaret Davis witnessed, that Sr Robert Cotton came to Town the 10th of
April, and has not been out of Town any night since, except it were in August.

The Lord High Steward caught hold of this, saying, You say he did not go out
of Town till See here the vast difference between this Trial, before an August
Assembly, and the Trials in that day, by Common Juries; had this petty
difference of the end of July, and August; happened in an ordinary case (as the
like did, in the Case of Otes his Perjury) what bawling would have been upon
it; and had this Excellent person, been upon his Trial, before my Lord Russel's
Jury, or Colonel Sid ney's three Carpenters, with the Tailor, and their Crew;
it might have been improved (by this Mushroom Lord Jeffryes, and the King's
Counsel) to his Destruction.
August; The other Man says, it was the latter end of July.

My Lord Delamere thereupon said, The other Witness says, it was the latter
end of July, and that may be very well consistent, neither of them speaking to
a day.

Mrs Sidney Lane (who lived in Sr Cotton's House) testified, That Sr Robert
came to Town in April last, and never lay out of Town all those Months of
April, May and June, after he came to Town.

Charles Reeves ( Sr Robert's Footman) testified, That Sr Robert was in Town
before the Coronation (the 23d of April) and he saw him every day that time
till after July.

Then, Mr Ashburnham, Sr William Twisden and Mr Heveningham witnessed, that
they saw Sr Robert Cotton in Town in June; Mr Heveningham, in particular, that
upon the 3d of June, he was walking with Robert in the Court of Requests, when
Mr Neale came and told him, the House of Commons had then determined a point,
about the Election of Thetford.

Sr Willoughby Aston then proved, that upon the 26th of May, Mr Offley and his
Lady came to his House; and he gave a particular account, how he spent his time
there till the 4th of June, when he returned home to his own House, which is
directly another way from my Lord Delamere's, whose House is eleven of those
Northern Miles from Sr Willoughby's.

Mr Gregory and Tho. Kid (Servants to Mr Offley) witnessed, that Mr Offley went
from Sr Willoughby Aston's, upon the 4th of June, directly home to his own
House, Crew-Hall, in Cheshire; and did not go from thence that night.

Mr Booth my Lord Delamer's Brother proved that he saw my Lord in Town, the 3d
of June in the evening, and also the 4th, 5th, 6th, and so on to the 10th of
June, sometimes twice or thrice a day.

Mr George Booth, another of my Lord's Brothers testified, that he saw my Lord
in Town, the 4th of June, by the partioular circumstance, that he went with
him, the next day, to the House of Lords, to hear my Lord Macclessield's Cause
upon Fitton's Appeal.

My Lord Lovlace proved that he saw my Lord D. in the House of Lords, at the
hearing of my Lord Macclesfield's Cause (the 5th of June) and that my Lord D.
stood by the Bar, and took notes.

My Lord D. then said, I hope I have now satisfied your Grace, and the rest of
my Lords, that none of us three, whom this Fellow has mentioned, were at that
time at Mere, when he said we were. I affirm in the presence of Almighty God,
that I have not seen Sr Robert Cotton at my House these many years, and I
believe Mr Offley was never there since I was Master of it: and I do protest,
that, to my knowledge, I never saw the Face of this Man till now: I am sure I
never spoke with him, nor sent for him to my House.

If his Story be considered, it will easily appear to be very improbable, for
he neither tells, who the Messenger was, that was sent for him, nor the way
that he came into the House, and he must needs discern which way he came in,
for I have but one Door into my House, except that by the Stables, which is a
great way off the House.

Besides, my Lords, Is it probable, that he should see no Body stiring about
the House, except the Man without a Hand, that he says was sent for him? I
assure your Lordship, I have not, nor had my Father ever, that I know of, any
Servant or Tenant, that was maimed in the manner he speaks of; Is it to be
imagined that I would take a Man I knew nothing of, into so great a confidence,
as to employ him about a business of this nature? I beseech your Lordships to
look at him; Is this Fellow a likely Fellow to be used in such an affair? Does
he look as if he were fit to be employed for the raising 10000 Men? your
Lordships likewise see, that he is so well thought of, that he dare not be
trusted out of Newgate; but is kept still a Prisoner, and as such, gives
evidence here; He Swears to save himself, and would fain exchange his Life for
mine.

My Lords, The King's Council lay a great weight upon my going down the 27th of
May, and my frequent riding Post; I shall satisfy your Lordships of the
Reasons of my Journies; the first time I went to take Possession of a Lease of
six or seven Thousand pounds value, which was renewed to me by the Bishop; and
I had word that the Bishop was ill, and that obliged me to make have down.

All this being fully proved by Mr Edmond's and Mr Henry; my Lord Delamere
proceeded, saying, I had resolved to go see a sick Child, but hod not taken my
journey so soon as the 27th of May, nor with such privacy; but that I had
notice there was a Warrant to apprehend me; and I was willing to keep out of
custody, as long as I could; Being at my House in Cheshire, my Wife sent me an
Express, that, as to the Warrant, She hoped it was a mistake; but my Eldest Son
was very ill, and if I intended to see him alive, I must make haste up; This
was the occasion of my quick return.

Mrs Kelsey then witnessed, that my Lord came to his House in Cheshire the 31st
of May being Sunday, and that his Child was ill; and my Lord told her, that he
heard there was a Warrant to take him up; That he stayed Monday the 1st of
June, and went away on Tuesday morning.

My Lady Delamere (my Lord's Mother) testified the Child's being ill in the
Country; and that while my Lord was there, his Lady sent for him Post, if he
intended to see his eldest Son alive.

Mr Kelsey proved, That my Lord D. came down upon the Sunday night, at eleven
of the Clock; and stayed at home all Monday, and on Tuesday, at three in the
Morning, he took Horse for London; and that Mr Kelsey had Letters from my Lady
Delamere, and Mrs Vere Booth; dated the 4th of June; that told him my Lord was
come to Town the night before.

Sr Thomas Millington (the Physician) witnessed; that upon the 28th of May, he
was sent for to my Lord Delamere's Son, and found him very ill, and he
continued so two days, and he told my Lady Delamere, that he thought the Child
would not escape. That he knows punctually this was the time, by the
Apothecaries Bills, which he wrote, and finds the date on them.

My Lord Delamere then said, My Lord, I hope I have given their Lordships
satisfaction in all points, and need to give no further Evidence.

I acknowledge I did go at that time privately a By-Road, by the name of Brown;
as for Jones, I appeal to him himself, and call God to witness, I never saw the
Man before now, in my Life; All that has been said against me, (except what
this Fellow Saxon testifies) is but Hearsay, nay indeed but Hearsay upon
Hearsay, at the third and fourth Hand.

It is at the pleasure of any two Men in the World, to take away the Lives,
Honors and Estates of any of your Lordships, if it be a proof sufficient to
make you guilty of Treason, for them to swear you were intended to be drawn
into Treason.

Upon the whole matter, my Lords, I must leave my Case to the consideration of
your Lordships; I am not Master of so much Law or Rhetoric as the Kings
Council, to plead in my own Cause; But I hope what Evidence I have offered, has
given your Lordship full satisfaction that I am not Guilty, of what I stand
charged with.

My Lords, I would beg you to consider this, that if I, with those other two
Gentlemen that he has named, had had any transactions of this kind with such a
Fellow as Saxon; so as at first sight, to put such large confidence in him; Can
it be imagined I so little regarded my own Life, and all that is dear to me; as
to have surrendered my self; were it not, that I was certain of my own
innocence and integrity? Life it self, my Lords, is to be preferred above all
things, but Honor and Innocence; and Job says, Skin for Skin, and all that a
Man has will he give for his Life; and why should I be presumed to have so
little a value for it, as voluntarily to deliver up my self to destruction; had
I been Conscious that there was any one, who could really testify any thing
that could hurt me?

Besides, my Lords; This very Fellow Saxon, is but one Evidence; and surely,
one Witness will never be sufficient to convict a Man of Treason, though
thousands of Hear-says, and such trivial circumstances be tacked to it;
especially, when tacked to an evidence, which, I dare say, your Lordships are
far from thinking it deserves credit.

Would not any of your Lordships think himself in a very bad Condition as to
his Fortune, if he could produce no better Evidence to prove his Title to his
Estate, than what has been now produced against me, to take away my Life, and
if such Evidence as this, would not be sufficient to support a Title to an
Estate, certainly it can never be thought sufficient to deprive a Man of Life,
Honor, Estate and All.

My Lords, God knows how soon the Misfortune of a false Accusation may fall to
the Lot of any of your Lordships; since that may happen; I question not but
your Lordships will be very cautious, how, by an easy Credulity, you give
encouragement to such a Wickedness; For Knights of the Post will not end in my
Trial, if they prosper in their Villainy; and perhaps it may come home to some
of your Lordships, if such Practices be encouraged.

My Lords, the Eyes of all the Nation are upon your Proceedings this day; Nay I
may say, your Lordships are now judging the Cause of every Man in England, that
shall hereafter happen to come under the like Circumstances with my self; For
accordingly as you Judge of me now, just so will Inferior Courts be directed
to give their Judgment in time to come.

Your Lordships very well know, Blood once spilt can never be gathered up
again; and therefore, you, I am sure, will not hazard the sheding of my Blood
upon a doubtful Evidence; -- If it should be indifferent, or but doubtful to
your Lordships (which upon my Proofs, I cannot believe it can be) whether I am
Innocent or Guilty; Both God and the Law require you to acquit me.

My Lords, I leave my self, My Cause, and all the Consequences of it, with your
Lordships; And I pray the All-wise, the Almighty God, to direct you in your
determination.

Mr Solicitor General then said, May it please your Grace, and you my Noble
Lords,

The Evidence against this Noble Lord is of two Natures, part of it is positive
Proof and part is Circumstantial, and though it be allowed, that there must be
two Witnesses in cases of Treason; and that Circumstances, though never so strong
to fortify one positive proof, cannot make a second positive Witness; yet, I
crave leave to say, that there may be Circumstances, so strong and cogent, so
violent and necessary, to fortify a positive Testimony; That will in Law
amount to make a second Witness; such as the Law requires.

My Lords, If a man comes and swears against another, That he said, he will go
and kill the King, and another Man, that did not hear these words, testifies
his lying in wait; That Circumstance of lying in wait, that was an Action
indifferent in it self, when applied to the positive Proof, will be a second
Witness to satisfy the Law.

It is not my duty to carry the Evidence in this Case, further than it will go;
and I am sure it is not my Duty, to let it lose any of its Weight.

My Lord; Our positive prooff, is but one single Witness, and that is Saxon,
(Mr Solicitor then repeated his Evidence, and went on saying) This, I must
acknowledge standing single, will make but one Witness; but whether the
Circumstances that have been offered by the other Witnesses, be such violent
Circumstances, as necessarily tend to fortify and support that positive
Evidence, and so will supply the defect of a second Witness; is the next
Question I come to consider.

Mr Solicitor then repeated the Evidence of the Lord Gray, and Mr Jones; (how
truly let any who will be at the trouble of reading the Trial at large, judge)
and proceeded saying, Here, my Lord, is the main Circumstance that renders the
matter suspicious; But, tho it was not observed in she whole Proceeding of the
Trial, Vaux witnessed, that my Lord sent to him, and engaged him the 26th of
May, to go out of Town with him the next day.
That very night that Jones came to Town (the 27th of May) does my Lord
Delamere, at ten at Night, go out of Town, under the disguise of the Name of
Brown, and a By-Road, into Cheshire; this I say, is the Circumstance that
renders the thing suspicious.

But now, my Lords, comes the Question, the main Question, how it is made out,
that my Lord Delamere had notice, Jones brought the Message from the Duke of
Monmouth.

Jones indeed does not say that he imparted it to him, But Story says that
Brand, who knew of the Message, did acquaint him, that my Lord had received it
at the Coffee-House, and that Night went out of Town.

It is true, this is but a hearsay, but that which followed, being matter of
Fact; My Lord's going out of Town that Night, and in such an unusual suspicious
manner, gives more credit to the Relation, than, as a bare hearsay, could have
of it self.

For unless there be a good account given of my Lord's thus going out of Town;
it is a kind of necessary presumption, that he acquainted him with the Message;
and if so, it can have no other Construction, than to be in pursuance of the
directions brought him from the Duke of Monmouth.

Another thing, my Lords, that renders this matter suspicious, is, the Name
which my Lord assumed; a Name by which the Party used to call my Lord; which is
proved by Babington and Paunchforth.

Paunchforth tells you, that one Lock came for some of the Duke of Monmouth's
Declarations, for Mr Brown, to be sent into Cheshire; So that though some body
else was called by the Name of Brown yet you have had no account given you,
that there was any other Brown in Cheshire.

It is very suspicious, that if my Lord went into Cheshire under the name of
Brown, and some came on Brown's behalf, for Declarations to be sent into
Cheshire; and my Lord commonly, with that Party, went by that Name; That will
be a great Evidence of his Correspondence with Monmouth.

I confess, my Lords, all this while, our proof is circumstantial; and indeed
there is no positive proof, but that of Saxon's; and here I must confess there
are Objections made, which I cannot readily answer -- There is no good account
given, what reason there was for so many Post-Journeys, backward and forward;
-- These are matters of suspicion; But I confess matters of suspicion only,
unless clear, positive, probable proof be joined with them, will not weigh with
your Lordships to convict a Man of High Treason; but whether these matters of
suspicion, be such violent and necessary presumptions, as tend to fortify the
positive Testimony, I must leave that to the consideration of your Lordships.

The High Steward then concluded, saying, my Lords, There is something I cannot
omit taking notice of, that one mistake in point of Law might not go
unrectified; viz. That there is a necessity in point of Law, that there should
be two positive Witnesses to convict a Man of Treason.

Without all doubt, what was urged by hat learned Gentleman who concluded for
the King, is true; There may be such other substantial Circumstances, joined to
one positive Testimony; that by the Opinion of all the Judges, has been several
times adjudged to be a sufficient Proof.

As in this Case; If your Lordships should believe Saxon swears true; and shall
believe there was that Circumstance of Jone's coming over from Holland, with
such a Message the 27th of May (which is directly sworn in Evidence) and what
the other Witnesses have sworn likewise, that my Lord Delamere went out of Town
that Night, changed his Name, and went an indirect By-Road; certainly these
Circumstances; if your Lordships be satisfied he went for that purpose; do
necessarily knit the positive Testimony of Saxon; and amount to a second
Witness.

Your Lordships are Judges, 'Twas well for my Lord D. and amultitude more, that
they were so; for had his Lordship fallen, weshould not have known where they,
would have stopped; and the High. Steward could have made this Evidence to have
passed, to the cutting off hundreds of Men in the West.
And if you do not believe the Testimony of Saxon, which has been so positively
contradicted by diverse Witnesses of Quallity; The Prisoner ought to be
acquitted of this Indictment.

The Peers having thereupon withdrawn, for about half an hour; returned and
took their Seats, and unanimously declared, upon their Honors, that the Lord
Delamere was not Guilty, and so his Lordship was most happily delivered; and
with him the Right Honorable my Lord of Stanford, my Lord Brandon, Sr Robert
Cotton, Mr Offley, and many other valuable Persons and good Patriots, who were
locked up in the Tower, and other Prisons, in order to their Trials; and Trial
and death in that day, were rarely found to be far asunder.

Thus Saxon, one of the vilest Miscreants of human Race, had a fair blow at one
of the most valuable and deserving Persons of this Generation; the Right
honorable Henry Lord Delamere, GrandSon of the most worthy and never to be
forgotten Patriot Sr G. Booth; and Son and Heir, as well of the Virtues, as of
the Estate, of the incomparably good and great Man, Sr George Booth (Lord
Delamere) But when the Villain came to bedetected of Perjury; And his Suborners
found that the sham would not pass; they were ready to wish themselves half
hanged, that ever they pretended to believe him at all.

The repeated Imprisonment, Vexation and eminent danger of this excellent
Person, my Lord Delamere; and many other honorable and highly deserving
Patriots of the Vale Royal of England; having been promoted and abetted by a
Fanatical Presentment or Address of a Grand Jury of Cheshire; which bears the
Style of Sr Roger L' Estrange; I shall here subjoyn it, (viz.)

WE the Grand Jury, sworn to enquire for the Body of the County of Chester, at
the Assizes held in the Common Hall of Pleas in the Castle of Chester, upon
Monday the 17th day of September, in the 35th year of his now Majesty's Reign,
and in the Year of our Lord 1683, having heard his Maj^y's Declaration to all
his Loving Subjects, touching the treasonous Conspiracy against his sacred
Person and Government, lately discovered, openly read to us in Sessions, by
order of the Court, as well as in our respective Parish Churches by Royal
Command, and seriously considering the extensiveness of the said Conspiracy and
dreadful Consequences thereof, had it taken offect; since notions of Sedition
and Rebellion have been cultivated to such an amazing height, that some have
not only dared to draw them into practice in their Lives, but to propogate them
with their latest Breath, by Devilish Insinuations of their consistency with
Religion and Law; We conceive it high time to manifest our Separation from such
Persons and Principles; their Favorers and Abettors, with detestation of that
dreadful Climax, the Bill of Exclusion, Treasonous Association, Ignoramus
Juries, and seducing Perambulations; by which the Accomplices advanced toward
their intended Assassination and Massacre; which barbarous design, it cannot be
imagined that Forty, or the Council of any Six, durst undertake, without
confident reliance on Confederate Auxiliaries, and not knowing the Latitude of
such dire Combinations, but heedful of our present charge and duty with the
indispensable Obligation the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, lay upon all;
We hold our selves boundin this distempered juncture of Affairs, to present,
that We have strong apprehensions of danger from a dissatisfied party in this
Country; who not only showed their defection openly, by an Address made to
Henry Booth, Esquire and Sr Robert Cotton, Knight and Barronet, at the last
Election of Knights of the Shire, tending to alter the Succession of the Crown;
with other dangerous and seditious purports, giving assurance of standing by
them, in that design, without respecting their Oath of Allegiance to the King
and his Heirs; but also by their several Meetings and Cabals sinee, which
administer greater suspicion, from the store of Arms many of them were provided
with; And for that the same Persons unanimously assembled with Schismatics and
disaffected Persons in the public reception of James Duke of Monmouth, who has
appeared a prime Confederate in the late treasonable Conspiracy the concourse
of armed Persons then attending him, especially in and near several populous
Towns in this County, where, the invited and instigated Rabble, in a broad
mixture of various Sectaries; with superfluous joy and popular noise, tumulted
on that occasion, has had an evil influence upon this yet unsettled Country,
and brought a terror upon his Majesty's good and peaceable Subjects; for remedy
whereof, with relation to the public Peace, and to prevent as far as in us
lies, the spreading of such contagion, as also to wash our Hands from all
misprision, by concealing proceedings that may encourage greater Evils in other
parts of his Majesty's Dominions; We conceive it expedient that the Principal
Persons who promoted the aforesaid Seditious Address, and also those who were
notorious in consorting, aiding and abetting, in the Routous reception and
entertainment of the said Duke of Monmouth and his Associates in this County;
together with the frequenters of Conventicles, and those that harbor and
countenance any Nonconformist Minister or Preacher should be obliged to give
security of the Peace, And particularly;

Charles, Earl of Macclesfield,
Richard, Lord Colchester,
Charles, Lord Brandon,
Henry Booth Esquire
Sr Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet,
Sr Willougby Aston, Baronet,
Sr Thomas Mainwaring, Baronet,
Sr Thomas Bellat, Baronet,
Sr John Crew, Knight,
Nathaniel Booth, Esquire
Colonel Thomas Leigh junior.
John Mainwaring of Baddeley, Esquire
Peter Leigh of Boothes, Esquire
Colonel Roger Whitley of Peele, And
Mr Thomas Whittley his Son.
Roger Mainwaring of Kiruuntham, Esquire
Tillston Bruen of Stapleford, Esquire
Sr Robert Duckenfield, Baronet,
Thomas Lea of Dernal, Esquire
Mr Robert Hide of Cattenhall,
Edward Glegge of Grange, Esquire
Richard Leigh of Highleigh, Esquire
Mr Roger Whittley,
Mr Robert Venables of Winthcombe,
William Minshall of Namptwith, Esquire
John Hurlston of Newton, Esquire And
Charles his Son, And
William Whitmore of Thutstaston, Esquire
We present also, that all persons not frequenting the Church according to Law
are Recusants; it being impossible to know the hearts of men, for what cause
they refuse to come to Church; And that all connivance and indulgence in that
case, is the ready Road to Rebellion, Popery and Arbitrary Power; And further
We desire humbly to present to his most sacred Majesty our repeated
Congratulations of Joy, for his and his Royal Brother's happy deliverance from
the late Treasonable Conspiracy; with our assurances that We will, with our
Lives and Fortunes, stand in defense of his sacred Person and Government, his
Heirs and Lawful Successors; To all which we subscribe our Names;

The Grand Jury, T. Grosvenor, W. Cotton, Edw. Legh, Peter Shakerley. Tho,
Warburton, Anthony Air, Hen. Dayies, Jo. Dod, John Daniel, T. Minshall, J.
Starkey, Hen. Meals, Rob. Alpart, Ran. Dod, Edw. Bromley, J. Hockenhull,
Francis Leche, Tho. Baruston John Davis,



Heads of some Informations and Examinations, taken upon Oath before a
Committee of the House of Lords, appointed to inspect, Who were the Advisers
and Prosecutors of the Murders of the Lord Russell, Colonel Sidney, Sr Thomas
Armstrong, Mr Cornish and others; And who were Advisers of issuing Quo
Warranto's against Corporations; and who were Assertors of the dispensing
Power; whereof a Report was made, by the Right honorable the Earl of Stamford,
upon the 20th day of December, 1689.
Also Copies of some other material Papers, relating to the Murders and
Oppressions perpetrated upon pretense of a Conspiracy against King Charles the
second, and the Duke of York, in the year 1683.
MR John Phelps, Mr Thomas Morris, Mr Peter Hagar, Mr Robert Bates, Mr Richard
Haly, Mr Horneby and Mr Crispe Grang (all Persons of good value and unspotted
Reputation) being examined upon Oath in relation to Josin Keeling, deposed in
substance as follows, (viz.)

That Keeling three or four days, or a week, before his Discovery, of the
Presbyterian Plot, came into their Company at the Fleece Tavern in Cornhill;
where, he appearing to be much disturbed and confused; one of their Company
enquired of him, why he seemed to be so disordered; to which he answered, that
he lay under a great Temptation, for he was sent to, The Popish Lords were then
in the Tower.
by the Lords in the Tower; and some Gentlemen that came to him from them, told
him, his own Party had disobliged him, He had, as a loose Fellow, been cast out
by the Congregation, to which he belonged.
and he had now an opportunity to be revenged of them; That he could not be
insensible of some Persons that designed against the Government; and that if he
would discover, Subornation was, at that day, carried on, by the tender term of
discovering.
he might make himself and his Family; That he had great proffers of Money, and
a Place of 100 l. per annum; and might go in a Coach and six Horses to Windsor.
And that he was to meet those who treated with him, again that Night, at the
Bull-head Tavern near the Tower.

That upon Keeling's talking at this rate, one of the Company asked him, why he
troubled them with this discourse, and told him, if he knew any thing against
the Government, he ought to discover it; but if he knew nothing, he would do
well to keep out of such Temptations, and not go to the meeting appointed; but
he said he would go, because he had promised them in the morning, that he would
meet them again, but declared that he knew nothing, and said that he acquainted
them with it, because if he should be prevailed upon, by Temptation of Money,
to witness any thing, they should be able to witness against him, that he had
declared that he knew nothing in agitation against the Government, and that
they should testify, that he was the greatest Rogue and Villain living, if he
should swear against any Man.

Mr Phelps (in particular) deposed, That he, attended to have testified this at
my Lord Russell's Trial, bat was not asked to come in at any of the other
Trials, and durst not appear, unless desired; That he remembers not, whether or
not, he knew of Walcot's Trial, before it was over; but that he knew not that
Keeling was a Witness against him, till after the Trial was over.

Mr Morris deposed, That he knew not that Keeling was a Discoverer of a Plot,
till after Walcot's Trial; but believes he acquainted Sr William Poultney what
he heard Keeling say, before the Lord Ruse sell's Trial; and also told it to Mr
Stevens; whereupon he was subpaenaed to that Trial, and went, but the Trial was
not till three or four days after the time he was directed to attend; That a
second Subpaena came the night before the Trial, but he being from home, did
not receive it till after the Trial.

Mr Hagar deposed, That he thinks he knew Keeling was a Witness against Captain
Walcot, but did not then offer himself to be a Witness, because times were so
difficult; but when he heard of my Lord Russell's Trial, he acquainted his
Lordship's Servant with what he has now sworn, and that he attended at the
Trial, but Keeling was no Witness.

Mr Bates deposed, That he believes he told what he has now sworn about
Keeling's Declaration at the Fleece Tavern, to twenty persons, before the Lord
Russell's Trial; and that he heard Keeling say, in the Amsterdam Coffee-House,
It is reported, that I have discovered a Plot, of the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord
Russell, and others; but I know nothing of it, and am innocent and falsely
accused.

Mr Haly deposed, that he remembers not that he spoke of what he has now sworn
to any Person, for times were such he was afraid to speak of it.

John Keeling deposed, that Josia Keeling his Brother ( who gave his first
Information upon Oath to Sr Leoline Jenkins, upon the 12th of June 1683.) came
to him the next day, and called him out, and carried him into the Company of
Goodenough, at the Dolphin-Tavern, where they talked of taking off the
Blackbird and the Goldsmith (meaning the King and the Duke) That the Company
being parted, he the said John Keeling, told his Brother, that he did not
understand that Gibberish, and therefore would not be concerned.

That his Brother then carried him to one Mr Peckham, at the Fleece-Tavern in
Southwark; where Peckham encouraged him, and told him, if he would be a
Witness, he should be well rewarded; Then he carried him to two Gentlemen (whom
he knew not) to the Flanders Coffee-House, who encouraged him, and would have
had him to a Dinner, but he declined it.

That then his Brother told him, he must go with him to Secretary Jenkins, to
give Information of what he had heard; to which he showing aversion, his
Brother told him, he must go thither or to Newgate; and so he was compelled to
comply.

That he gave notice to Mr Tory (his Brother's Master) how his Brother had
trapan'd him, An honest Whigg Tory Citizen, living in St Martins Legrand, and
is reckoned the only Tory in London, who at all Elections votes for the true
English Interest.
and made him to swear; and that he acquainted Mr Jones therewith, and desired
him to give notice to the Persons accused.

That he did not believe the Plot, till he saw the Proclamation, and understood
that Lee the Dyer came in for a Witness; That his Brother had 500 l. of the
King; and brought it to a Coffee-House.

That he the said John Keeling was subpenaed to be a Witness against the Lord
Russell, and was sworn to give Evidence to the Grand Jury; but was not examined.

Mr Nathaniel Wade deposed, that Josia Keeling accused him of being in the
Rye-Plot; though he had never been above twice in his company: That, at the
Salutation Tavern in Lumbard-street, he heard Keeling He was ordered by Jenkins
to draw Men in, and that he might accomplish it, They gave him License to talk
Treason.
speak very extravagantly, and say he would do some brisk thing; and that
thereupon Mr Nelthorpe said, I prithee be not mad: And that presently after Mr
Wade heard his own Name in a Proelamation.

Mr John Tisard deposed, that at my Lord Russell's Trial, four Gentlemen told
him, that Keeling (who was to have been the first Evidence against his
Lordship) had confessed that he was to meet some Gentlemen at a Tavern, who
were to give him Instructions what to swear; but he said, when he had received
the Instructions, he would make a discovery.

That however, Keeling was not produced against my Lord, and he believes the
reason was, because some were apprised of the defense, which his Lordship would
have made against his evidence.

Mr Nathaniel Gael deposed, that by the persuasion, of Keeling's Mother, he
procured 100 l. to be lent to him, by Mr Wolf a Merchant, to supply his
necessities, which Keeling repaid three Months after, which was after he was an
Evidence.

Josia Keeling being examined, declared, That he remembers not that he was in
an Agony or trouble at the Fleece-Tavern, or that he told the Company there, he
was to meet any Persons concerning the discovery of a Plot, or that he was
promised a Groat or Employment, or that he desired them to bear Witness against
him, if he pretended to say any thing of a Plot, or that he knew nothing.

That he was subpenaed at the Lord Russell's, and Walcot's Trial; and was there
during the whole Trial of the Lord Russell.

That he applied himself to the Lord Privy Seal, at his House, to help him to
his place in the Victualling Office; and he thinks he applied also to the D.
York; That he after reminded the Lord Hallifax going up into the Gallery at
Whitehall; and after that, he heard he had his place, he thankt him that
Evening, and he continued in his place till within these six Weeks.

That he had Money of the King as Subsistence; and also received 500 l. of Mr
Duncumb the Banker; That the King told him he should have 100 l. a Year, but he
never had it.

Mr Aaron Smyth deposed, That he was a Prisoner in the Tower, when my Lord
Russell and Colonel Sidney were tried; and was kept close Prisoner above
nineteen Weeks, at 5. l. a week charge, and two Warders watched him, or lay in
the Room.

That one of his Warders told him, that Mr Ambrose Philips was come to speak
with him, and had an Order from one of the Secretaries to come as often as he
would, and bring whom he would along with him; but then he was alone; When Mr
Philips came in, after some other discourse, he told him it was in his Power to
make himself what he would; for said he, you know this Rogue Sidney is a
Traitor, and you way make your self what you will, if you will DISCOVER what
you know of his designs against the Government.

That he replied, he could not say any thing that could touch a Hair of Colonel
Sidney's head; and that then Mr Philips said, If he might advise the King, he
would have all the damned Whig Rogues hanged; and for your part, any Body knows
you are Guilty.

Sr Ambrose Philips being examined, confessed that Aaron Smyth had been his
Client, and there was a Friendship between them, and he thought he might have
prevailed with him to have declared what he knew, which he thought would be a
service to the Public, and service to himself.

That he cannot be positive, whether Mr Roger North gave him an Order to go to
Aaron Smyth, or told him he should find an Order with the Lieutenant of the
Tower.

That he used to Mr Smyth, the Arguments a Friend might do; and told him he
came not to trapan him; nor would he discover more of what he would tell him,
but what he would give him leave; but he found him very resolute; and so fairly
took his leave, and never came near him more.

That he believes he might say to Mr North, that he had such a power in Mr
Smyth, to persuade him to tell what he knew; That no body besides Mr North,
either persuaded, or advised him to go to Mr Smyth.

Mr Roger North being examined said, that he procured no Order for Sr Ambrose
Philips to go to Aaron Symth; nor does he believe he ever had any conversation
with him about that matter; and he is confident he never delivered him any
Order for going to him; nor told him that he should find any such Order at the
Tower; nor to the best of his remembrance, knew he of any such Order; and that
Sr Ambrose Philips mis-remembers, if he says he had any such Order from him.

Sr John Moore being examined, said, That 'twas not he that rejected the
Sheriffs, but the Court of Aldermen; That Mr Papillon was set aside by the
Court, because Sr John had drunk to Sr Dudly North.

That he does not believe or remember, that he had any Orders from Court to
drink to Sr Dudly; That Secretary Jenkins was often to visit him, but never
gave him any Persuasion would do, with an easy, willing Man.
Directions.

That he believes Mr Papillon and Mr Dubois demanded the Poll, That he had no
direction from Whitehall to reject the Poll, but the Court of Aldermen did
reject it.

That the Soldiers were sent to keep the Peace; that he remembers not, that
he, either the day before, or that morning of the Poll, made any promise not to
disturb the Poll; nor does he remember what time of the day he went to disturb
the Poll; Many of the Citizens came to his House, and would have him to the
Hall, telling him, the Poll went on, though he adjourned it; which Adjournment,
he says, was by advice of the Court of Aldermen.

Mr Normansel and Mr Trotman the Secondaries, deposed, that Graham and Burton
were the Prosecutors of my Lord Russell; that Sr Dudly North had the Books from
them, and returned my Lord Russell's Jury; that Juries had usually been
returned by the Secondaries, and taken out of two, three, or four Wards; but
this Jury was taken out of about nineteen Wards. That Sr Benjamine Thorowgood
returned the Jury upon Alderman Cornish.

Mr Trotman added, that Graham and Burton were also the Prosecutors of Alderman
Cornish.

Mr Perry (who had been Clerk to Mr Trotman nine Years) deposed, That he was
not by, at the return of my Lord Russell's Jury; but he made a Copy of it, and
is was under Sr Dudly North's hand.

That he was with Mr Trotman at Sr Benjamine Thorowgood's House, who had the
Books of both the Compters, and he wrote the Names, as Sr Benjamine directed
him.

That in common cases, the Pannels used to be returned out of two or three
Wards.

Mr Crisp the Common Sergeant deposed, The proper Officers, swear out of two or
three, but the Common Sergeant swears out of six, so makes some advance toward
Sr Dudley North's number.
that he has known Juries returned out of six Wards, and never out of fewer
than four.

That he was in Court at part of the Lord Ruffell's Trial; That he remembers
his Lordship desired he might be heard by Counsel, and that they might have
time to consider of it; but the Court heard them immediately; [ The Gentleman
paid too great a deference to the Coure, to say they refused my Lord Russell
time, and therefore expresses it in the tender Words, That the Court heard them
immediately.]

Sr Dudly North being examined, said, That he was a Freeman of London; and the
Lord Mayor drank to him as Sheriff; and he took upon him the Office, and was
2000 l. out of Purse, which he never had again directly or indirectly.

[But he was wellrewarded, by being first one of the Commissioners of the
Customs, and then of the Treasury; whereby he was sufficiently reimbursed; and
rewarded also, for the good service he did in his Sheriffalty.

Sr Dudly went on, saying, That he impanuelled the Juries for the Sessions,
when the Lord Russell was tried; That he returned the best It being Sr Dudley's
own Jury, and they doing their business to content, he treated them at a
Tavern, after the Verdict given, as appears by the Journal of the House of
Lords.
Jury he could, without observing any Ward; and drew this out of several Wards,
because they might be the more substantial Men.

That, to the best of his remembrance, Sr Peter Rich concurred in this Jury; if
he had opposed it, he should not have done it.

That the Juries before, were returned by the Secondaries, but this being a
very It was indeed a very extraordinary business, to murder as valuable a Noble
Man, as ever drew Breath in England.
extraordinary business, he thought it requisite to take care of it himself.

That he took no care of what opinion the Jury were of, but only that they were
substantial Men [ yet he cannot show one Man called a Whigg, returned on the
Jury.]

That he had no order or directions from any Man Note, his Brother the Lord
Keeper was now mination.
alive, to take care of this business.

Sr Peter Rich declared, That he was never asked in his whole year to impannel
a Jury; and that he never impanneled any, or signed any Panel to his
knowledge; and says positively, that the Books were sent to him by the
Secondaries, and that he never saw the Panel (of my Lord Russell's Jury) till
he heard it read in Court.

That the usual practice of the return of Juryes, in London, is by the
Secondaries.

Sr Benjamin Thorowgood, being examined, said, that he was Sheriff at the time
when Mr Cornish suffered; That the two Secondaries brought him the Books. That
he knows not out of how many Wards the Jury was returned, but he thinks out of
most of them, and he believes it to be the Custom to return the Jury so. [But
the Secondaries swear the contrary.]

That he thought it a piece of justice in him, to see the Jury fairly
returned; being the Gentleman to be tried, had been one of his Predecessors.

That the Jury were of the sufficientest, This is Sr Benjamine's opinion that
the substance as well as the honesty of the City was got into Tory Hands (the
Jury being all of that stamp) but to let their honesty alone, the contrary is
as evident, as to the ability of more than one of these Jurymen, as it is that
Juryes were wont to be taken out of most of the Wards.
ablest and honestest Men, of the City of London; and he believes all the Men
that served of the Jury, were those he returned.

Mr Henry Cornish, being examined, deposed, that his Father was kept close from
his Commitment to the day of his Trial, and Captain Richardson would admit none
of his Friends to come to him.

That he went to Normansel the Secondary, for a Copy of the Panel, and either
he or his Clerk told him, that Burton and Graham hadit; and when he came again
in the Evening to them for it, one of them told him, They had orders from
above, not to let him have it.

Sr James Forbes, deposed, that the Dake of Monmouth desired him to show Mr
Hambden a Paper written with the King's own Hand; which was, for the Duke's
owning of the Evidence of Romsey and others.

That, he told the Duke that that Paper would make him infamous, and would be a
means of destroying many Men's Lives; whereupon, the Duke sent him with the
Paper to the Earl of Anglesey; who, upon the reading of it, presently wrote a a
Paper of Reasons against it.

That before Sr James went to the Earl of A. the Duke told him, if it were so
as he had told him, he would have the Paper again, though he dyed for it;
whereupon Sr James ask't him how he would get it. That the Duke said the King
would show it him, and then he would tear it out of his Hand; and then further
said, the Duke of York was his implacable Enemy.

That, as soon as Mr Hambden had read the Paper, he said, he was a Dead Man;
and ask't leave of Sr James to show it to his Father, which he consented to.

That he returned to the Duke and gave him the Earl of Anglesey's Reasons
against the Paper, together with his own thoughts of it; whereupon the Duke
replied, that he saw they had a mind to ruin him; and he was only brought into
Court to do a Jobb; and that he would not Sleep before he had retrived the
Paper.

That, the Duke told him how kindly the King had expressed himself to him; and
Sr James desired the Duke to save Colonel Sidney, if possible; but he feared he
could not; but said, he had told the King, how good a Man the Lord Russell was,
and how unjustly he had been put to death.

That, at the desire of Mr Hambden, the Duke went to visit him, before he had
his Pardon: though he thought it to be very dangerous; and was with him two or
three Hours in private, and Sr James believes it was about saving the Colonel's
Life.

That, the Duke's Servants told Sr James, at the Cockpit, that they were
ordered not to suffer any of his old Friends, or Whiggs (and such and such in
particular) to see, or pay a Visit to the Duke.

That the Duke told St James, that the Lord Hallifax persuaded him to sign the
Paper; but whether it were for his good or not he knew not.

That when Sr James told the Duke how it was reported in the Town, that he was
come in to be a Witness, he answered, he never would.

That the next day after Sr James had given the Duke the Earl of Anglesey's
Reasons, and Mr Hambden's and his own Opinion: Colonel Godfrey came to him, and
told him that the Duke had recovered the Paper, and got it into his own
possession; and Sr James went to tell Mr Hambden, Mr Charlton, and Major
Wildman of it.

Colonel Godfrey, deposed That the first night the Duke of Monmouth came to
Court, he went to him with Sr James Forbes; and the Duke told them how kind the
King was to him, in giving him his Pardon: and that he believed he owed a great
deal of it, to the Lord Hallifax; and several times he heard him say, that the
Lord Hallifax had been kind and servicable to him.

That the Duke said, the King told him, that he must submit to be asked
Questions in public, concerning the Plot; and must submit to him, and not
contradict him.

That within two or three days after the Duke surrendered himself, he showed
him a Paper, which was, a Declaration or seeming Confirmation of the Plot, with
which the Lord Russell and Colonel Sidney were charged; and he thinks the
Paper was signed, with the Dukes name to it.

That the Paper which the Duke got from the King was not the same with the
other: and he believes he did not see that Paper; That the Duke told him, after
the Paper had been sent to the Council, that he had signed such a Paper; he
understood in general from him, that this Paper was a Confirmation of the Plot,
the Lord Russell and Colonel Sidney suffered upon.

That he thinks the Duke told him, the Lord Hallifax persuaded him to sign that
Paper; The Reasons he used were, that he might keep at Court, and be near the
King or else he must go from thence.

Anthony Row Esquire deposed, That the Duke of Monmouth sent him to the King, with
two or three Letters; whom he found very angry with him, for the Company he
kept; Observe here what value that King put upon the Blood of Lord Russell and
Col. Sidney, etc.
and particularly the Lord Howard, who, he said was so ill a Man, that he would
not hang the worst dog he had, on his Evidence.

That he heard the Duke had a Paper given him from the King to consider of; he
seemed unwilling to sign it, but at last consented, so he might not be asked to
sign any other; He being in the Bedchamber, when the King told him he should
not; whether he signed it or not, Mr Row knows not.

That this Paper was given to the King, and showed to the Council, but they not
likeing it, it was either Burnt or Torn, and another Paper drawn.

That about that time, some thing of this being put into the Gazette, Mr Row
acquainted the Duke with it: Who was displeased at it; and bid them tell every
Body they met, that it was false.

That Mr Row doing so in the Coffeehouse that night, the King, was acquainted
with it; and sent for him early the next morning, and chid him; and told him,
he did the Duke more hurt than he was aware of, and commanded him to speak no
more of it.

That the Duke told him he was resolved not to sign the second Paper; That one
day afterward, he, and Godfrey and Barker, were in the outward Room, and the
Lord Hallifax, was with the Duke and Duchess in her Room; and the Duke came
out to them once or twice, and at last laid he had done it; and that night he
seemed angry with himself that he had signed the Paper, for that it might hurt
others, and that if it had concerned none but himself he had not cared; but
said, he would not rest till he had the Paper again, and the next morning he
told him he had got it.

That the Duke told them, that the King had often pressed him to sign it, and
told him he should never see his face more if he did not do it, but if he would
he should ask him nothing, but he would grant it; But when he did sign it, he
knows not, nor that there was any in the Room, but the Duchess and the Lord
Hallifax.

That the Duke told him, after he came out, that the Lord Hallifax had over
persuaded him, and made him do it; and engaged to him, the King should never
let the Paper be seen; and said, this was the time to gain the King's favor:
It being long ago, Mr Row declared these things as he believes, and to the best
of his Remembrance.

Mr Robert Yard, being examined, declared, that the Advertisement concerning
the Duke of M. which was put into the Gazete, was what was handled in Council,
the day after the Duke came in, It was the giving an Account of what passed
betwixt the King and the Duke. That he had the Paper either from the Lord
Sunderland or Sr Leoline Jenkins.

John Hambden Esquire declared himself thus; His Case is so twisted with those of
the Noble Persons, whose Murders you enquire after, that he knows not how to
speak of theirs, without relating his his own, and that he looks upon himself
almost as much murdered, as any of them, by reason of his Sufferings.

My Lord Russell and Col. Sidney were clapped up in the Tower; after which he
was sent for, and brought into the Cabinet Council, or select number of Lords;
and asked, whether he was of the Council of six; so the Lord Howard was pleased
to call it: He saw there, the King, the Lord Keeper North, and Lord Hallifax;
there were some others present, whose faces he did not fee; he does not
remember a Clerk with them; my Lord Keeper asked some Questions, and so did the
King; He was pressed much to confess; he claimed the Liberty, as an
Englishman, not to accuse himself; he was sent to the Tower, and made close
Prisoner; he was kept in the strictest custody for twenty Weeks; when he had
been there, after the Lord R. was executed, and a little before Col. Sidney was
executed, he had an intimation by a private note, that there was an intention
to try him; for a Misdemeanour, he was bailed out upon 30000 l.

After this, it happened, the D. of M. came in, and had a Pardon; but several
coming to see him, he spoke some things freely, which did not please the Court;
and at the Old Duchess of Richmond 's, he spoke as if those Gentlemen that
were put to Death, dyed unjustly.

Whereupon, after the King was told this, by a Lady; he would have him confess
his being concerned in the Plot; and a Paper was drawn to that purpose, which
the King would have him sign, which he did.

A Gentleman (viz.) Sr James Forbes, came to him from the Duke, with the Copy
of the Paper the Duke had signed, to own the Plot; as soon as he saw it, he
said it was a Confession (...) the Plot, and according to the Law then in
practice, it would hang him; because a Paper had been given in evidence against
Col. Sidney; upon which he was condemned; for if a Paper which was said, and
not proved to be writ by him, could supply the place of a second Evidence; then
a Paper which could be proved to be written and signed by the D. of M. might
much more properly be made use of as his Evidence, to hang other People.

He said, he was told by Sr James Forbes, that the D. was in a manner forced to
do it; and persuaded and overborne in it, by the Lord H. when Sr James Forbes
went back, the D. was concerned to madness; and said, if he lived till next
day, he would have the Paper again; and accordingly he went to the King, and
told him he could not rest till he had it; The King with great indignation
threw him the Paper, and bid him never see his face more; and he believes he
did not; and so the Duke went away; and by that he escaped the Trial then.

He was told by Mr Waller, who is since dead, that the Duke's owning the Plot
to the King, was the cause of Colonel Sidney's death; for the King balanced
before.

He was after this, brought to a Trial for Misdemeanour, and was convicted on
the Lord Howard's evidence. He pleaded Magna Charta, that a Salvo Contenemento;
but the Court fined him 4000 l. and to Imprisonment, till the Fine paid, and
security for the good Behavior.

The King made his choice of putting him in Prison, and he was committed to the
Marshal's House in the King's Bench, where he was ten Months.

He offered several sums of Money, and they answered, they had rather have him
rot in Prison, than he should pay the Fine.

After this, they put him in the Common Prison, where he was kept ten or eleven
Months, very close; then, they contrive a Writ called a long Writ, to reach his
Real and Personal Estate, whilst he was thus a Prisoner.

After this, he heard a new Witness appeared, which was after the defeat of the
Duke of Monmouth. He was sent Close Prisoner to the Tower, by the Lord
Sunderland's Warrant, and put into such a Room, where he had no convenience,
and with two of the Rudest Warders in the Tower, to lie in the Room with him.

After seven or eight weeks, he was removed to Newgate, where he was kept close
eleven weeks; his Friends offered Money for his Pardon to some in power; who
were the Lord Jefferyes and Mr Petre; the sum was 6000 l. and that was
effectual; It is not possible for a Man to suffer more than he did.

By the help of the Money, on condition he would plead Guilty to his
Indictment, he was to come off.

His Friends advised him to it, because it could hurt none; there being none
living of those called the Council of six, but the Lord Howard.

Whereupon, pleading guilty, he was discharged; paying 3 or 400 l. to Burton
and Graham for the charge of his Pardon.

As for the Subject matter of what he confessed, The designing to rise in Arms
to rescue the Laws and Liberties of his Country, when threatened with
destruction.
no man will think he ought to be ashamed, that thinks my Lord Russell was
Murdered; And he said, this was the way that our Ancestors always took, when
the Sovereign Authority came to so great a height; as may be made out by many
instances; he said, Custom had made this the Law of England; and that all
Civilized and well governed Nations about us, had used the same way.

Notwithstanding his pleading Guilty, he has been very ready to secure the
Kingdom; and he was one of the two or three Men, that received Letters from
Holland of this Revolution; And, he says he thinks King William's coming into
England, to be nothing else but the Continuation of the Council of six; and if
not, he desires to be better informed.

Being asked by the Lord H. how he came to send his Wife to the Man, whom he
thought was instrumental in obtaining the Paper, which he thought endangered
his Life; He answered, did not he send his Wife to the Lord Jefferies, Mr Petre
and others? who should he send to but to those in power? and who could help him
but those in power?

He did not think that the Lord H. struck directly at his Life, or that his
Lordship had any personal Pique against him; but against the Cause he was
engaged in; His Wife did go several times to the Lord H. and by her he believes
he sent him thanks; He knows no solid effects of his kindness; if there were,
he desires the Lord H. to tell him in what; He believes no part of the 6000 l
was given to the Lord H.

He never heard any thing of the D. of Monmouth's Confession of the Plot, till
after the Paper was signed by the Duke, and sent to him; He has heard it, as
common talk, that the Duke had confessed a Plot, and that Mr Waller told him so
indefinitely; he could not tell whether he meant before the signing the Paper,
or no; He says what the Duke did at that time was all of a piece; whether
speaking or writing; he is sure that it was with the utmost reluctance, that
the Duke signed the Paper.

He remembers no more in the Cabinet Council, but the Lord Radnor, besides
those he has already named; but believes there were three or four more.

He was bailed the 28th of November, 1683. and Colonel Sidney he thinks was
Executed, the 5th of December following.

The Duke of Monmouth appeared very firm to him, and engaged to do his utmost
to save Colonel Sidney.

He says he came out of the Tower some days before Colonel Sidney was
Executed; he had an intention to have visited him, but his Friends thought it
useless and dangerous to them; and that he might write any thing he had to say;
Accordingly, he wrote to him, that he would come to him, if he desired it, but
Col. Sidney charged him not to come, but to write, if he thought any
inconveniency would come of it; The Messenger which brought him the Message
beforementioned, was Dr Hall now Bishop of Oxford; who applied to the Duchess
of Portsmouth for his Release; but her answer to him, afterward was, That she
had tried, and could do nothing, for they would rather have him rot in Prison,
than have the 40000 l.

Dame Katharine Armstrong, being examined, deposed, that she demanded a Writ of
Error of the Cursitor of London, for Sr Thomas Armstrong, and told him she was
ready to pay all due Fees; but he told her she must go to the Attorney General;
and she demanded it publicly in Court of the Lord Keeper North; but he said it
was not in him to give, but the King.

Mrs Jane Mathews being examined, said, that her Father was sent to Prison, and
could have no Council admitted to him; nor any Friends speak with him; but in
the presence of his Keeper; he had one Chain on him, and was kept close
Prisoner; she says, she questions not but to prove the Lord Howard perjured,
for Sr Thomas could have proved by ten Gentlemen, and the Servants of the
House, those base Reflections the Lord Howard made on him, to be falsehoods.

She says, her Father demanded his Trial, and also Counsel, in the Court; but
was denied both, the Chief Justice Jefferies telling him, they had nothing but
the Outlawry to go on. Withens, Holloway, and VValcot were other three of the
Judges; And she thinks, he was brought from aboard the Yatch by the Lord
Godolphin's Warrant.

She says, Mr Richardson beat her Sister, while she was asking her Father
Blessing.

She says, that her Father was at Sparrow's at Dinner, that day that the Lord
Howard swore he was not; and she says, that when her Father in Court said, My
Blood be upon you; The Lord Chief Justice Jeffryes said, let it, let it; I am
Clamor proof.

Mrs Katherine Armstrong, being examined says, That Captain Richardson used
her Father ill, and made him lie in a Chain on one Leg; and would not let her
see him alone; and was rude to her, and struck her in such manner, that she had
so fore a Breast, that she could not put on Bodies in three quarters of a year.

She says, she went with her Mother to the Cursitor of London, to demand a
Writ of Error, but he refused it.

She went also on the same Errand to the Lord Keeper North, Mr Attorney, and
the Lord Chief Justice, but had none.

Mr Richard Win declared, That he was Solicitor to Colonel Sidney; That the
Colonel excepted against several of the Judy; to some as not being Freeholders,
and others, as being in the King's Service, and receiving Wages from his
Majesty.

That presently after the Trial, the Lord Chief Justice sent him Prisoner to
the King's Bench, Mr Win said this, to Angier (the Foreman of that murdering
Jury) and to Glisby (another of the three Carpenters which were upon that Jury)
and to another of their Brethren near the King's Bench Court; whereupon they
went to lay hold upon Mr. Win; at which instant Mr Forth (the King's Joyner)
coming, interposed; upon which Angier said, Mr Forth will you assist this Man?
he says Colonel Sidney's Jury, was a Loggerheaded Jury. To which Mr Forth
answered; I have nothing to do with the Jury, but Glisby knows, that I know he
it a Loggerhead. Of this, They complained to Jeffryes, who committed Mr Win
and Mr Forth to the King's Bench; It cost Mr Forth about 50 l. whereof Burton
had 24 l. and he being a Protestant Joyner, he 'scap'd well out of their Hands,
as times then went; especially with that Trade.
for saying the Jury were a Loggerheaded Jury, and that They had not Evidence
sufficient to find such a Verdict; or found a Verdict contrary to Evidence.

Mr Sergeant Rotherham, being examined, declared, That he was of Counsel for
Colonel Sidney, and drew a Plea for him; which the Colonel desired to have
read, and threw it into the Court; It was to distinguish the Treasons, laid in
the Indictment, and quoted the three Acts of Treason: But the Court told him,
if the Plea had any slip in it, he must have Judgment of Death, pass on him
immediately: After this he pleaded Not Guilty.

That he demanded a Copy of the Indictment, as his due; but the Court refused
it him; That Col. Sidney told him, that they proved the Paper, they accused him
of, to be his Handwriting, by a Banker, who only had his hand upon a Bill.
Col. Sidney quoted the Lady Carr's Case in the King's Benels, Trinity Term,
1669, Anno 21. Car. 2. wherein it was adjudged, that in a Criminal Case, it is
not sufficient for a Witness to swear he believes it to be the hand, but that
he saw the party write it: The words in the Case are, That it must be proved,
that she actually writ it, and not her hand, ^ut credit.

[ Note, Colonel Sidney demanded the Copy of the Indictment, upon the Statute
46 Edw. 3. which allows it to all Men, in all Cases.]

That Colonel Sidney asked him, with the rest of the Council, whether all the
Book should be read at his Trial; The Council said it ought; The Book was by
way of Questions, and merely polemical discourse of Government in general; as
far as Sergeant Rotherham could find, after reading in it several hours; He
believes it consisted of seven or eight hundred Sheets.

Mr Joseph Ducas, upon his Examination, informed the Lords in substance as
follows; That Colonel Sidney was taken up by a Messenger, before there could be
any pretense of proof against him; for the Lord Howard (the only Witness) was
not seized till fourteen days after.

That when Sr Philip Floyd seized and carried away Colonel Sidney's Papers, he
promised him that the Trunk and Pillowbeere, in which they were sealed up;
should not be opened, but in the Colonel's presence; but that promise was not
performed.

That they seized the Colonel's Goods and Money in the City and Country; five
or six Months before any Indictment was found against him.

That the Colonel was brought to Westminster the 7th of November; by an A most
clear demonstration, that the Prosecutors of this great Man had good
Intelligence with the Grand Jury, and Influence upon them.
Habeas Corpus, sent the day before; to be arraigned upon an Indictment; though
no Indictment was then found against him; and they kept him in a Tavern in the
Palace-yard, an hour; till they had got the Grand Jury to find the Indictment.

That the Colonel being carried to the Court of King's Bench; and the
Indictment read; he demanded a Copy thereof; but the Court refused it. That the
Colonel offered a Special Plea engrossed in Parchment, and desired it might be
read; but the Chief Justice said, that if the Attorney General demurred, and
the Plea were overruled; Judgment of Death should pass upon him; (and Wythens
said, if your Plea be overruled, your Life is gone) and so he was forced to
Plead Not Guilty.

That he challenged several of the Jury, as being the King's Servants; and
others, as not being Freeholders; but was overruled therein. Some Gentlemen
and very worthy Persons were, for Fashion sake, put into the Panel and called;
but did not appear [and it may be reasonably thought they were never summoned.]

That Colonel Sidney was informed, that when the Jury was withdrawn, the Chief
Justice, under pretense of going to drink a Glass of Sack; went to the Jury,
when they were consulting about their Verdict.

That when it was demanded of the Colonel, what he had to say, why Judgment
should not pass; he urged several points of Law, but was overruled, in every
thing.

To this effect, was the Information of Mr Ducas, a very valuable French
Protestant Gentleman, and Colonel Sidney's true Friend; To which I shall here
subjoyn a few words, uttered by that great Man, at the time of his
Condemnation: I was brought to Westminster the 7th of this Month by This leads
me to correct an Error committed in the first part of this History, page 185.
where I said, as I then understood it, that Colonel Sidney brought the Habeas
Corpus; but it appears, that it was brought at the instance of his Prosecutors;
And upon this occasion I shall confess another mistake, (and therein, all with
which I have been charged in the first part) that I said Robert Masters, one of
Sr S. Barnardiston's Jury, was a principal Witness against College; But I must
acknowledge, that Richard was the Witness, and Robert the Jury man was his
Brother, and only sucked the same Milk with him.
Habeas Corpus, granted the day before to be arraigned; when yet no Bill was
exhibited against me, and my Prosecutors could not know it would be found,
unless they had a Correspondence with the Grand Jury; That the Jury was not
summoned by the Bailiff, but agreed upon by the Undersheriff, and Graham and
Burton.

Upon the Sentence he expressed himself, in that excellent manner, which the
Reader may turn to, in the first part of the Display of Tyranny; Page 200.
Whereupon, the Chief Justice, (foaming at the Mouth) told him he was mad; To
which Colonel Sidney, with great composure and gallantry of mind (stretching
out his hand) said, My Lord, feel my Pulse, and see if I am disordered; I bless
my God, I never was in better Temper, than I now am.

Dr. Chamberlain being examined, deposed, That meeting the Lord Hallifax in
the Gallery at White Hall; he asked his Lordship whether the Aldermen were to
blame that defended the City Charter, and he believes he did not blame them,
but said the King must, or will have the Charter; he rather thinks it was, must
have it; he believes he might tell this to the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord
Russell and others.

That it was for Sr John Laurence's sake, he asked the Lord Hallifax; and to
him, he gave advice to take care in what he did, he being one of the Committee
to defend the Charter.

A Memorial of the Numbers of Charters, Dispensations and Pardons, passed,
between October 1682, and the time of the late King's Abdication.
THe Marquess of Hallifax was Lord Privy Seal from October 1682. to February
1684. In which time 166 Charters were granted; whereof one passed immediate.

No Dispensations passed in that time.

In that time 47. Pardons, with Non-Obstante's and Clauses with Dispensations,
were granted, whereof three passed immediate.

The Earl of Clarendon was Lord Privy Seal from February, 1684, to December
1685. in which time 94. Charters were granted; whereof 17 passed immediate.

No Dispensations passed in that time.

In that time 10 Pardon, with Non-Obstante's and Clauses with Dispensations,
were granted, whereof two passed immediate.

The Lord Tiveot and others, were Commissioners of the Privy Seal, from
December 1685. to March 1686, 7. in which time, 26 Charters were granted; which
passed in the usual manner.

Dispensations with the Penal Laws, in that time were Six, whereof one was
immediate.

In that time 70. Pardons, with Non-Obstante's were passed; whereof one of them
immediate.

The Lord Arundel of Wardour was Lord Privy Seal, from March 1686, 7. to 4
Jacobi 2. in which time, 56 Charers were granted, whereof 41. passed immediate.

Dispensations in that time were 35. whereof 3 passed immediate.

In that time were 47 Pardons with Non-Obstante's passed; whereof 25 passed
immediate.

These are the heads of the Earl of Stamford's Report, which being read in the
House of Lords, the same, was by Order, sent down to the House of Commons, for
their Information in these Affairs.

Copies of some Papers mentioned in, or relating to the forgoing Informations.
Copy of the Advertisment in the Gazette, Number 1880. November 26. 1683.
relating to the Duke of Monmouth, mentioned in the Examinations of Mr Row and
Mr Yard.
White Hall, November 25. His Majesty having this afternoon called an
Extraordinary Council, was pleased to acquaint them; that the Duke of Monmouth
did the last night surrender himself to Mr Secretary Jenkins; having before
writ a very submissive Letter to his Majesty; entirely resigning himself to his
Majesty's disposal; That his Majesty and his Royal Highness went down to Mr
Secretary's Office, where the Duke of Monmouth was; who showed himself very
sensible of his crime in the late Conspiracy; making a full Declaration of it;
And that having showed an extraordinary penitence, for the same, and made a
particular submission to his Royal Highness, for his misbehaviour toward him;
His Majesty and his Royal Highness received so much satisfaction, that upon his
Royal Highnesse's desire and entreaty; His Majesty was pleased to Pardon the
said Duke, and thereupon, did order Mr Attorney General, to stop further
proceedings against him; but ordered he should proceed, notwithstanding,
against all the rest of the Conspirators.

Copy of the Paper, mentioned in the preceding Informations, was wrote by King
Charles the seconds's own hand; who imposed upon the Duke of Monmouth, to
transcribe and sign it.
I have heard of some reports of me, as if I should have lessened the late
Plot, and gone about to discredit the evidence given against those, who have
dyed by Justice; your Majesty and the Duke know, how ingeniously I have owned
the late Conspiracy; and though I was not conscious of any design against your
Majestys Life, yet I lament the having had so great a share in the other part
of the said Conspiracy.

Sr, I have taken the Liberty to put this in writing, for my own vindication;
and I beseech you to look forward, and endeavor to forget the faults you have
forgiven me; I will take care, never to commit any more against you; or come
within the danger of being again misled from my duty; but make it the business
of my Life, to deserve the Pardon, your Majesty has granted to, your dutiful,

Moumouth.


Copy of a Paper delivered to the Lord Keeper North, the Lord Chief Justice
Jeffryes and the Attorney General; by the Lady Armstrong, on behalf of her
Husband, Sr Thomas Armstrong.
I am informed, that by the Common Law of England, any Man that was outlawed,
in Felony or Treason, might bring a Writ of Error, to reverse the Outlawry;
which was to be granted ex debito Justitiae; though it may be, the sueing forth
such a Writ of Error to the King, might be by way of Petition; As in a Petition
or Monstrans de droit, for Lands; And so it was resolved, in Ninian Melvin's
Case, Co. 4. Just. 215.

Next, by the Common Law, if any Man were in England, at the time of the
Exigent awarded; and went out of the Realm after that, and before the Outlawry
pronounced; he could never assign that for Error, that he was beyond Sea at the
time of pronouncing the Outlawry; And the reason is, because he was here, at
the awarding of the Exigent, and might reasonably have notice of it.

On the other side, if any Man were out of England, during the whole Process,
and pronuntiation of the Outlawry; it was never yet a doubt, but that was
Error, and might be assigned for Error, either by the party, or by his Heir, at
the Common Law; and so continues to this Day, and was not long since adjudged
in O. Kerney's Case, the Jrish man, But that Case differed greatly from this,
O. Kerney, being a Friend of Holy Church
who came in two Years after the Outlawry.

Then comes the Statute of 5. and 6. Edw. 6. Cap. 11. and enlarges the Law, for
the benefit of the outlawed person; and gives him liberty to assign for Error,
that he was beyond Sea at the time of the Outlawry pronounced; which he could
not do, by the Common Law, if he went away after the Exigent: For if he went
before the Exigent, that was Error by the Common Law, before the Statute; and
so continues.

Then comes the Proviso, and says, That he must come in, within a Year, and
render himself, to be entitled to the benefit of that Act; which was, to
assign for Error, that he was beyond Sea, at the time of the Outlawry
ponounced; So that upon this State of the Law, and my Husbands case; he being
beyond Sea at the time of the Process, and at the time of the Outlawry
pronounced; It is conceived, he is well entitled to assign this for Error at
the Common Law, without any aid of the Statute; though the Proviso in that
^tatu^e, should be ruled against him; which, with submission, it is the opinion
of many learned Persons in the Law, that he is within the intent and meaning of
that Proviso, for many Reasons, too long to trouble your Lordship with now;
Therefore I do hope, that this Case of my Husband's, being the first Case, that
ever any Man was executed upon an Outlawry (that did not desire it) may have
that weight with your Lordship which it deserves; Holloway, a little before,
being in the same condition, refused a Trial, and so was executed upon the
Outlawry.
And do hope, that your Lordship will so advise the King, in matter of Law)
whose Counsel you are) that my Husband may have a Writ of Error granted him,
and Counsel assigned him, to argue these points; as by Law has been allowed to
Criminals, in Capital Cases; with, whatever else shall appear upon the Record
of Outlawry produced; which, as yet, my Husband, nor any for him ever saw.

Colonel Sidney's Plea drawn by Mr Sergeant Rotherham.
PRedict Algernon Sidney dicit quod per Statut in Parliamento inchoat and tent
apud Westminster octavo die Maij Anno regni domini Regis nunc decimo tertio, and ibi
continuat usque tricesimum diem Julij tunc prox sequen and ab eodem tricesimo
die Julij Adjornatum usque vicesimum diem Novembris tunc prox sequen
Intitulatum, An Act for Safety and Preservation of his Majesty's Person and
Government, against Treasonable and Seditions Practices and Attempts, inter
alia, Ordinat and inactitat fuit per Autoritatem Parliamenti predicti quod
null. Persona sive Personae virtute Actus predicti incurreret aliquas penalita
tes in Actu predicto mentionat Nisi Ipse vel Ipsi prosecut esset vel essent
infra sex Menses prox offens commiss. and indictat esset superinde infra tres
Menses post talem prosecutionem, aliquo in Statuto predict content in
contrarium non obstante, Et predictus Algernon ulterius dicit quod ipse
proseeut fuit and commissus Prisonoe Turris de London pro Offens. in
Indictamento predict mentionat vicesimo sexto die Junij ultimo preterito and
non anta and ibidem continuat Prisonar huousque Et quod ipse predict Algernon
non fuit indictat pro aliquo vel aliquibus Offens in Indictimento predict
mentionat in fra tres Menses prox post prosecutionem predict Et hoc predict
Algernon parat est verificare unde petit judicium si ipse predict Algernon
quoad aliquod Crimen sive Offens in Indictamento predict mentionat quod Crimen
vel Offens non fuit Alta Proditio ante confectionem Statuti predict respondere
debeat et quoad omnes Proditiones Crimina and Offens in Indictimento predict
mentionata quae non fuere vel fuit alta proditio ante confectionem Statuti
predict idem Algernon dicit quod per Statutum in Parliamento tento apud Westminster
in Com Middlesex in Festo sancti Hillarij Anno regni Domini Edwardi nuper Regis
Angliae tertij Anno regni sui vicesimo quinto editum intitulatum, A
Declaration; Which Offenses shall be judged high Treason, inter alia, inactatum
fuit Autoritate ejusdem Parliamenti quod si ullus casus suppositus esse
Proditio qui non specificatur in eodem Statuto acciderit coram aliquibus
Justitiarijs, Justitiarij moram facient Anglice shall tarry sine aliquo
progressuad Judicium Anglice going to Judgment de predicta proditioni nsqu;
Causa monstretur and declaretur coram Rege and Parliamento suo, Quodque per
Statatum in Parliamento tent apud West in Com Midds. quinto die Octobris Anno
regni Dominae Mariae nuper Reginae Anglae primo intitulatum, A Repeal of
several Treasons Felonies and Premunires inactit fuit inter alia, Autoritate
ejusdem Parliamenti quod abinde nullum factum vel Offens. existen per actum
Parliamenti vel Statut fact Proditio per Verba Script Notationem Anglice
Ciphering fact aut aliter quocunque capt habit Census Anglice deemed vel
adjudicat esse alta Proditio, nifi tantum tal. quae declarantur and exprimuntur
esse Proditio in vel per Actum Parliamenti vel Statut factum in Anno vicesimo
quinto regni prenobilis Regis Edwardi tertij tangen vel concexnen Proditiones
vel Declarationes Proditionis and null al. nec quod aliquae paene mortis
penalitates vel forisfactur in aliquo modo sequuntur Anglice ensue vel sint
alicui Peccatori Anglice Offender vel Peccatoribus Anglice Offenders pro facien
vel committen aliquam Proditionem aliter quam tal. quae in Statuto predicto
facto in dicto Anno vicesiano quinto regni dicti Edwardi Regis ordinat and
provis, aliquo Actu vel Actus Parliamenti Statut vel Statuta ad aliquod empus
antea habit vel fact post dictum vicesimum quintum Annum dictinuper Regis
Edwardi tertij; vel aliquam al Declarationem vel materiam in contrarium aliquo
modo non obstante Et predictus Algernon dicit quod ipse non est culpabilis de
aliqua vel aliquibus Proditione vel Proditionibus in Indictamento predicto
mentionat quae specificatur vel specificantur in Statuto ultimo mentionato modo
and forma prout in Indictimento predicto mentionat Et de hoc ponit se super
Patriam.

The Names of the London Grand Jury returned, July 1683. When the Conspirators
had decreed the Murdering my Lord Russell.
RIchard Alie, Esquire Sworn. Peter Parivicini, Sworn. Benjamin Skutt, Sworn.
Philip Harman, Sworn. Benjamin Thorowgood, Sworn. William Longmore, Sworn. John
Price, Sworn. Francis Brerwood, Sworn. William VVithers seni. Sworn. William
Lovel, Sworn. John Debnam, Sworn. Prcival Gilborne, Sworn. Henery VVood, Sworn.
JOhn Cooper, Sworn. Samuel Newton, Sworn. Henry VVagstaffe, Sworn. Thomas
Blackmore, Sworn. Thomas Larner, Sworn. John Potts. Sworn. Leonard Bates, John
Femill, Barth. Ferryman, Spencer Johnson, and James Kelke.
The Panel of Jurors picked for the Trial of my Lord Russell, in July 1683.
Colman-Street-Ward.
SIR James Ward, Sr Tho. Davall, Arthur Baron, Thomas Moffit, John Martin,
Thomas Hadges, Will. Fitzacherly, and William Rouse,
Tower-Ward.
Peter Joye, John Pelling, Tho. Porey, Will. Winberry, Tho. Normansel, Richard
Meynell, William Pellatt, Jervas Seaton, and Richard Burden.
Algate-Ward.
Jacob Lucy, Peter Jones, and William Crouch,
Billingsgate- Ward.
Henry Loades, Hugh Strode, Robert Mellish, and Abraham Wright,
Breadstreet- Ward.
Peter Ayleworth, William Danes, John Steventon, William Rutland, William
Fashions, Thomas Short, Samuel Skinner, Theophilus Man, George Baker, Richard
Kent Ar. and Gerlington Chapman,
Dowgate-Ward.
Richard Hamond, Fr. Chamberlain, John Jenew, and John Bridges.
Ward of Bishopsgate within.
John Busson. Joel Andrews, and Ralpo Izard.
Bridge-Ward.
John Short senior. Thomas Nicholls, and Roger Mingay.
Candlewick- Ward.
George Toriano, William Butler, William Parker, and James Pickering.
Limestreet- Ward.
John Hall, Matthew Gibbon, Thomas Angier, Robert Masters, Luke Pead,
Christopher Johnson, Philip Perry, Stephen Gittings, and William Warren.
Walbrooke- Ward.
John Westbrooke, John Tempest, John West, and Edward Le Neve.
Langborne-Ward.
William Gerrard, Anthony Mingay. Nathaniel Hornby, Henry Collyer, James Smith,
Thomas Lowfield, Thomas Jenny, and Samuel Hanckee,
Cripplegate- Ward.
Robert Ask, Thomas Jeve. Hugh Noden. Robert Brough, John Mallory, Thomas
Yate. William Crispe, John Walkly, Thomas Oneby,
Ward of Farringdon within.
Francis Griffith, Peter Pickering, Edward Rigby, Richard Hoare, Thomas Barnes,
Henry Robins, Henry Kempe, John Owen, William Simonds, Thomas Grice,
Ward of Farringdon without.
Paul Weeks, Roger Reeve, Edw. Reddish, Edw. Kempe, Will. Brown, Ambros.
Istead, Thomas Fowls, Thomas Hamond, Thomas Fitzer, Thomas Dring, Henry
Baldwin, Robert Fowls, Thomas Rawlinson, William Warn, Valentine Castillion,
Jervas Wilcox, James Smith,
Ward of Aldersgate within.
Peter Floyer.
Ward of Aldersgate without.
Robert Scott, John Andrews; Jeremiah Wright, Jacob Sheldrake,
Cordwayner- Ward.
Thomas Coulson.
Unity- Ward.
George Peck. John Hoyle,
Ward of Castlebaynard.
Sr William Dodson, Sr Edm. Wiseman, William Goslin, Nicholas Alexander,
Nicholas Charleton, Christopher Pit, Robert Beddingfield Thomas Warren,
By Peter Rich Esquire Sheriffs. and Sr Dudly North, Sheriffs. Knight, Sheriffs.

The Names of the Grand Jury at the Sessions the 14th of October, 1685. when
the Conspirators had resolved to Murder Alderman Cornish and Mrs Gaunt.
PErcival Gilborne, Bart. Ferriman, Thomas Blackmore, Thomas Simonds, William
Watton, Thomas Barnesly, John Green, Thomas Amy, Jofeph Baggs, John Reynolds,
Robert Blackmore, Joseph Caien, W. Withers, Junior. Thomas Deacon, Richard
Brown, Thomas Mills, John Bernard, William Fownes, John Luker.
The Panel of Jurors for the Trial of Alderman Cornish, in October 1685.
returned out of most of the Wards of the City, by the particular care of Sr.
Benjamin Thorowgoed, in regard that Mr Cornish had been one of his
Predecessors, (See this page 289.)
SIr William Russell, Sr Mich. Hicks, Sr. John Mathews, Sr William Dodson, Sr
Thomas Griffith, Sr Edmun. Wiseman, Sr John Clarke, Sr Thomas Vernon, Sr Edward
Boveree, Richard Alie, Esquire Ralph Box, Esquire Thomas Hartepp Esquire Thomas Foul,
Arthur Baron, Benjamin Skutt, Thomas Rawlinson, John Short, Senior, Thomas
Goddard, William Gore, John Kent, Edward Griffith, Esquire, William Withers, Sen.
John Midgly, John Carpenter, Franc. Chamberlain, Peter Joy, Thomas Langham,
George Toriano, Henry Loades, Robert Bedingfeild, Ambrose Istead, William
Butler, Kenelm Smith, Ralph Lee, William Moyer, Robert Scott, William Warn,
Thomas Short, Jermingham Chaplin, John Jenew, James Pickering, James Smith,
Thomas Lofeild, James Woods, Tho. Pendleton, Samuel Hinton, Nicholas Smith,
James Smith, Tho. Peircehouse, John Grice, Thomas Oneby, Richard Cotton,
Richard Hoare, Roger Reeves, William Crouch, John Foster, Thomas Sergeant,
James Richardson, William Cloudsly, Richard Holford, Thomas Crane, Lewis
Wilson, Henry Wood, William Tigh, John Pelling, Gervis Wilcox, Jacob
Sheldracke, George Peck, Francis Breerewood, W. Longmore, John Price, William
Fitzacherly, William Fashion, Walter Acton, Stephen Coleman, Robert Clavel,
William Long, John Wells, Maurice Mosely, John Pott, Thomas Lardner, James
Kelke, John Perrott, Thomas Ashby, Samuel Skinner, William Rouse, Noel Basano,
Paul Sherman, John Walkly and William Humfreys.
The Panel of Jurors returned for the Trial of the Honorable Colonel Sidney.
SR Reignald Foster of Criplegate Bar. Sr John Musters, of Hornsey Knight.
Peregine Bertie, of St Martins in the Fields, Esqrs Richard Morely, of St
Martins in the Fields, Esqrs; James Supple, of the same, John Angier,
Carpenter; of Westminster. Richard Fisher, of Westminster. John Kirk, of
Westminster. Christopher Granger, of Westminster. John Nicholl, of Finchley.
William Cleeve, of Criplegate Richard White, of Criplegate Sr Charles Gerard,
of Harrow on the Hill. Sr Richard Fisher, of Clerkenwell. Sr Robert Dacres, of
Clerkenwell. Sr John Kirk, of St Martins in the Fields John Wells, of
Marybone. Samuel Linne, senior, of Clerkenwell. Michael Todd, of Clerkenwell.
William Linne, of Clerkenwell. Laurence Wood, of Holborne, (Tailor) John Powel,
of the Strand. Hugh Hamersly, of the same. John Cannon, of St Giles in the
Fields. Sr John Brattle, of Enfield (an Officer in the Mint) Sr John Downton,
of Isleworth, Sr William Hill, of Tedington. Ralph Hawtry, of Rislip, Esquire
Francis Knowles, of Covent Garden, Esquire Thomas Hinton, of St Giles in the
Fields. John Merridel, of St Giles in the Fields. John Bailey. of St Giles in
the Fields. Abel Andrews, of Edmonton. Reuben Bourne, of Edmonton. Emery
Arguise, of Westminster (Carpenter) Richard Cooper, of St Martins in the
Fields. Thomas Row, of Hornesey, Esquire (a Captain in the Army) John Bathurst of
Edmonton, Esquire Richard Pagitt, of Westminster, Esquire Nehemiah Arnold. of
Westminster, Esquire William Freeman of Hatton-Garden Esquire William Avery of Enfield.
Francis Stevens of Westminster Esquire Thomas Phelps of St Martins in the fields.
John Smalbone of St Martins in the fields. Tho. Whitfield of St Martins in the
fields. John Haynes. of St Martins in the fields. Charles Monk. of St Martins
in the fields. John Sharp of Wapping (Lieutent Colonel) Josia Clarke of
Chiswick. William Wait of St Chements Danes (keeper of the Privy Garden.) John
Bignal Senior. of St Martins in the Fields, George Glisby (Carpenter) of St
Martins in the Fields, Nicholas Baxter of St Martins in the Fields, Tho.
Roberts -- of St Martins in the Fields, John Hazard (Vintner.) of St Clements
Danes. Jeremi. Playner, (Vintner) of St Clements Danes. William Reeves. of St
Clements Danes. William German of St Clements Danes. Tho. Claxton of Harrow Esquire
Charles Pryor of Highgate. Tho. Curtis of St Clements Danes. -- Bradshaw of the
Strand Esquire Tho. Kensey of St Giles's in the Fields Esquire Richard Tailor of
Chiswick Esquire William Groves of St Clements Danes. John Bert of the Savoy.
Samuel Lynne junior of Holborne. Richard Bromfield. of Holborne. Edward
Hampsted. of St Giles. Benjamin Boltby. of St Giles. Christopher Chambers of St
Giles. Arthur Blyth of Paddington. John Leeson of the Strand. Tho. Elton of
Stepney. Nicholas Grice of Hesson. Simon Smith of Westminster Esquire Bartholomew
Parr of East Smithfield, Francis Child of Acton Gentleman, John Davis of St
Martins. John White (the King's Founder) of St Martins. Stephen Philips. --
Richard Foster of Westminster. Tho. Graves, of the Strand. John Singleton, of
the Strand. Tho. Tatton Gentleman, of the Strand. Robert Longland Gentleman, of
St Giles. James Blagrave Gentleman, of St Giles. William Abel. of St Giles.
To draw to (what I have impatiently desired) a conclusion; It is a sad Truth,
that the Conspirators had long resolved to go to hanging work, and Sr Roger L'
Estrange could more certainly predict the time, than Mr Gadbury could that of
the Birth of his Prince of Wales; for at that very Juncture, when it was
resolved, That Sr Dudley North must be Sr John Moors Sheriff; We had the
direful Consequences foretold in the Observator, of May 20. 1682, Number 140.
in these words. If it should please God to send us SEASONABLE SHERIFFS, The
same celebrated Auther, told the World whom the esteemed his seasonable
Sheriffs; for in his Observator of May 17th 1684. he says; Prithee will thou
set their Cornish and Bethel their Pilkington and Shnte, against Our North and
Rich; Our Daniel and Dashwood; and say which of these Sheriffs are the
likelyer Men, to juggle Protestants out of their Lives. [ But the Poor VVhigg
durst not for his Ears, at that day, answer this ensnareing Question; for if
he had, and done it honestly, it might have cost him his Head.]
and fair Play for our money, there are set a soot so many Titles in
competition for the Gallows, that it would be a hard matter to settle their
Claims, and say, who should go first. And We know that the Gentleman was a
Minister of State in that Reign: But to allow every thing its due weight, and
to set the Tragedy of that dismal day In its proper Light; I sha here revive
the Remembrance of the dying Testimonys of very serious Persons who then lost
their Lives, for that horrid Conspiracy against the late Kings Charles and
James the Second; which frighted the Cheshire Grand Jury, and with them, a
great part of the Kingdom, out of their Wits.

It Is well known, that the VVitnesses against them, swore for their own Lives,
with halters about their Necks; and its as true, that most of the Witnesses had
talked at a mad rate, in the hearing of some of those whom they destroyed; But
see, what those dying Protestants in a most solemn manner declared, with their
last Breath.

Mr College took it upon his death, That he was never engaged in any manner of
Plot or Conspiracy against the King, the Laws or the Government; or knew of
any, except that of the Papists; That if it had been true, that he was to have
seized the King; he knew not of so much as one single Person, that was or would
have stood by him, in that attempt.

Captain VValcot denied any design of killing the King, or of engaging the
Guards, whilst others killed him; And said, that the Witnesses invited him to
Meetings, where some things were discoursed of, in order to the asserting our
Liberties and Properties; which we looked upon to be violated and invaded: --
That They importuned and perpetually solicited him, and then delivered him up
to be hanged -- That They combined together to swear him out of his Life, to
save their own; and that they might do it effectually, They contrived an
Untruth. -- That he forgave them, though guilty of his Blood; But, withal,
earnestly begged, That they might be observed, that Remarks might be set upon
them, whether their end be peace: and he concluded (with what made Sr Roger
L'Estrange a great deal of Sport, but yet Heaven has made it good) That when
God HAS A WORK TO DO, HE WILL NOT WANT Instruments.

Mr Holloway declared, that Mr West proposed the Assassination, but none
seconded him. -- That he could not perceive that Mr Ferguson knew any thing of
it; and Holloway said, It was our design to shed no Blood; He being
interrogated, by Mr Ferguson's Friend, Mr Sheriff Daniel, whether he knew
Ferguson; He answered that he did know him, but knew him to be against any
design of killing the King.

Sr Tho. Armstrong, at his death spoke thus; Mr Attorney said, I was accused
for being one of Those who were to kill the King; I take God to witness, I
never had any such design; nor ever had a thought to take away the King's Life;
Neither ever had any man the impudence to propose so barbarous and base a thing
to me.

Mr Nelthorp at his death in 1685, said, I can with great comfort appeal to the
great God; before whose Tribunal I am to appear; what I did was in the
sincerity of my Heart, thinking it my duty to hazard my Life, for the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the English Liberties; which I
thought invaded, and in great danger to be lost; As to the design of
Assassinating or Murdering the late King, or his present Majesty; it was a
thing I always detested; and I never was in the least concerned in it; Nor did
I believe there was such a design, -- I dye in Charity with all the World; and
can readily and heartily forgive my greatest Enemies, and even those that have
been the Evidence against me.

Mr Rouse declared, that he was told, that They did not intend to spill one
drop of Blood; and affirmed that Lee, the Witness against him, did (by his
Evidence) make him the Author of the very words, that came out of his the said
Lee's own Mouth.

Mr Richard Rumbold (who at his death, at Edinburgh, in 1685, was found to be a
very brave Man, and most serious Christian, and had been represented as the
main Promoter of the Murdering design) with his last breath desired all to
believe his dying Words, and therewith affirmed; that he never directly, or
indirectly, intended such a Villainy as the death of King Charles the second,
and the Duke of York; but declared, that he abhorred the thoughts of so horrid
an intention: That he was sure this Truth, would at the great day, be manifest
to all Men; And he concluded, that he dyed in the defense of the just Laws and
Liberties of the Nation; and said, that for that Cause, were every Hair of his
Head and Beard a Life, he would joyfully sacrifice them all; and wished he had a
Limb for every Town in Christendom.

To conclude, these solemn, serious, dying Declarations, Protestations and
Appeals to the heart-searching God; have always, out-weighed with me, the
Evidence of those two or three Witnesses, who swore these Persons out of their
Lives, and by so doing saved their own. And I did and do most steadfastly
believe, that the only Plot in that day, was the same, which the Almighty has
at length owned, and most signally prospered, in the hand of our gracious
August and Rightful Sovereign King William; I mean, the rescuing the Protestant
Religion and the Laws and Liberties of England, from a most impetuous Torrent
of Popery and Tyranny; wherewith they were very dangerously threatened. And
methinks it should even convert a Tory (unless his Brains were picked out of
his Shull, by him who picked the Guineas out of his Pocket) when he casts his
Eye upon that apposite and Emphatical Expression in the Observator, vol. 2.
Number 125. To deal freely with thee, TRIMMER, I have more Faith, in the Words
of one dying Traitor, under the stroke of Justice, than of twenty Living.

Errata's.
PAge 34. last Line read Closet. p 63 first line r and he be found. p 91 line 9
dele that. p 105 l 2. dele us. p 151 l 25 r acquainted with. p 203 l 5 for with
r which. p 213 l 20 for it is r its. p 241 l 14 r possessed. p 247 l 22 r
always had. p 252 l 25 r every day from that p 253 l 3 r Sr Robert. p 277 l 26
r Gold-Finch. p 288 l 9 r were not sent.


