An Exact and Faithful NARRATIVE OF THE Horrid Conspiracy OF Thomas Knox,
William Osborne, and John Lane, To INVALIDATE the TESTIMONIES OF Dr. Titus
Oats, and Mr. William Bedlow; By Charging them with a Malicious Contrivance
against the E. of Danby, and the said Dr. OATS with an Attempt of SODOMY.

Wherein are Exemplified from the Originals,

I. Four Forged Letters dictated by Thomas Knox. II. Five False Informations,
One Paper of Memorials, and one other Information against Dr. OATS for Sodomy,
forged by Knox in the Names of Lane and Osborne. III. The Informations,
Depositions, Examinations, and Confessions of the said Knox, Osborne, and Lane,
taken upon Oath before Sir William Waller and Edmond Warcup, Esquire. IV. An
Account of some Depositions taken before the Lords Committees of Secrecy,
relating thereunto. V. The Breviates of the Council for the KING at the Trials
of the said Knox and Lane, Nov. 25. 1679. wherein full satisfaction is given to
the World of the whole Cause, by the particular Evidences of the Witnesses in
behalf of the KING.
Published by the Appointment of me TITUS OATS.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, Tho. Cockerill and Benj. Alsop, at the
Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, at the Three Legs, and at
the Angel and Bible in the Poultrey, 1680.

I Do Appoint Thomas Parkhurst, Thomas Cockerill, and Benjamin Alsop, to Print
this Narrative, and that no other Print the same.

TITUS OATS.
December. 2. 1679.
TO HIS Sacred Majesty CHARLES, II: BY THE GRACE of GOD OF Great Britain,
France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith.
Great Sr.
THe highest Ambition this Address dares pretend to, is to Congratulate your
Majesty's happy Success in the late famous Cause obtained against the Enemies
of your Person, Crown and Dignity; in which Tri^l you have won the Field, and
carried the day not by the Justice of the Sword, but by the Sword of Justice:
And if the old Roman Consuls rejoiced in these Triumphs decreed to their
fortunate Valor by the Senate; wherein the Success was commonly better than
the Cause, your Majesty must needs much more Rejoice to have come off Victor by
the Law, where you have not the Advantage of the longer Sword, but fight your
Enemies with equal Weapons: where it is the Glory of your Courts of Judicature,
that they are Eagle-eyed to discern the merits of the Cause, but blind in the
favor, and respect of Persons.

Nor will you wonder (dear Sir) that I have Entitled your Name to what may
seem my personal and private Concern, since without Vanity I can avow it, they
that struck at my Credit, designed the Blow at your Sacred Life; and to Murder
the Repute of your Majesty's Evidence against the Traitors, was indeed but a
handsome expedient to atchieve a more horrid Assassination.

I have therefore fair Hopes your Majesty will graciously Accept this
Dedication, and give it the Protection of your Royal Purple, which will
convince the obstinate Unbelief of your Enemies, that Papal Principles bear
such a Vatinian Hatred against your Person, Government, and Religion, that they
abhor the meanest Creature that crosses them in the way of their Conspiracies.

But I give them free leave to Storm! and if the Interposition of so
inconsiderable a thing as what I am, between your Sacred Person and their Fery,
might intercept the Effect of their raging Malice, I should glory to become
your succedaneous Sacrifice, and despair ever to place out my cheap Life to
better account, then to pay it down upon the Nale, for the preservation of
yours, that is, of three Kingdoms, for seeing I owe a Death to Nature, my loyal
Heart must interpret it a huge Advantage to swist Martyrdom with Mortality,
and make so great a Virtue of inevitable Necessity*

You will easily believe Sir! I might have slept out my Dates in inglorious
Ease, amongst the Crowds of men of no Name or Noise, could I have satisfied
myself to have stood a Spectator in the common Box, of those Tragedies they had
contrived, and laid great Brittan for the Seen of Action; but when once Duty
and Allegiance had conquered the remainders of slavish Fears, worldly Hopes, or
whatever of self Respects might fright or flatter me out of honorable Danger,
into a base Retreat, to discover their Deeds of Darkness before the Sun, I
foresaw, I must draw the Combined Wrath of that whole Faction upon my self, and
that all the lines of their Malice would enter at least in the desine of my
Destruction, who otherwise fly at higher Games, and do not use to stoop at so
Inconsiderable Quarry.

I accknowledge it was no small Encouragement to me, to see with what
Transports your Majesty's loyal Subjects there present, expressed their inward
Joys, when the righteous Verdict of the Jury according to full, and clear
Evidence of the Fact, at once proclaimed my own Innocence, and the villainous
Confederacy of my Popish Enemies, but how would that Joy be multiplied if the
grand Engineers of all these Mischiefs, who sit behind the Curtain and direct
these Actors, were once brought to a legal Ordeal, which in effect would be
condign and exemplary Panishments? the rather because all Essays toward
settlement, all approaches toward satisfaction have proved fruitless, and will
do so, whilst the great Abettors and Fomentors of Treason, hug themselves in
the prospect of not despayred Success, and seem to defy and deride the Justice
of the Nation.

I know well your Majesty's excellent Laws are not like the Spiders Toyls,
which entangle the lesser Flies, whilst the great Transgressors by power, and
interest brake through them. Nor dare we question but your Wisdom will find a
sit juncture of time to let the proudest Delinquents know, if they dare offend,
your Justice will dare to punish: That the Sword which the Divine Grace had
entrusted you with, is sharp enough to chop off a plotting Head, as well as to
pair the Nails of those that would scratch your Royal Honor; that your
equal, and impertial Justice will reckon with these Wholesale Traitors who are
in Arrear to the Laws for Talents, as well as you have called to account some
of the Retayle Offenders, which comparatively owed but a few Farthings..

And in this Confidence your Majesty's loyal Subjects have waited, and still
do, and shall attend your Royal Leisure, resting satisfied that though your
Majesty will try, you will not dissapoint their Expectations, and if you suffer
their Hope to Gasp, you will not suffer it to give up the Ghost.

I am confident there is no Prince in Europe that can Command more real and
courageous Hearts then your Majesty may: and when you have made a Purchase of
their Hearts, their Hands, and Purses, their Lives, and Estates are but
Appurtinances which go along with, and of course are thrown into the bargain,
only they are so devoted to your Service that as they would have no foreign
Prince, Pope, or potentate govern them, so they desire you may be King of, and
to all your Subjects:

Whilst you shall unite them amongst themselves, and against your, and their
common Enemy, they are wholly your own, and whilst you secure to them their
religious, and civil Interests, the Fruits of both are entirely in your
Excheaquer.

Which Union of your Protestant Subjects your old inveterate popish Enemies,
dread more than all your Naval and Land Forces, who indeed only live by our
Divisions, and gather Confidence from our Animosites: And this work as it is
truly glorious, so it is exceeding easy, and I hope reserved as the great
blessing which England shall receive from your Royal Hand: for you see them all
(except some few Bigots) impatiently waiting till your Majesty shall remove the
rocks of offense, cunningly by our adversaries laid in the way of our peaceable
Coalescence, and command us all to write in the grand Truths of the Protestant
Religion, leaving the lesser punctilio's a fit matter wherein to exercise
charity and mutual forbearance, which otherwise like fire for want of Fuel to
feed it would expire. And though those Zealots of all forms and persuasions
amongst us, who value their little pretentions at a greater rate than that of
the public peace, may seem to discour age your pious endeavors this way, yet
believe it (Sr.) the discord of a single string or two, will be drowned in the
Harmony of an universal Jubilee.

All true Protestants are naturally inclined to peace upon conscientious Terms.
out of Interest as well as Duty; for if we be so mad as to create troubles in
England, we are not so fond as to expect Peace in Italy; If we fire our own
houses, Rome will never quench them; we have no foreign, Dependencies, or
transmarine expectancies, where ever our Circumference may be by Trade or
Travel we Censor in your desired self; though it is far otherwise with our
Catholics who have a Head at Rome, and an Interest distinct form, and opposed
to that of their Natural King and Native Country.

Whatever Cruelties, and Barbarisms the Papists have acted amonst us, may be
paralleld by Instances from other Country's and former Ages, but still from
their own Patterns: Their late Ingenious Artifice to divolve the quilt and
Odium of their own Treasons, upon the innocent Protestants, may be sampled in
the Powder Treason, and the Massacre of Paris; In the former of which (had it
succeeded) the Puritans must have born the blame and shame of their Villainies;
in the latter Instance, the Hugonots did actually bear it, and Knights of the
post were suborned to swear against the valiant Briquemault, and gallant
Caviagnes that they with the great Admiral Caligni had conspired the Death of
the King, and the Duke of Guise, and accordingly these innocent Persons were
Executed; so trite a Method is it for our Catholics to object their own
Treasons to their Enemies, and it 's evident that they never contrived a Plot
for the Protestants, but at the same time they designed upon the pretense and
under the umbrage a general Massacre of them: but now what History can give us
an example so contrived, we repeated a project, to Corrupt (if it were
possible) the Evidence which divine Providence had brought in against their
Treasons or to suborn a company of Rake-hels to disparage the Testimony of
those, who came in as Volunteers to save a Prince and his People from imprudent
destruction.

I am far from despairing to see your Majesty's Kingdoms once more yet happy,
that is, freed from these Pests of all Societies, the sworn Enemies to Peace
and Truth, the Priests and Jesuits without which it is impossible England should
be happy: which is no Conclusion hastily, and rashly drawn from a solitary, or
single observation, but the uniform experience of all times since this Island
was rescued from Romish Slavery by a Miracle of mercy, no less glorious than
that of the Redeeming Israel from Egypt or Balylon.

The English Soil carries the same Antipothy against the Ignatian Fraternity,
that Ireland bears no venomous Creatures and it is the happier constitution of
the two that we maintain a radicated enmity against the Romish Wolves, then
that they can boast of the aversion of their Air or Soil to Spiders, to Adders
and Serpents; a temper and natural Complexion, which we owe not to any fabulous
miroculous power of St. Patrick, but to that more powerful Influence of the
grace of God: which cannot be interpreted a sudden flash or hasty ferment of
spirit, which will be dashed in a moment, but to the Genius, and Interest of
the People, whose Piety has been their best Policy, it being a staple Maxim
bequeathed to your Majesty from that Glorious Jacen of eternal and happy
Memory, that our only way to secure peace at Home, was to love none with Rome,
nor reconciliation with them to be attempted till they shall cease to be what
they are, and divest them of their imbred Disloyalty.

History tells us of a Great Prince that habituated his body to the use of
poison, till no poison would work upon him; but that which is the Serpents
Nature is our Disease; If Spain can live with such a Dose of Superstitions and
Heresies in its Bowels, we cannot; but must eternally languish; till Nature, or
the Poison gets victory: All those convulsive motions, all those pangs,
those gripes, and dreadful symptoms that have been found upon us of late, are
entirely due to some fragments of this Popish Poison, which the Nation has
unawares lickt up, or has been given it in some plausible Vehicle; and all our
distortions, struglings and commotions in many parts of the body politic are
nothing else but the strainings and Pumpings of a strong Constitution to eject
the venom that we have unadvisedly contracted.

I can discern nothing by the pulse of the Nation, but that the heart is yet
sound for God, and the King, the vitals are good, and perhaps the true old
English Spirit may by the strength of its natural Crasis overcome, and throw
off those ill humors which at present oppress it; but yet Nature may want a
little help, and when she discovers a willingness to discharge that which
burdens it, those indications are to be observed, and her attempts to be
encouraged.

Which your Majesty will have the glory of, when you shall consult your Great
College of Physicians, who proceed upon the solid Principles of Art, and
listen not to those Empiricks who try conclusions with us, and show tricks upon
us, to their own shame, and the retarding our hopes of a perfect Cure, and
through-recovery.

God has honored your Sacred Majesty with a peculiar Grace, to heal that
Disease which we commonly call the King's Evil (not that he causes it, but that
he cures it) with one Touch of your Royal Hand. Sr. we come to you for one
Sovereign Touch, May it please you but to put your Hand to one Bill humbly
tendered to you by your loyal Subjects at their next Session, to deliver us from
our present Dangers, and secure us against future fears, and you have healed us
all.

I confess that we are not touched, and healed, is not your Majesty's fault but
our own, who lie pining, and languishing under our Maladies, and perhaps as
uncivilly as unjustly complaining of others, when we should complain of our own
sluggishness, that we make not our frequent Addresses to your Majesty's Grace
and Favor for this divine Medicine: it is past your Majesty's Obligations, and
I believe your Skill too, to cure a People whether they will or no: it is but
decent we complain to, though not of the Physician, that we may learn to prize
restored health at greater rates, and testify the gratitude of those that have
been at the Shrine of AEsculapius by some Noble Fee, which I dare promise you;
for a through-cure would be the most noble that ever a saved Nation tendered to
their Preservers.

I know not how I am fallen into this odd way of expressing my self, I am sure
I ought to beg your Majesty's pardon that I have imitated those affected modes
of expressions, which your great Soul does justly scorn; But I shall pursue the
Humor no further then to represent to your sacred Majesty that as some learned
Observators have proved, that English Simples are most congenial to English
Bodies, and work more benignly upon us than all the far-fetcht and dear-bought
Drugs of Pontus, so the Wholesome Laws, and Customs of your own Kingdom, duly and
properly applied will work more glorious and admirable effects to the composing
all our differences, preventing all recidivations, and relapses, then all your
boasted Catholicons of our exotic chemical Empiricks, and at once disappoint
Hell, and Rome, and preserve your Majesty's Person, and our Religion, if your
Majesty pleases.

Which is the daily prayers and humble petition to the King of Kings.

Whitehal, December. 4th. 1679. Your Majesty's Most humble Most loyal Subject,
and Serant, Titus Oats.

The Introduction.
It Is the great unhappiness of extraordinary surprising evils, that they disarm
us at once of Counsel and Self-defence, and render our Reasons, Tongues and
Hands most unserviceable, when we have most need of their service. As little
griefs are querulous, and talkative, shallow brooks loquacious, when great
sorrows, like deep rivers, slide away without noise: Such is the posture of our
souls in reference to dangers; if they be ordinary, we know perhaps what to
advise upon, what to say, what to do; but if extreme, we are no longer Masters
of Wisdom, we lose the freedom of the Tongues to plead our Cause, and the use
of our Hands to make a just and vigorous opposition against those evils.

I know not how, but so it is, our implacable enemies the Papists, have got the
Gorgons Head, or the great secret of the Torpedo, that we seem all to be
Petrified and turned into senseless Statues, whilst they cut our throats, and
practice at their own leisure our final Ruin.

Had the Protestants of France burnt the smallest Village; had they murdered
the meanest Peasant; had they attempted the least disturbance of the Civil or
Ecclesiastical Government, they must not have expected due forms of Law, nor
the picking out of the guilty Individuals, to be sacrificed to Justice; but
Popish fury had let it self loose in some universal Massacre, to the utter
extirpation of the name of Hugonots; for they that have once done the same
thing without the least provocation, may be presumed ready to do it upon a very
slighty occasion: But they must thank the goodness of our Natures, or rather
the excellency of our Laws, and Religion, that we have proceeded with them in
other methods, and have chosen to oppose Law to violence; Patience to fury;
Moderation and Mercy, to malice and cruelty, rather than to stain our Religion
with the least blot of precipitated Revenge.

But were I worthy to be their Counselor, I would mildly warn them not to
provoke English men any further, nor awaken their just indignation with
repeated importunities, who knows what an exasperated people may do? there is
none can be guarranty against the Rage of a Nation blown up to a flame by the
bellows of continued, and renewed, and growing Insolences.

It had been happy for us and them too, if the unanimous Resolve of the Late
House of Commons, had reduced the restless Papists to more moderation in their
Villainies: I will remind them fairly of it.

May 11. 1679.
Resolved, Nemine contradicente, That this House will stand by His Majesty with
their lives and fortunes; and that if it shall happen that His Majesty shall be
taken away by any untimely death (which God forbid) this House will avenge the
same to the utmost upon the Papists.

The wisdom, justice and reasonableness of which Vote, is founded visibly upon
that Act of Parliament 27 Eliz. 1. whereby the people are authorized to
prosecute with the utmost extremities the bloody Papists, who with unwearied
endeavors were contriving the Death of that Queen of famous and blessed
memory, in hopes to better their condition by the succession of one who gave
proof to the loss of her Head of her addictedness to the Romish Heresy and
Idolatry.

I meet with nothing in story that can parallel the obstinacy of our Romish
Conspirators, except perhaps that of the desperate Soldier, who laid hold on
the Enemies Galley, and when his right hand was cut off, yet he seized it with
the left; and when that was also topt off, he fastened his teeth to the Vessel,
resolving tooth and nail to hold his hold, till his head taken off too, put a
period at once to his life and brutish Courage: The Justice of the Nation had
already cut off their right hand, the Jesuits, or at least some of the fingers
of the right hand; It has not spared their laity, the left hand in their bold
and bloody Conspiracies, and yet they proceed at the same undaunted rates of
pertinacy, and will do so till the heads of the Faction which influence the
whole body with spirit, life and activity be separated by the same stroke of
exemplary Justice from it.

That they have formed the most horrid treason against the Person, life, and
government of his Sacred Majesty, against the Protestants and the Protestant
Religion; that they have endeavored to corrupt all the evidence which
providence has summond in, to discover their villainies; that they have
devilishly suborned Knights of the Post to take away the credibility of their
testimony; and with the same malice peculiar to themselves have now at last
attempted to devolve the Odium and Guilt of their abominable villainies upon the
innocent Protestants, is now so notorious as to be past a Question with all
mankind whom either Interest, or Impudence has not so far gulled, that they are
given up to Infidelity.

And yet amongst all those worthy persons whom God has raised up as Saviors,
and deliverers to England, there is none against whom their poisoned spleen
does more swell than against Him, who being the first, and fullest Evidence
against them, had drawn all the lines of their hatred to center in his
destruction. I shall not need to tell the world that I mean Dr. Titus Oats, he
is the person against whom they have shot all the Arrows of obloquy and
slander; it is his life that must be devoted to the raging waves, to appease
the Tempest; he is the Jonas, that must be cast overboard; not because he fled
from God to Tarsus, but because he forsook Rome for God; Treason for Loyalty,
and the Tents of wickedness for the Camp of Israel.

I have wondered that they, who in the Magazine and Treasury of their Church,
have such variety, and with their variety such Stores of Pardons, Indulgencies
and Dispensations for Incest, Murder, Adultery, Simony, Assassinating of
Princes, dispensed by the hand of their holy Father to all his dear Children,
cannot lend one Pardon to him that has been instrumental to serve and preserve
his natural King and Native Country: Is this at last discovered to be the
unpardonable sin? Has every crime its expiation with them, but Repentance? Is
this the only mortal heinous sin, that deserves utter extermination, and
excision? Will no sacrifice be accepted but his blood? Must his life pay the
price of his Loyalty? I dare aver it, had this Gentleman been really guilty of
all those, and ten times more than all these enormities they have falsely and
impudently laid to his charge, a slender confession, and slighty penance might
have procured a most easy Absolution; provided always he had been true to the
Cause, and would have embarked his soul in the same Leaky Bottom of their
Pseudocatholick Church with themselves; but the greatest Treason with them is
to discover and prevent their Treasons; the highest crime to dilate and impeach
their crimes, and nothing renders a man more incapable of forgiveness, than not
to need it.

The Protestants have indeed been under some disadvantagious Circumstances,
that have rendered them less capable to defeat the designs of their politic
enemies, amongst which none has more encouraged the Papists to proceed in their
so often baffled enterprises, than the incredulousness of the Protestants
themselves: for the fine and Mercurial wits of the Jesuits and their
accomplices had raised a Treason to that superlative height of Impiety, that it
was somewhat too big for the bore of our faith; it had almost stranded the
belief of those who looked into their own hearts for a footstep of such
wickedness, and attended not the presidents upon Record of the like practices,
though in some particulars it must be confessed they have outvyed former Ages
and themselves: Had it been a modest piece of Roguery, an ordinary Essay of
Treason, or some common instance of Jesuitical contrivance, we should have
found an ordinary faith for its entertainment, and easily admitted the
credibility of it; but when malice is rampant, when villainy is transcendent,
and got above all the predicaments, all the Schemes of usual devilishness;
this, this is that which poses and puzzles the thoughts of common sized
sinners, how to conceive mankind should be so desperately debauched, so
horribly degenerated, as to engage in unparalled unpresidented mischiefs.

But our Catholics are resolved to cure us for ever of our Infidelity, and to
let us know by Antopsie, that henceforward there is no evil so great which
their daring towering Inventions cannot excogitate; and when they have done, if
we will sit with our fingers in our mouths, execute it too; so that now they
have furnished us with a faith even to Plerophory, that they are full as bad as
the public Justice of the Nation has represented them.

Out of the vast Mass of complicated Villainies which adorn the story of this
hideous Plot, I have singled out one, and but one particular wherein to gratify
the curious, and satisfy the Judicious; And that shall be the Cursed Design of
Thomas Knox, William Osburn, and John Lane to invalidate the testimony of Dr.
Oats and Mr. William Bedlow, by fixing upon them a Conspiracy against the life
of the Earl of Danby Prisoner in the Tower; but especially to charge the former
of those worthy Persons, with a Crime, which had it been true, must have
renderd him a Person so scandalous, and vicious in his morals, as would have
caused a suspicion in the breasts of all that were possessed with the truth of it
of the veracity of the said Dr. Oats in all is former, and future Testimonies.

Why these men of prostituted consciences should only attempt the murder of the
Doctors good name and not dispatch him out of the way by Dagger, Pistol, or
Poison, I can ascribe to nothing but to the vigilance of the same never
slumbering eye that has hitherto preserved his Majesty and the Protestant
Religion, against those Hellish attempts which have been made upon them: but
seriously all Protestants must reflect upon it with admiration, that in so long
time, they that could in a moment send Mr. Justice Godfrey out of the way, have
not been able to destroy one, no not one of those many who have appeared to
accuse them, wherein we must adore the goodness of God who by his own hand
could, but would not, and by the same hand has restrained them who would, but
should not be able to touch them.

But that I may not make a Porch so unproportionably great that the house may
run out at the portall, I shall not move passion or compassion any further, but
leave the Reader to his own Impartial thoughts, to make reflections and
commentaries upon the ensuing Narrative.

Farewell.
A faithful and particular Account of a most horrid Contrivance of the Papists
to invalidate the evidence of Dr. Titus Oats, by representing his Person
scandalous, and his veracity questionable, which accursed design was managed by
Thomas Knox, William Osburn, and John Lane, as the Instruments, but governed by
wiser heads then their own.
When I have informed the Reader that Mr. Knox, was formerly servant to the
Lord Dumblain, Son to the Earl of Danby, he will easily suggest to himself the
reason why he was so active an Instrument in this great affair: and when he
shall know also that Mr. Osburn, and Mr. Lane were or had been Servants to Dr.
Oats, he will easily justify the prudence of the Confederates to draw them by
the greatest promises and reward into the Confederacy.

But it will be necessary to let the Reader know in a few, and but a few more
words, that these lesser and lower wheels only moved according to influence,
and direction of greater Politicians, that what ever these common seamen had
to do with the tackle, yet there were more subtle heads that attended the
Steerage and Compass.

That Mr. Lane had intimacy with Mrs. Cellier, who was the great Agent between
the Lords in the Tower, and the small Engineers that were plying abroad,
appears from the deposition of Anne Blake, servant to the said Cellier, as I
find in Colonel Manfel's Narrative.

That the Lords in the Tower were mightily concerned for their beloved friend
Mr. Lane; Mr. Dangerfield in his Informations of November. 1. 1679 before the
Councilb-oard assures us; when Lane (says he) lay at Powis house, that Lord
advised he should be sent out of the way, for (said the Lord Powis) Oats
searches for him, and if he be found at my house, 'twould ruin us All.

And this Mr. Lane himself being examined by the Council, Nov. 4. 1679. says,
That he lay at Powis-house a month or six weeks by order of Willoughby, and
Mrs. Cellier, from whom he had his diet; That he went by the name of Johnson,
fearing to be arrested by Mr. Oats, for what he had testified against him, and
in that fear he went down to Greys, near Gravesend, and had a pair of shoes
given him by Mr. Willoughby, who also got him out of Prison, which was a
chargeable work. And being asked by one of the Lords, whether he had not before
the House of Lords, made two contrary Affidavits, he acknowledged that out of
fear he did so, but that the first drawn by Willoughby, as Mr. Nevill had
directed was true, and the other false.

I shall not need to pursue this point any further: The Lord Powis gives him
house-room; Mrs. Cellier paies for his diet; Mr. Willoughby gives him shoes,
and gets him out of prison at great rates, but nothing can be too dear to
support so precious an Instrument of a design so near and dear to them.

Having gotten an Instrument so fit for the business, their next consultation
must be how to manage it with prudence; for they had fresh Instances before
their eyes of some that had endeavored to corrupt the King's Evidence, or to
take away the Credit of their Testimony, which had miserably miscarried: These
examples, though fresh in memory, were not sufficient to deter them from
proceeding in so pious a work, but only ought to caution them to proceed with
more advice; and therefore Mr. Knox, who like the Mole under ground, was the
grand Agent, must not appear by any means, but seem to be haled into the
concern by the repeated importunities of Lane and Osborne; and for this end Mr.
Knox finds this the only expedient, to indite several Letters, which being
written out by them, or one of them, might be sent with great formality to his
own worthy self; wherein they are to intimate to him, that knowing him a person
that had a due veneration for the Earl of Danby, they judged him the only meet
person whom to acquaint with their secrets; they tell him (or rather he tells
himself) how they labored continually under the stings of their own
consciences, for concealing that which might clear up the Innocence of the said
honorable person; that they had tried several ways to divert these black
thoughts, but all would not do; still they were pursued by their guilt, and
therefore entreat, beseech and importune him that he would put them in a way to
exonerate their consciences.

It Is very true, the only real way to have recovered their peace, (if they
could be said to lose what they never had) was to have repented of their horrid
and hellish Combination against the Innocence of Dr. Oats, and Captain Bedlow;
but it was not a Cure they designed, but a greater wound, not to unload their
souls of, but further to charge them with guilt: It was agreed Dr. Oats and
Mr. Bedlow must be guilty, the Catholic Cause required it; and therefore if
they could forge a Conspiracy between Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow against the Earl
of Danby, it would prove a fatal blow at the root of the House, and the
prosecution of the Plot must needs fall to the ground.

And if it could be once made out that there had been a Conspiracy against the
late Lord Treasurer, it would by consequence go far to prove that all the
Evidence that should be given in against the Lords in the Tower, was of the
same metal, and would vanish into smoke: And that great man the E. of Danby was
so confident of success in the fair promising hopes of Mr. Knoxes Agency, that
he delivered himself up at the sitting of the Parliament, to the Usher of the
Black Rod, not fearing any colors. But I shall not any longer detain the
Reader from looking into the mystery of these Letters.

A true Copy of four Letters, sent from William Osborne and John Lane, to
Thomas Knox by the direction of the said Knox, the Original Letters being in
the Relators possession.
(Numb. 1.) Superscribed, To Mr. Thomas Knox, these.
Apr. 2. 1679. SIR,
I Had forgot to tell you, that yesterday morning I left Mr. Oats, the
wickedness of whose Conversation, and lewdness of his Person, I could no longer
bear, though I had some thoughts of going from him to Mr. Dugdale. My
resolution is now changed, and I am resolved to go as soon as I can home to my
own Country, but I would willingly before I depart, leave London with a good
Conscience, and in order to that, I would discharge my mind of what I know
concerning the malicious proceedings of Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow, against my
Lord Treasurer, therefore I do (...) you, if you love my Lord, to put me into a
w^y how I may legally discharge my Conscience of that matter which lies heavy
on it, and you will eternally oblige him, whom I hope you do believe is

Your true Friend, William Osborne.
I do believe this to be Osborne's hand,

Thomas Knox.




But it seems (for so he would wheedle us to believe him) Mr. Knox was somewhat
averse to engage in a Business, whose issue he could not foresee; Alas! the
good man was flesh and blood as well as other men, he loved to sleep in a whole
skin, and saw no reason he had to burn his singers in other men's fire, and
therefore showed great unwillingness to hearken to them; till Mr. Osborne, and
Mr. Lane, with united Forces assault him, and by a second Letter importune him
to give some ease to their troubled Consciences, which Letter was dated but two
days after the former, so painful was it for these tender-conscienced Gentlemen
to lie under the reproaches of their own hearts.

(Numb. 2.) To Mr. Knox at his Lodgings, this.
SIR,
MR. Lane and I are both extremely troubled that we cannot hear from you, and
especially in a matter of this high nature, which concerns so nearly the Life
of my Lord Treasur^^; for we are both very uneasy, and extremely troubled in
our minds for fear we should lose time, and my Lord Treasurer should suffer by
our neglect, whil^st we can with so safe a Conscience declare to the world, how
maliciously he is prosecuted, and what Contrivances are daily practiced against
him by Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow, as you might easily perceive by those
Informations, and other Memorials, we at the first time at our meeting showed
you. Sir, It is now three days since our last meeting, and we do now beg you
for Gods sake, to inform us how we may legally put an end to this matter; for
we are in daily trouble, and fear of our lives, lest those our honest
intentions should come to the ears of Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow, whose tempers
we know so well, and the revenge of whose minds are so great, that they would
study all the ways imaginable to ruin us, and take away our good names, rather
than so true a matter as we have already declared to you should be proved
against them; we therefore once more entreat the favor of you, since you are
the only person we dare trust, to do us the justice of a meeting, and we are
sure if you have any kindness for my Lord Treasurer, you will not deny it us;
and we shall then with the same care that we have done before, endeavor to
clear our Consciences to you of all the matter we know spoken either against
His Sacred Majesty, the Lord Treasurer, or any other person whatsoever: which
is all at present, from

Your faithful Friends, William Osborne, John Lane.
Pray do not fail to meet us at the Cloisters, this afternoon at 4 a clock,
Apr. 4. 1679.


I do believe this to be Lane 's and Osborne 's hand,

Tho. Knox.


An Endorsement to the foregoing Letter, Memorand. That I met with Mr. Lane and
Mr. Osborne, according to the contents if this Letter, and they there told me,
that Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow were to sup at the Palsgraves-head.




All this while Mr. Knox, must seem to keep great state, and to hold off from
intermedling in an affair of so high a nature, and therefore Osborne and Lane
resolve to attaque him with a third Letter, wherein they express the trouble of
their minds for which they can find no ease, till they have revealed to some
person of Honor, and Secrecy, what they knew against Mr. Oats, and Captain
Bedlow; that so they might not draw the guilt of innocent blood upon their own
heads, which they must inevitably do, if they suffer the Earl of Danby to
perish, when they understood so much of the Conspiracy of Mr. Oats and Mr.
Bedlow against him, as being revealed, would make him appear to all the world
to be innocent.

(Numb. 3.) Superscribed, To Mr. Knox, these.
Apr. 6. 1679. SIR,
SInce our last meeting, we have not any thing new to communicate unto you, by
reason that we had suggested all that we formerly knew into those Papers which
at our first meeting we showed unto you; And as we are sure there is nothing
contained in those Papers and Memorials, but what is really true, and what we
may with a safe Conscience swear to; so lest you should suspect our fidelity
and stedfastness in this Affair, we do now make it our request unto you, that
we may be speedily brought before some Person of Honor and Secrecy, to take
our Oaths of what we have already related. And I hope you will pardon us, if we
once again press your hastening of this matter, because if it should chance to
come by any accident to Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlows ears, we are confident they
would with as much malice contrive our Ruin, as they have already done my Lord
Treasurers; but we hope God will preserve us from their mercy, and the Nation
from believing them, which is all at present from

Your true Friends, William Osborne, John Lane.
Pray meet us at six a clock at the Cloisters, for we have a great desire to
see you, and pay the Bearer.


I do believe this to be Lane 's hand,

Tho. Knox.




Mr. Knox yet thought not these Letters which he had dictated, to be sufficient
to clear him from all suspicion of Practice and Confederacy, unless he had also
contrived this fourth, wherein the main Artifice lay to answer an Objection,
why they had not revealed this great Secret to some other person long before
this; to which he invents an Answer for them, that they had already discovered
it to one Mr. Thuer of the Guard, but he being a prudent and wary person as
well as Mr. Knox, advised them to Secrecy for their own sake; but that indeed
their Consciences were so clamorous, that they must needs obey its dictates.
The Letter is as follows.

(Numb. 4.) Superscribed, To Mr. Knox, these.
SIR,
THat you may be the better satisfied, that what we have related to you is all
truth, and what we have done we have been urged to by our own Consciences, we
must needs tell you that we did reveal this matter before we ever saw you, to
Captain Thuer of the Guard, who, if you are acquainted with him, would give you
an account, that what we say to you, we had formerly told him of, though at the
same time he advised us to Secrecy for our own sakes; but our Consciences were
so troubled that we could not contain it, and therefore chose you, who Mr.
Wiggins told Mr. Lane was a very honest young man, and loved my Lord Treasurer,
and he was sorry he was brought to trouble by him, but that it was his Master
Mr. Bedlow made him do it: Therefore I hope you think we have no design upon
you, but that we will clear you, and our selves, whenever it shall please God
that we shall be called to justify what we have already declared.

Your faithful Friends, William Osborne, John Lane.
Apr. 10 1679. at 10 a clock in the morning. I do believe this to be Osborne,
and Lane's hand,

Tho. Knox.




HAving given a true Copy of those Letters, it will be requisite to let the
Reader into the inside of this Conspiracy: Know then, that Mr. Knox and his
Crew had beaten their brains long, and used better brains than their own to
draw up certain Informations, of the wickedness of Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow,
which they kept ready in bank against the good time they should meet with some
Justice of the Peace that would serve the Design: They went to Mr. Justice
Cheyney, at Chelsey, and humbly prayed him to take their Informations upon
Oath, but he desired to be excused, alleging, that it seemed a matter of
State, and that it was not proper for his Cognizance: They make an attempt also
upon Mr. Justice Dewy, who used the same Plea; but yet turning every Stone,
they got an Affidavit lodged at last with Sir James Butler, who owned before
the Council Board, November. 2. 1679. that he took an Affidavit of Lane about
Buggery charged upon Mr. Oats, and that a woman came with the same Lane to him.

These Informations were the life and soul of the whole Intrigue; into which
they had emptied whatever of malice they had conceived against the Doctor, or
of affection to their grand Patron the Earl of Danby; and that I may not be
wanting to the full satisfaction of the Inquisitive, I shall give them a view
of all those Informations, which they kept ready cut and dried for service upon
all occasions.

[Numb. 1.] The Information of Thomas Knox sworn before me this (...) day of
(...) 1679.
THIS Informant does upon his Oath declare, that on the first of this present
April, there came one William Osborne to the Informant in the Painted-Chamber
in Westminster, and told to him the said Informant, that he had something of
moment to reveal to him; and did also desire the Informant to go with him into
the Abbey, and he would reveal it to him; upon which the said Osborne, and the
Informant being together, the said Osborne did tell the Informant, that his
conscience was mightily troubled for that he found the Lord Treasurer was
maliciously prosecuted by Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow, for that he having been a
servant to Mr. Oats, and had often heard Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow consult
together, in Mr. Oats his Chamber in Whitehall, and resolve how they might
contrive a way whereby to destroy my Lord Treasurer: And that he had chosen to
reveal this secret, and ease his conscience to the Informant, rather than to
any one else, because he thought he would keep it secret, for his own sake,
because he had already suffered by endeavoring to serve the said Lord
Treasurer, and thereupon the said Osborne showed to the Informant some Papers
written, as he told the Informant, all in his own hand, and which were relating
to the said Lord Treasurer, upon which the said Informant told the said
Osborne, that he was no servant of the said Lord Treasurers, and did not
therefore desire to meddle in it; and that particularly, because he had never
spoke with the said Osborne before, and desired to be excused; upon which the
said Osborne did press the Informant, and withal did tell him, that if he did
not assist him in this Affair, it was resolved both by him, and one Mr. Lane,
that they would come in on the day of the said Lord Treasurers Trial, and
declare the truth concerning what they knew, concerning the malicious Design of
the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow, against the said Lord Treasurer; for that
they could not rest for fear he should suffer innocently, whilst they could
with so good a conscience, as they thought, save him: And the said Osborne did
withal declare, that the aforesaid Mr. Lane was resolved to speak to the
Informant, upon the foresaid matter: And the said Lane did accordingly upon the
said first of April, in the evening, meet the Informant, and showed him some
Papers, wherein he had taken several memorials, relating to His Majesty, the
Queen, my Lord Treasurer, and several other persons, and did withal declare to
the Informant, that his conscience was so troubled to see the malicious
proceedings of the said Mr. Oats and Bedlow against the said Lord Treasurer,
that he could not rest in his bed, until he had disburdened it, by telling the
Truth; and if he had not met with this Informant, he was resolved to declare it
speedily to some one else, or come himself at the day of the said Lord
Treasurers Trial, and there declare all that he knew relating to that Affair,
and did withal conjure the Informant, as also the said Osborne, to keep all
they had told him secret; for if it should come to the Ears of the said Mr.
Oats and Bedlow, they would endeavor to poison, or murder them, the said
Osborne and Lane, the first time they should see them.

Tho. Knox.

That this information was penned with some cunning, will appear to the narrow
observer: Let it be noted how the Informant answers tacitly the objections
before hand, which he might easily foresee would be made: It would be said, how
came Mr. Lane to entrust so great a secret to you, being a mere stranger? This
he obviates by saying: That Osborne chose to reveal this secret to him, rather
than any one else, because he thought he would keep it secret for his own sake;
because he had already suffered by endeavoring to serve the Lord Treasurer.
Again it might be objected to Mr. Knox, that he was so nearly related to the
Lord Treasurer, that his testimony seemed to savor of partial affection: This
he prevents by saying: That he was no Servant of the Lord Treasurers, and
therefore did not desire to meddle in it: It might be objected; that this
informant Knox, and Osborne, were possibly great Intimates, and therefore might
have laid their heads together to contrive this business against Dr. Oats, but
this he obviates and wards off the objection by saying, That he had never
spoken with Osborne before. But I proceed to the second Information.

[Number 2.] The Information of William Osborne and John Lane taken, etc.
THese Informants do voluntarily upon their Oaths declare, that on or about the
beginning of March last Mr. Oats being at Dinner in his Chamber at Whitehall,
with several other persons, the names of whom the Informants do not well
remember, the said Mr. Oats did then say, that We (which was his frequent way
of mentioning the King) have not gone to bed sober this four years, and that
We did never use to do so before this French Bitch came over, (which was his
usual way of mentioning the Du^chess of Portsmouth.) And the said Mr. Oats
falling into discourse concerning Mr. Cheffins, said, that Mr. Cheffins was a
fit companion for the King, but he should not be so for him, for that he is a
pitiful beggarly Rogue, and the firstborn Son of a Whore, and that his Father
was a Pimp, and his Mother a common Bawd: And the said John Lane can testify
that the said Mr. Oats did at the same time say, That the King had kissed Mr.
Cheffins his Tool. And that the said Informants having been one day abused by
the said Mr. Oats, and desiring therefore to depart from him; the said Mr.
Oats then told the Informants, that though they might perhaps know something
prejudicial, to say against him, yet he did not fear what they could do or say,
for that the House of Commons, and the whole Kingdom, would be of his side, and
believe his word, before their Oaths. These Informants do farther upon their
Oaths declare, that the said Mr. Oats is so wicked and lewd a man, that they
could not endure to live longer with him, for that he is either perpetually
calling them base and scandalous names, or else endeavoring to feel them by
the Members, and lewdly kissing them; for which cause, and abhorrency of what
might follow, they durst never remain long alone with him, but were willing to
leave him at the first opportunity.

William Osborne. John Lane.

I do believe this to be Osborns hand;

Tho. Knox.



The Matters of this Information are so offensive to Pious Ears, and scandalous
to others, that it had been unpardonable to exemplify them, but that their
Falsehood is their own Antidote; and whoever knows Dr. Oats must confess him a
person who has learnt the moderation of the Tongue to that exactness, that he
could not possibly be guilty of such Extravagancies; all the good that I know
in them is this, That the Incredibility of these Stories will teach us to bear
little Faith to the Testimonies of Osborn and Lane in other Cases, even when
they would obtrude upon our Belief more modest and plausible Falsehoods.

A few Remarks shall discharge the Reader of this lewd Information.

And first, It appears that the Consciences of Osborn and Lane were of the same
elevation to a degree, to a minute, that they both swore in a Quill; how else
could they jump in that Expression; Several other persons whose Names the
Informants do not well remember. It was a mysterious Union of Souls, that
neither should remember one person in the Company, but withal it was prudently
foreseen; for had they mentioned any one single person there upon the place,
that person they knew well would have routed the main Body of their
Information. But that which satisfies the World that 'twas mere Confederacy,
is, That they should both remember or forget to a Hairs breadth; they do not
well remember! and this will prove them very unfit Instruments for a cleaver
Lie, seeing they had so bad Memories.

A second thing is this, That it will appear in the sequel of their
Informations taken upon Oath, that whereas he was now prepared to swear, That
the word We, which these Informants would make to refer to the King, if it
referred to any, was to another person of whom it was too great, but too horrid
a Scandal.

[Number 3.] The Information of W. Osborn, Gent. sworn before me this (...) day
of (...) 1679.
THis Informant does upon his Oath declare, That Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow held
several Consultations, conspiring how or which way they could contrive
something whereby to make my Lord Treasurer appear a Traitor, and thereby to
destroy him, and that particularly on or about the beginning of February last;
when Mr. Bedlow being in Mr. Oates's Chamber in White Hall, and then being in
some Discourse concerning the Lord Treasurer, the said Mr. Oats did then, in
the hearing of the Informant, declare to the said Mr. Bedlow, That he did not
doubt but to bring it to pass, that the Lord Treasurer should be tried for his
life amongst the rest of the Lords then in the Tower, for he would be revenged
on him for advising the King against him and the aforesaid Mr. Bedlow, to which
the said Mr. Bedlow did give him Consent and Assistance.

And not long after the Contrivance beforementioned held between the said Mr.
Oats and Mr. Bedlow, Mr. Bedlow came to Mr. Oates's Chamber, in White Hall,
and there did say, That he had now found out a way to do the said Lord
Treasurer's business, and that he had been lately with the Lord Treasurer, with
an order for Money, and that he had since contrived with himself that he would
now swear that the Lord Treasurer had offered him Money to go beyond Sea, and
thereby quash his Evidence; and the said Mr. Bedlow did also at the same time
say, that, I will warrant you (at the same time speaking to Mr. Oats) this
will do the Rogue's Business for him, and the said Mr. Oats did at the same
time reply, You could never have thought of a more complete and dextrous way
than this of doing it, and this the Informant does aver was all said in his
hearing.

W. Osborn.

The third Information carries its own Confutation in its Forehead, (and it is
great pity that all false Accusers have not their Crimes engraven there with a
hot Iron) for how bereft of their Understandings must Dr. Oats and Captain
Bedlow be supposed, that would contrive this Villainy against the Lord
Treasurer, in the hearing of a shabby Servant, who for Bread came into his
Service, and for better Fare would quit it at a days warning? It had been
equally credible, had Osborn sworn that they had proclaimed it by the Common
Crier, for such is every temporary Servant presumed to be, who only waits to
make his Market, and mend his Condition upon the next offer of advantages.

[Number 4.] The Information of John Lane, sworn before me this (...) day of
(...) 1679.
THis Informant does voluntarily upon his Oath declare, That on or about the
first of March last, that Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow being in a Consult together
in Mr. Oates's Chamber, in White Hall, the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow did
call in the Informant into the said Chamber, and demanded of him, Whether any
one belonging to my Lord Treasurer had been tampering with him, or offering him
Money to reveal to them what the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow had designed or
contrived to say or do against the said Lord Treasurer; whereupon the said
Informant did then declare to them, the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow, That
there never had been any such thing offered him; upon which Answer of the
Informant, the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow did encourage the said Informant,
if hereafter any such Overture should be made of Moneys, that he should reveal
it unto them, and they would make use of it to the ruin of the said Lord
Treasurer, and they would withal give him such Instructions how to manage this
Affair, that the Informant should receive the Moneys offered him, for his own
use, and tell the persons with whom he treated nothing but Lies, which they
would readily instruct him in, and let the World say what it would, the said
Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow vowed to the Informant to stitch the said Lord
Treasurer's Arse, and to do his business for him if they lived.

John Lane.
I do believe this to be Lane's hand.

Tho. Knox.



This fourth Information labors under the same Absurdity with the former, That
Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow should be in a Consult together, about Mischief, and
yet call in this Informant for a Witness; which indeed had been all a-case to
them who could as easily swear at a hundred Miles distance, as present in the
Room; but that they should advise this Lane to tell Lies and Falsehoods, and
openly threaten to do the Lord Treasurer's work for him, was both incredible
and vain, for if that Noble Person had not done his own work for himself, all
the World could never have done it for him.

[Number 5.] The Information of W. Osborn, Gent. sworn before me this (...) day
of (...)
THis Informant does voluntarily upon his Oath declare, That on or about the
first of March last, that Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow being alone together in Mr.
Oates's Chamber, in White Hall, the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow did call in
the Informant, and did, in a wheedling manner, ask of him whether any Gentleman
belonging to my Lord Treasurer, or any other person, had been endeavoring to
corrupt him, or offer him any Reward to reveal to them what the said Mr. Oats
and Mr. Bedlow had designed or intended to say or do against the said Lord
Treasurer; whereupon the said Informant did then protest to them, the said Mr.
Oats and Bedlow, that never any person whatsoever had offered to him any thing
of that nature, upon which true Answer of the Informant's, the said Mr. Oats
and Mr. Bedlow did encourage the said Informant, that if hereafter any such
thing should be endeavored, either of Money or any other Reward, that he
should presently reveal it unto them, and they would make such use of it as
would destroy the said Lord Treasurer; and they did withal give him such
instructions how to manage this whole Affair, that he might receive the moneys
offered him, for his own use, and tell the person with whom he treated nothing
but lies and false stories, which they would instruct him readily in; and let
the World imagine what it would of them, the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow
vowed, in the Informants presence, to ruin the said Lord Treasurer to all
intents and purposes.

William Osborne.
I do conceive this to be Osborne's hand.

Tho. Knox.



[Number 6.] Several Memorials of John Lane, and William Osborne's, delivered
April 2. 1679. Memorial 1.
ABout the time when Mr. Coleman was tried for his Life, and Mr. Titus Oats
did impeach the Queen, and was therefore confined to his Chamber, and no body
suffered to speak to him in private, his Father and I coming about Eight a
Clock at Night from Westminster Hall, he bid me, if possible I could speak to
his Son, deliver him words from him to this purpose, that he should not fear,
nor be daunted, but cheer up, and Impeach the Woman, since he so well knew that
Mr. Bedlow was resolved to assist him in his Evidence against her. (which Woman
Old Mr. Oats, Father to Mr. Titus Oats, did explain afterward to me to be
the Queen) This was written by me, and copied by George Neal, who then served
Mr. Titus Oats, and who told me he delivered those words in writing under a
Dish of Meat to Mr. Titus Oats, who privately put it in his Pocket. This I
took notice of, because we all then thought, and Mr. Oats told us, that he had
no body to assist him in the Evidence against the Queen.

John Lane.
I do believe this to be Lane's hand.

Tho. Knox.



These Memorials were the first Papers which Lane and Osborne showed to Knox
upon their first meeting (as they have said it in their Notes,) but in truth,
were the contrivance of Knox, out of which they might form their Affidavits,
when matters were ripe.

The Design of it seems first to make the Father as wise as the Son, that is,
neither of them to have more Wit than they were born with; that an Ancient
Gentleman who had seen so much of the world as he had done, and well knew under
what Circumstances his Son then was, should reveal his evil designs, if he had
any, to a Servant, is something more than improbable, that is, incredible: But
the main design was to intimate, that Mr. Oats was but a single Testimony in
the case, till Mr. Bedlow by Conspiracy came in to strengthen him.

Memorial 2.
WHen the Queen used to go to Somerset House to Chapel, and the Drums beat at
her going by, Mr. Oats used frequently to go to the Window to see her, he
would then frequently say, where is our Gammer, or our Dame Short-Arse going
now? She is going to Godfrey-Hall, I Will warrant you, amongst the rest of the
Crew, to say Mass, etc. but I will warrant you she will not go long there: This
was his usual contemptuous way of speaking of the Queen when ever he saw her;
and this we have several times took particular notice of to one another.

John Lane. William Osborne.

I do believe this to be Lane's and Osborne's hands.

Tho. Knox.



The Scandalous Expressions herein falsely imputed to Dr. Oats strike not at
the main of the Cause, but were forged to draw the displeasure of their
Majesty's upon him, under which prejudices they knew he must needs sink, if
once they made the desired Impressions upon their Royal Breasts: but the
discerning Spirit of his Majesty would soon look through these Cobwebs; nor do
we find that Dr. Oats suffered in the gracious thoughts of his Majesty.

Memorial 3.
A little after the Election for Parliament Men in Tuttle-fields, his Majesty
sent one of his Officers to Mr. Titus Oats, with Commands not to go out of
White Hall and S. James's Park without leave, which Mr. Oats did promise upon
the Faith of a Minister punctually to obey: yet notwithstanding his promise he
went out the sametime, and went privately to Southwark in a Coach, with us in
his company; and when he came there, great Multitudes of people flocked after
him, and there he made Speeches to the Rabble, desiring them to choose whom he
would recommend, which should be one that was his Counsel, and assisted him in
saving the Nation, and that they were beholding to him for all their safeties;
and he was sure that this man (who was Mr. Smith) would stand up for the Cause,
and defend their Liberties. This was said in our hearing, and we took notice of
it, because he met with one Mr. Collier, of the Guard of Yeomen, and bid him be
secret, and not tell that he saw him abroad, and gave him a Bottle of Sack; and
this he has done several other times after he has engaged not to go without
the King's leave.

John Lane. W. Osborne.

I do believe this to be Lane's and Osborne's hands.

Tho. Knox.



Had this been true, it had been in it self neither Felony nor Treason, the
greatest Account it could turn to, was obliquely to wound his Reputation, whom
they had represented, as a person whose Evidence must be of no weight, seeing
he had falsified in a promise made to his Majesty in verbo sacerdotis; but the
Innocence of the Doctor has scattered thicker Clouds of Obloquy and Slander,
than this wretched Calumny.

The Information of John Lane sworn this (...) day of (...) 1679.
THis Informant does voluntarily upon his Oath declare, That on or about the
24th or 25th of March last, about 7 of the Clock in the morning, Mr. Titus
Oats sent all his Servants to the King's Chapel in White Hall, except this
Informant; and when they were all gone to Chapel he called this Informant in
to him, to help to dress him, and as soon as the Informant had put on the said
Mr. Oates's Breeches, and Stockins, and Morning-Gown, he took this Informant
into his Bedchamber, and there he told the Informant, That he must take his
Penance: whereupon he made the Informant lie down upon the Bed with his
Breeches down, and gave him nine lashes with a lash of three small Ropes with a
knot at each end, which he usually kept in his Pocket for that purpose, (which
usage the Informant durst not deny lest he should call to the Sentinel to take
hold of him, and say to the said Sentinel, That the Informant would have
offered Violence to him, which was his usual way of threatening the Informant,
if he durst at any time resist his Cruel Usage) and after he had severely
lashed him, he took the said Informant by the hand, and clapped his hand eagerly
about his Neck and kissed him, and put his hand into the Codpiece of the
Informant's Breeches, and took him by the Privy-Members, and said that he would
be Friends with the Informant; and at the same time when Mr. Oates's hand was
in the Informant's Breeches, and held him by the Members, the said Mr. Oats
unbutton'd the Informant's Breeches with the other hand, and commanded and
forced with an angry Countenance with his hand the Informant to lie down upon
his Belly upon the Bed, and the said Mr. Oats laid down by the Informants
side, and told the Informant, that he had a mind to see whether his backside
were flayed enough, and when he saw that it looked red, he took the Informant
about the middle, and kissed him in a lascivious manner; and at the same time
the said Mr. Oats thrust his Belly against the said Informant's side, and did
with his naked Privy-Members press the said Informant's Body hard: and the said
Informant does further upon his Oath declare, had not a Woman that was
sweeping the next Room kept a noise (which made him think the rest of the
Servants were come from Prayers) he would grievously have abused the Body of
the Informant, and would certainly have bugger'd him; and the Informant durst
not cry out, for fear of being seized by the Sentinels, as aforesaid; and this
the said Informant does swear he had tempted to do several other times before.

John Lane.
I do believe this to be Lane's hand.

Tho. Knox.



The Information subscribed by Lane, as Knox testifies under his own hand, was
after some time made upon Oath before Sir James Butler; for so Lane himself
confesses before the Council, November. 4. 1679. for which see Col. Mansell's
Narrative, p. 64. and Sir James Butler himself owns the taking an Affidavit of
Lane, about Buggery, charged upon Mr. Oats, November the second, see the same
Narrative, page 50.

In which Information Lane acted both maliciously against Dr. Oats, and warily
for himself; for though he had a great mind the Doctor's Person and Evidence
should be soundly disparaged, yet he loved himself too well to be hanged; and
therefore he lays the Crime not to be committed, (which would have stretched
his own Neck,) but only attempted, which was enough to throw Dirt upon the
Doctor's Conversation, and blemish his Testimony.

Now because a Crime of so high and horrid guilt, so contrary to Nature, and
above the common Standard of Villainies, would never gain credit amongst those
who knew the former method of the Doctors Conversation, they had drawn the
Information with so good advice, that there was an Answer insinuated to the
common Objections that might be made against the truth of it: As first, why did
not Lane cry out for help upon the Attempt made upon him? to this you are
furnished with an Answer, it was this, The Informant durst not cry out for fear
of being seized by the Sentinels. It seems he was more afraid of the Sentinels
than of the Gallows. But it might be asked, Why was not the Fact committed as
well as attempted? to this he hints a fine Answer; that had not a Woman that
was sweeping kept a noise (which made him think the rest of the Servants were
come from Prayers) he would grievously have abused the Body of the Informant.
This old Woman was indeed handsomely contrived, and so the Poets introduce some
God from Heaven to salve all Difficulties, when their own Plots have rendered
matters intricate; but should we ask Lane, how the Doctors severe whipping and
lashing him with Cords was a proper inducement to Lane's yielding to his Lust,
which certainly would have raised other passions, and why he did not swear that
Dr. Oats gave him Sweet meats, rather than such severe Penance. I know not
what he would answer, but that it was an error, and they will rectify it in
the next Information.

It is now time, having exemplified all the Letters, Informations, and
Memorials which were drawn up by themselves, and kept ready to serve the
occasion, to proceed to those Informations which were taken upon Oath before
some or other of his Majesty's Justices for the Peace; only I must leave this
Advertisement, That the four Letters, the six Informations, and the Paper
containing three Memorials, all of them here transcribed and compared, were by
Knox delivered into the hands of Sir William waller, and Mr. Justice Warcup, as
he owns upon his Oath before the said Gentlemen.

The Examination of Thomas Knox, lately Servant to the Lord Dumblane, before us
Sir William Waller, and Edmund Warcup, Esquire, two of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and City and Liberties of
Westminster, taken by us by Virtue of an Order of the Committee of Lords.
This Examinant says, That on the 1st of April, walking in the painted
Chamber, W. Osborne came to him and told him, that he being informed that he
had lived in the E. of Danby's Family for some time, he had something of moment
to communicate to him, which might be a means to save the Lord Treasurer,
whereupon this Examinant walked with the said Osborne into the Abbey; being in
the Abbey, Osborne delivered Papers drawn up by way of Information, being five
in number, none of them bearing any date, and one Paper of several Memorials of
John Lane, and William Osborne: The next day they brought him to the Cloisters
in Westminster-Abby, several meetings they had afterward, and four Letters
they wrote to him: About the fifth of April they went together to Mr. Cheyney
at Chelsey, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace; but he told them, the
business being of an high nature, and matter of State, he desired to be
excused: About a fortnight after, this Examinant went to Mr. Dew, upon the
same Errand, and received the like Answer as Mr. Cheyney had done; not long
after he went likewise to Mr. Secretary Coventrey, who told him, that he being
a Member of the House of Commons, by whom the said Lord Treasurer had been
Impeached, he could not meddle in that business: None of the forementioned
Gentlemen, his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, had a sight of any of the
Papers, but only upon the Information (which this Examinant made in his own
Name) they, and Mr. Secretary Coventrey, made the same Answer.

This Examinant being something scrupulous in meddling in the business, they
told him, that they had been with Captain Thuar formerly, and had acquainted
him with this business; and that he had advised them, it being a nice business,
to let it alone, till the heat of the Parliament should be a little over: About
a fortnight after that, Will. Osborne and John Lane had communicated these
matters to the Examinant, they complaining that they knew not where
conveniently to lodge, this Examinant told them he would endeavor to find them
Lodgings; and the very same day, by the direction of the Lord Dunblain's
Coachman, went to the Sugar Loaf in Pickadilly, and took Lodgings on his own
account, for himself, and two of his Friends, and lay there with them. At the
time of their going from the said Lodgings, which was four or five days at
most, the said Osborne and Lane paid to this Examinant two Shillings a-piece;
and during the time that this Examinant was with them, they constantly paid
their Club. This Examinant further says, that he has communicated this
business to the Lord Latimere, and that he had given the Papers
beforementioned into his hands to be perused, which he has now delivered into
our Custody: He likewise declares neither to have seen or heard of any body
coming to them from the Lords in the Tower, or knows of their ever having
been at the Tower. And further, this Examinant says, that he never directly or
indirectly did supply the said Osborne or Lane with any money, or made them any
promise of Reward whatsoever; only he confesses, that at the Tun-Tavern in S.
Martin's Lane, he flung down a Guinney on the Table, the said Lane saying he
had no money, and promising to repay it; and further this Examinant says not.

Tho. Knox.
Jurat. coram nobis 29. April, 1679.

William Waller. Edmond Warcupp.


Memorand. That after the aforesaid Examination, he confessed to us both, that
he had written a Note this Afternoon (being a Prisoner) to Mr. Osborne, to
inform him, that he would be examined this afternoon, (with these other words)
We always Clubbed, and you paid two Shillings at the Sugar Loaf: Tear this. He
likewise confessed that he had lain in White-Fryers, being again examined,
although before he had denied it.

William Waller. Edmond Warcupp.



[Lane's first Examination.] The Examination of John Lane, Son of Richard Lane,
at this time one of the Yeomen of the Guard in Extraordinary to his Majesty,
taken in obedience to an Order of the Lords of the Committee, for examining
Discoveries relating to the late Horrid Conspiracy, before us Sir William
Waller, and Edmond Warcupp, Esquire two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
this 29. April. 1679.
This Examinant says, that he lived with Mr. Oats nine Weeks; about the
seventh of April last he quitted Mr. Oats his service; whilst he lived with
the said Mr. Oats, he says, he daily sent his Servants to Morning Prayers,
reserving one only with him, to dress him: This Examinant says, that whilst he
was his Servant, he was never charged by Mr. Oats of opening any of his
Letters, or of any other misdemeanour: He further says, that three
Informations marked the numbers (1) (2) (4) and the Memorial marked number (6)
were written by Mr. William Osborne, and were by this Examinant subscribed,
none saving the said Osborne being present; and three of the Letters marked (2)
(3) and (4) were written by the said William Osborne, and were by this
Examinants own hand subscribed, John Lane, none else being present, and thinks
that they were truly dated when written. This Examinant confesses, that he,
and Mr. Knox, and Mr. Osborne, lay privately this day fortnight in
White-Fryers, from the Tuesday to the Saturday following; and from thence they
went and lodged in a paved Alley, leading out of Chancery Lane into
Lincolns-Inn-fields, and there they rested all the next day, which was
Easter Day, and the Night: On Monday they removed into Pickadilly, to the Sign
of the three Sugar-Loaves, and there continued till Friday last, at which time
he was taken. These three forementioned Lodgings were taken by Mr. Knox; and
this Examinant, and Mr. Osborne, delivered their share of Charges from time to
time, both for Diet and Lodging, to the said Mr. Knox; and then the said Mr.
Knox paid all the expenses to the persons to whom it was due, but not in their
presence.

This Examinant says, that he, Mr. Knox, and Mr. Osborne, once being at the
One-Tun-Tavern in St. Martins-Lane, Mr. Knox threw a Guinney on the Table,
which this Examinant says he took up, and put it into his Pocket, Mr. Knox
then saying, that it should never be said I gave you any money. And he further
says, that never at any time, either Mr. Knox, or any other person, directly
or indirectly, gave him either any money, or promised him any Reward
whatsoever, for thus accusing Mr. Oats; neither was he by Mr. Knox, or any
other person, ever persuaded to swear for the Lords in the Tower, or the Lord
Treasurer, and further this Examination says not.

John Lane.
Jurat. little nobis,

Will. Waller. Edmund Warcupp.



Hitherto we find Mr. Lane keeps close to the Cause, and stands his ground;
only the Guinney dropped at the Tun-Tavern in St. Mertins-Lane, and by Mr. Lane
put into his own Pocket, administers some suspicion that there was some
practice in the business, and especially those words which Knox dropped with the
Guinney do greatly confirm it; It shall never be said I gave you any money.

But we are now entering upon those Informations which testify at once Mr.
Lane's relentings, though not his repentings, and therefore I shall subjoyn two
more of Mr. Lane's Examinations, which will discover the depths of this
Roguery; though a little out of time-order.

[Lane's second Examination.] A further Examination of John Lane, Son to
Richard Lane, at this time one of the Yeomen of the Guard to His Majesty, taken
by me at the earnest suite and request of the said John Lane, this (...) of
(...) 1679.
This Examinant having been this day brought to the door of the Commitee of
Lords, in order to a further Examination of what he had formerly deposed, being
brought back to the Prison without having appeared before the Lords; the
Committee having, by reason of the King's being come to the House, adjourned
the hearing of the Ex^minant until Friday morning; this Examinant being touched
and pricked in his own Conscience with a real and hearty remorse and sorrow for
the great Guilt he had contracted, in falsely swearing and accusing Mr. Oats
and Mr. Bedlow, desired one Mr. R^cks, one of the Yeomen of the Guard, to
endeavor to find out Sir Will. Waller, to beg his pardon, and to let him know
that he was now fully convinced of his sin, and should confess the whole naked
truth, though he should expose his own Reputation to ruin, rather than
increase his Guilt by justifying of what in his own Conscience he is convinced
to be false.

This Examinant declares, that the first time he ever met Mr. Thomas Knox, it
was at the Sign of the Hole in the Wall in Duffins Alley in Kings-street, and
that there Mr. Knox advised him what he should say concerning Mr. Oats, in
Reference to any discourse either of the King, Queen, or Lord Treasurer; that
at this Examinatnt's coming to that House, he was not to ask for Mr. Knox, but
for the Number (3) After some discourse there how they should contrive an
accusation of Mr. Oats, The said Knox gave this Examinant directions how to do
it; and it being late they broke up their meeting: This first meeting happened
to be on the Tuesday, or Wednesday, before he left Mr. Oats: The second
meeting was agreed to be at the Owl in King Street, on the Sunday following,
at three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and whoever should come first, should
ask for the Figure of (3) at the Bar, but Mr. Knox, having some other
extraordinary business they made no stay, or came to any Resolution; but
appointed a third meeting, which to the best of this Examinant's memory was at
the Kings-Armes in the Bowling-Alley: but the said Mr. Knox not coming at the
appointed time, the Examinant, and Osborn walked in the Cloisters, and had not
been there long but Mr. Knox came to them, whereupon, immediately they took
Coach, and went directly to Chelsea, to Mr. Cheyney, where they were to swear
some things against Mr. Oats, according to Mr. Knox's Instructions, in behalf
of the Lord Treasurer: This Examinant, and the said Osborn stayed in the Coach,
whilst Knox (as he told this Examinant, and Osborn) went to speak with Mr.
Cheyney, who stayed not very long; and at his return told them that Mr. Cheyney
refused to meddle in the business, whereupon they returned to White Hall. This
Examinant being yet in Mr. Oats his service: The Monday following this
Examinant came away from Mr. Oats; and either on that very day, or the day
following, had another meeting with Knox, and Osborne at the One Tun Tavern in
St. Martins-Lane, by the sign all of the Number (3) where Knox treated this
Examinant with Oysters, and Wine; and after they had eaten their Oysters, Mr.
Knox, and Osborne, wrote out the Informations, Knox being the Dictator of them;
and at the same time the said Knox made this Examinant, and the said Osborne
swear secrecy: what this Examinant's part was to swear, Knox prevailed with
Osborne to write down, because the Examinant could not write a good hand. The
writings being finished, Knox took them and put them in his pocket and paid the
reckoning, offering them before hand, if they would either eat, or drink, they
might call for whatever they had a mind to; and told them, because it should
not be said, he had given them money, he would contrive in a short time to
convey some to them, and appointed the same place to meet at the next day by
two of the clock, and according to the agreement, they all met at the said
place; where after they had drank a Pint of Sack, he dropped a Guinney on the
Table, and told them, that on the next day they should have another; and after
they had been by him enjoined secrecy, they parted: The next day Osborne (as
this Examinant was told by him) he met the said Knox and received a Guinney
according to Knox his promise the day before; the same day as Osborne had
received the Guinney of Knox, in the Evening Osborne came to the Examinant's
Lodgings in Westminster, and then told this Examinant of the Guinney he had
received, and returned him ten shillings, which the day before this Examinant
had lent him: A day or two after they had another meeting at the Green Dragon
in the Pel-mel, and there dined, after Dinner, Mr. Osborn was desired by Knox
to write a letter, according to such a manner as he would direct, and caused
him to date the Letter of a latter date, and direct the said Letter to him,
which being done he put up the Letter in his Pocket; and having clubbed in the
payment of the Reckoning which came to twelve pence a piece, parted for that
time, appointing a meeting the same night to be at the Rose Tavern in the
Pel-mel, to be at nine of the clock, where accordingly we met, and supped
together, and conferred with Knox, asking how things went? to which he answered
very well! about ten of the clock at night we parted, and came to Westminster,
and agreed the next day to meet in a little Alley near the Rose-Tavern in the
Pell-mel, at an Ordinary, about seven or eight in the evening, where we met and
had a Supper, and at this House Knox took the first lodging for this Examinant
and the said Osborne; and lay there the same night. The next morning after they
had broke their fast, Mr. Knox came to this Examinant and Osborne, and told
them that he had provided them another lodging at the Cider-house in
Leicester-fields at the sign of the Apple Tree, and at the said Cider-house,
this Examinant and Osborne continued from Tuesday or Wednesday to Saturday,
during which time Knox caused Osborne to write him a Letter, as he should
direct him, which he did, and gave it to Knox, who continually advised both
Osborne and Knox, to seem to press him earnestly to engage in this business; on
the Saturday this Examinant and Osborne, changed their lodgings which were
provided for them by Knox, in a little paved Alley leading out of little
Lincolnes-Inn fields into Chancery Lane, and there the said Knox lay with this
Examinant and Osborne, in one and the same bed: The next morning Knox with this
Examinant and Osborne (their lodgings being paid for by Knox) went together
into Whitefriers, and Knox took lodgings next door to a Music house, where
they all three lodged for near a week, after which time, Mr. Knox having (as he
told this Examinant) paid the Reckoning; This Examinant, and Osborne, and
Knox, removed to their forementioned lodgings in the Paved Alley leading out of
little Lincolns Inn fields into Chancery lane, and lay there Easter-eve till
Easter-monday, whence the said Knox, and Osborne, with this Examinant removed
into Pickadilly to the sign of the three Sugar-loaves a Grocers house, and
there this Examinant continued lodged with the said Knox, and Osborne, until
last Friday at which time this Examinant was seized at his Fathers house at the
sign of the Wooll-pack in Westminster: This Examinant farther says, that all
charges for diet and lodging in the said respective places were paid, and
cleared by Mr. Knox, unless at the Green-Dragon in the Pell-mell, and the Owl
in King Street, where this Examinant and the said Osborne paid their Clubs,
which to the best of this Examinants memory did not exceed eighteen pence a
piece. This Examinant does further say that by way of encouragement the said
Knox told Mr. Osborne, in his hearing, that for what he should say in behalf of
the Lord Treasurer he should be sure of a considerable reward both of Money,
and preferment. And the said Knox did likewise tell this Examinant for his
encouragement that he should want neither money nor a good place as long as he
should live: And least any of these proceedings should be discovered, either by
William Osbrone, or this Examinant, the said Knox, told them, that if either of
them should make a discovery of him, he would be sure to dispatch them by one
means or other, and if he should discover then he would freely grant them the
same liberty. This Examinant likewise says, that Knox assured him, he should
not doubt but that the Lords in the Tower would likewise own his kindness to
them in Accusing Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow: And further this Examinant says
not, only humbly begs pardon from God, and of their Lordships for the heinous
Crime he stands guilty of,

John Lane.
Coram

William Waller.



A third Examination of John Lane taken by me this third of May, 1679.
This Examinant having recollected himself further says, that the very day the
Lord Treasurer came into the Black Rod, Mr. Knox made this Examinant, and
William Osborn swear they would stand to what he had instructed them to write,
and said, that if they should not the Lord Treasurer would die; and that he
would not have come in but for them; hoping they would swear, as they had been
by the said Knox directed: This Examinant further says, that on Monday last,
the Nurse belonging to the Goal, came to him, and told him, he should do well
to stick to Mr. Knox; and that a Gentlewoman very well habited came to the
Prison, and bid her tell this Examinant, that he should be sure to stick to Mr.
Knox, and not be daunted, and what moneys foever he should require, tho it were
a thousand pounds, he should have it: Whereupon this Examinant asked the Nurse,
who this Gentlewoman was, to whom she replied, she would not discover her name,
because she would not have her name brought in question, and further this
Examinant says not.

John Lane.
Coram

William Waller.



Mr. Lane seems now to be a Penitent, to have by these two last recanted his
first Examination; but we must not flatter our selves too much with his
sincerity? let us have but a little patience, and we shall hear him deny, what
ever he has now owned, and justify what in his first Examination he had
justified: He has degorg'd himself in those last Papers, but resolves to lick
up his vomit again, and tho he seems to have become a Convert, will ere long
prove himself an Apostate: Whether he thought he should make his Fortune better
by telling lies for his Great Master, than by telling truth for the Doctor, or
what other Reason may be assigned, Certain it is, that Nov. 4. 1679 before the
Lords of the Council, being asked, Whether he had not made two contrary
Affidavits before the House of Lords? he acknowledged that out of fear he did
so! but that the first drawn by Willoughby, as Mr. Nevil had directed was true
and the other false.

And being flesht in Wickedness, and hardened to his own ruin, he proceeds to
Indict Dr. Oats at the Kings Bench Bar, of the horrid and abominable Crimes
mentioned in the foregoing Depositions, tho the Wisdom of the Jury upon the
slightness and Inconsistency of his Evidence threwit out and brought in an
Ignoramus.

I shall now present to the Reader a true Copy of the Examination of William
Osborn, which opens much of this accursed design against Dr. Oats, and Mr.
Bedlow, which tho full of now proved Truth, yet the Examinant it seems
desperately resolved to take his part of shame and punishment with his beloved
Accomplices, and is since fled from his own Oath, and the Justice due to
Perjury.

The Examination of William Osborn of Cullumpton in the County of Devon,
Vintener taken upon Oath in obedience to an Order of the Lords Committees, for
examining of Discoveries, relating to the late horrid Conspiracy before Sir
William Waller Baronet, and Edward Wareup, Esquire two of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, this 29th day of April, 1679.
Middlesex and Westminster.
This Examinant says, that he served Mr. Titus Oats from the tenth of
December last, to the latter end of March past: That the said Mr. Oats paid
this Examinant his Wages very honestly, and his usage was civil, but he
sometimes corrected this Examinant for Misdemeanors, at which this Examinant
was offended, but never intended any mischief to Mr. Oats for it: And this
Examinant farther says, that Mr. Oats was a passionate man, yet very
Religious, and every morning sent all his Servants to the Kings Chapel to
prayers, only ordering some one of them to stay at home to dress him; and he
further says, that he never heard Mr. Oats say, he had any design to accuse
the Lord Treasurer, or any ways to destroy him; nor did this Examinant ever
hear any discourse between Mr. Bedlow, and Mr. Oats tending to any Accusation
against the Lord Treasurer; but this Examinant did (...) the Information that
Mr. Bedlow gave against the Lord Treasurer, which Mr. Wiggins, Mr. Bedlow
Clerk, showed to this Examinant, after the same was sworn publicly. And this
Examinant further says, that he never heard Mr. Oats say that he had any
acc^^^^ion to make against the Queen, or had made any: and the worst word he
ever heard him speak of the Queen was, where is our Dame going? which was when
he saw the Guard drawn out in the Yard to attend her Majesty. And this
Examinant further says, that one day at Dinner, when Mr. Wharton, Mr. Oats
his Father, Dr. Jones and others were present, some discourse happened between
them about Sir John Robinson, and sometime after the naming of him, Mr. Oats
did say these words: We have not gone to bed sober these four years: which Mr.
Thurston, Mr. Lane, and this Examinant did think to be spoken of the King, but
this Examinant cannot say 'twas spoken of His Majesty, in regard he can give no
reason why to apply it so. And he further says, that he cannot remember, or
call to mind, that he ever heard Mr. Oats speak any undecent words of any
passages between His Majesty and Mr. Cheffinch; and this Examinant further
says, that he has layen several nights with Mr. Oats, but never found he
afford the least lascivious or undecent action to this Examinant, but did
exhort this Examinant from time to time to lead a good course of Life, free
from doing evil, and often made this Examinant to read Sermons, and other Books
by him: And this Examinant further says, That upon the first of April last,
Mr. John Lane (now Prisoner with this Examinant in the Gatehouse, and formerly
fellow servant with this Examinant to Mr. Oats) brought this Examinant to Mr.
Knox in the painted Chamber, who thence went to the Cloisters in the Abbey with
this Examinant, where he discoursed about the Earl of Danby, and Mr. Knox
proposed then to this Examinant, That if this Examinant would swear, That Mr.
Bedlow came to Mr. Oats his Chamber, and there said, that he had been with the
Earl of Danby, and that the Earl of Danby had promised him money to go beyond
Sea, and that this was a contrived story, between the said Mr. Oats, and Mr.
Bedlow, to take away the Earl of Danby's Life, that in such case, this
Examinant should have enough to maintain this Examinant and a Footboy to attend
him. And this Examinant says, that he met Mr. Knox in the same Cloisters
afterward twice, they two being alone, when he always continued his
discourse, and promises of what great rewards this Examinant should have if he
would swear that Mr. Bedlow, and Mr. Oats, in this Examinants hearing
contrived the design against the Lord Treasurer, whereby to prove; that the
said Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow in this Examinants hearing should say, Come let
us contrive a story to ruin the Lord Treasurer, and that Mr. Bedlow should
within a day or two after come to Mr. Oats and say, now I have found out a way
to do the Rogues business for him: I will swear he has offered me money to go
beyond Sea, and that Mr. Oats should reply, you could never have thought of a
better way. And this Examinant was to swear, that all these things were spoken
in this Examinants hearing: And upon these Conditions Mr. Knox promised this
Examinant sufficient reward. And this Examinant says, that Mr. Lane was not to
swear to these things, (as Mr. Knex told this Examinant.) And this Examinant
further says, that He, Mr. Lane, and Mr. Knox, met several times together, and
when Mr. Knox had any thing to say to this Examinent, he took him aside in the
Room; and when he had any thing to say to Mr. Lane, he took him aside also, and
so discoursed them severally: But about this Tuesday was a fortnight, Mr. Knox
took a lodging for this Examinant, Mr. Lane, and himself, in White Friars at
the three Flower de Luces, where they lodged, till the Saturday night
following, and in that time Mr. Knox dictated to this Examinant, what should be
this Examinants, and John Lanes Depositions, and they were written once before
at the one Tun Tavern in St. Martins Lane: And he says, that what Mr. Lanes
part in his Deposition about the Queen, was to be, was not spoken of till the
the lodging in White Friars, though the other part of the Depositions, were
dictated by Mr. Knox before: And he further says, that the four Letters, now
showed this Examinant marked (1) (2) (3) (4) are all of this Examinants hand
Writing, but were directed by Mr. Knox, what they should contain, and were
antedated several days before they were written (by Mr. Knox his direction)
because it should appear thereby, that this Examinant, and Mr. Lane invited the
said Mr. Knox to take their Depositions, and to bring them to light as a matter
of Conscience, not of his, Mr. Knox, his own seeking; and this Examinant
further says, that the Informations marked (1.) (2.) (3.) (4.) (5.) and the
Memorials marked (6.) are all of this Examinants hand Writing, and were all
dictated verbatim to this Examinant, to be the Informations upon Oath of this
Examinant, and the said Mr. Lane: And this Examinant says, that Mr. Knox took
this Examinant, and Mr. Lane in a Coach with him out of Town, with an intent to
have them sworn before Mr. Cheyney at Chelsea, where this Examinant, and Mr.
Lane continoed in the Coach, while Mr. Knox went out, and at his return Mr.
Knox told us, that Mr. Cheyney would not take the Informations, but advised
they should be taken before one of the Privy Counselors, who should be one of
the Lord Treasurers friends: And this Examinant says, that afterward they
removed their Lodgings into an Alley leading into little Lincolns-Inn-fields
out of Chancery Lane, where they staid on Sunday was a seven night last; and on
Monday following they removed to Pickadilly, to the three Sugar Loaves, in all
which time, and places Mr, Knox heartned up this Examinant and Mr. Lane to
stand to the Depositions aforesaid: promissing great rewards, and bearing all
their expenses, affording what meat or wine was desired, and some Treats he
bestowed, which amounted to near twenty shillings a time at Taverns. And this
Examinant says, that Mr. Lane being taken, Mr. Knox sent a Hackney-Coach to
this Examinants Lodging, at the said three Sugar Loaves in Pickadilly, with the
Lord Dumblaines Coachman, and this Examinant went into the Coach and took up
Mr. Knox at the Mews, and then this Examinant was carried into White Friars, to
another Lodging, where Mr. Knox Lodged with this Examinant one night, being
Friday night last, and then he said that the taking of Mr. Lane would be for
the better, because they should sooner come to an end; and he heartened up this
Examinant, and said, that if this Examinant should be taken also, a thousand
pounds Bail would be given for this Examinants Liberty. And he further says
that Mr. Knox gave this Examinant one Guinney at one time, by throwing it on
the table, that this Examinant might take it up; but it was so ordered that it
should not be given this Examinant, that he might safely swear no money was
given him; and at the last lodging in Whitefriers Mr. Knox came, and lay down
on a bed by the Examimant, and then laid his Arm over this Examinant, and let
fall ten shillings, which this Examinant took up also: And Mr. Lane told this
Examinant that Mr. Knox had given him one Guinny, in the same manner, by
throwing it on a Table. And he further says, that Mr. Knox told this
Examinant, that he saw Mr. Lane taken, and walked by Mr. Wiggins in a Troopers
Cloak at the same time. And this day this Examinant being in a Room in the
Gate House, a Note was brought to this Examinant, it being thrust under the
door, wherein was written these words, or to the effect following: You will be
examined this afternoon; we always clubbed, and you paid two shillings at the
Sugar Loaf: Tear this! but no name to it, which this Examinant knows to be of
Mr. Knox his hand Writing; and further at present says not.

William Osborn.
Jurat. die and anno praedict. cor. nobis

William Waller. Edmond VVarcup.




This full and authentic Confession of Osborn, being taken upon Oath by two of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, and that by order of the Committee of the
House of Lords, all men hoped would have so discouraged the Conspirators, that
the Doctor should have heard no more of them, and the secret guilt of their
Consciences would have taught their faces to blush at their own villainies, and
hide their heads from all Mankind for ever: but Mr. Knox was not yet out of
heart, that their Cause and Spirits might yet be supported, especially if he
could keep Lane firm to the Cause, tho Osborn had proved a Renegado.

They were all three then Prisoners in the Gatehouse, tho debarred intercourse
with one another, least they should adjust their lies the more plausibly, and
confirm each other in their combined mischiefs: Knox therefore began to tamper
with the under Keeper, Richard Slightham to conveigh to Lane a Message, that he
would stand fast to him, and their Common Interest, which because it discovers
the desperate obstinacy of the said Knox in pursuing their villainies to the
utmost, I shall here exemplify the testimony of the said Slightham under his
own hand.

Richard Slightham Servant to Mr. Church, says, that one Wednesday the
thirtieth of April 1679, that he being then with Mr. (...) Knox a prisoner in
the Gate House under his said Masters Custody, the said Mr. Knox desired him to
go to Mr. (...) Lane, than also a prisoner there, and tell him that he feared
Mr. (...) Osborne, then also a prisoner there, had betrayed them, (about the
matter of Dr. Titus Oats, for which they were all prisoners, as this Examinant
apprehended) and to speak to him to stand fast to him, and then they should be
two against one; and further to encourage this Examinant he told this
Examinant, if he would be faithful to him, in carrying Messages between him,
and them, he should want for nothing, or to that or the like effect.

Richard Slightham.
This was taken the same day by me

Tho. Smith.



Upon the whole matter, we observe that Mr. Knox, as he could command better
Counsel and advise then his own head could give him, so he has Master of a
better purse then his own to bribe, suborne, and draw in witnesses to bear up
their Cause now declining, he knew there was a Mint of money in the Tower, and
whilst that was open he doubted not but money would do wonders: Osborne, and
Lane, had already bitten at, and swallowed the bait, and he hoped others would
be as greedy of the temptation, though here his hopes deceived him, and Mr.
Slightham proved too honest for the temptation.

I have nothing more of these Grand Conspirators informations to acquaint the
Reader with, save some notes taken by the Clerk attending the Lords Committees
for Examinations, which when I have faithfully Copied from the Originalls, I
shall proceed to the Indictments of Lane against Dr. Oats, and that against
Lane and Knox, on behalf of the King, upon which the famous Trial of Nov.
twenty five 1679 at the King's Bench bar proceeded.

May the second 1679 some notes taken by the Clerk attending the Lords
Committees for examinations.
Richard Slightham (sworn before the Earl of Clarendon) says that the
Information made by him before Mr. Tho. Smyth, and now showed him, was signed
by him; and further says that the contents of the said paper are true.

John Lane, being showed his second Deposition taken before Sir William Waller,
says, what he has there sworn is true, and he will stand by it: And being
asked why he swore as he did in his first Deposition before Sir William Waller,
and Mr. Warcup, says he was induced thereto, for that he, Osborn and Knox had
contracted, that whoever discovered the Informations they had contrived should
be killed: And says, that he has neither been threatened, nor encouraged to
make this second Deposition, but merely to quiet his own Conscience.

Thomas Knox denies that he employed Richard Slightham, as he has deposed; but
owns he sent Lane a Note, as is in his Examination taken before Sir William
Waller, and Mr. Warcup: Says that Osborn came to him in the painted Chamber
(which was the first time he ever see him) and told him he had Informations to
make, that he would save the Earl of Danby's life, and which concerned the
King, and Queen: And showed him Informations ready Writ in the Abbey Cloisters.
Says, he told Lane, and Osborn, he was wholly at their mercy, they being two
to one, and might deny their Papers, tho under their hands: and says further,
that for about a Week whilst they had money, they paid their Clubs, but
afterward, he paid all; and told them they should pay their shares; and
afterward lent Lane a Guinney, but denies he ever gave Osborn any money.

William Osborn, sworn, says. That he had no discourse in the Painted Chamber
with Thomas Knox, about the King, Queen, or Earl of Danby: That the said Knox
brought the said Informations he would have him make, ready Writ; being two
particulars concerning Mr. Oats, but he did not suffer him to keep the Papers.
And says further, that John Lane, and Thomas Knox's brother, were present when
he Writ the Informations in Whitefriers; and says that Mr. Knox bid him, if
asked, how he could draw his Informations in so good form? Say, That he used to
draw his Masters Informations: and that Knox gave him a Guinney at one time and
ten shillings at another time.

John Knox sworn, says, That he was at the Three Flower de luces in
White-Friers, where he see Osborn write, but did not hear his Brother dictate
to Osborn; but heard his Brother wish Mr. Osborn to write nothing but truth;
And also heard Osborn say that he had writ nothing but what he would swear if
he were about to die.

By this time the World is satisfied of this horrid Conspiracy to blow up the
Popish Plot, by blowing up the Testimonies of Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow. For
Lane in his first Examination, whilst he was firm to the Cause, acknowledges,
that Knox took lodgings for him and Osborn; that Knox lent him a Guiney; upon
his second Examination, he says, he was pricked in Conscience, and convinced of
his Sin; That Knox, the first time he met him, advised him what he should say
in relation to the King, Queen, and Lord Treasurer; that Knox gave him
directions how he should accuse Mr. Oats. That Knox and Osborn wrote the
Informations, Knox being the Dictator of them: That Knox made Lane and Osborne
swear secrecy: That Knox paid the reckoning, and that it might not be said he
gave them any money, he would take care it should be conveyed to them: That Knox
at several times gave them a Guiney a piece by dropping them on the Table: That
Osborn at Knox's desire wrote a Letter in such manner as he directed, and dated
it of a latter date, which Knox caused to be directed to himself: That Osborn
at Knox's desire wrote another Letter, directed to Knox: That Knox advised them
both to seem to press Knox to engage in that business: That they changed
Lodgings often: That Knox paid for all Lodging and Diet, except two Reckonings
of about 1 s. 6 d. a piece: That Knox promised Lane and Osborn money and
preferment for what they should do for the Lord Treasurer, and told them if
either of them should make a discovery, he should be dispatched, and that Lane
need not doubt but the Lords in the Tower would acknowledge their kindness

That the very day the Lord Treasurer surrendered himself to the Black-Rod, Knox
made him and Osborn swear they should stand to what he had instructed them, and
that if they did not, the Lord Treasurer would die, and that he would not have
come in but for them.

But Mr. Osborn in his Examination denies all he had before informed against
Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow, and says that Lane brought him to Knox, and Knox told
him what to say in relation to the contrivance of Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow
against the Earl of Danby. That there was in Truth no such Contrivance. That he
had layen with Dr. Oats several nights, found nothing undecent from him, but
that contrariwise he used to exhort him, to a good life, and made him often
read Sermons to him: And at another time Knox directed him to say, that Mr.
Bedlow should say of the Treasurer, I have now found away to do the Rogues
buisiness for him; That Knox, always discoursed them a part, about the Earl of
Danby, and Dr. Oats. He confesses the writing the Letters, and informations:
That they often shifted lodgings; that Knox bore their expenses, and promised
them great rewards: That Lane being taken, Knox, sent my Lord Duneblanes
Coachman with a hackney-Coach for him; that in that Coach they went to
Whitefriers where Knox acquainted him that the taking of Lane would expedite
the buisiness: That Knox gave him money. That when Osborne was in the
Gate House, Knox sent him a Note to this purpose, you will be examined this
afternoon, we always clubbed, and you paid two shillings at the Sugar-leaf.
Tare this! which note, Knox has confessed, and upon his Examination
acknowledged he threw down a Guinny upon the table, which Lane took up; but to
color the business said it was only lent him, but even this gives just ground
of suspicion to the design, and now what will the whole world think and say of
the Impudence of these men; that after all these disappointments and bafflings;
after their own confessions, retractions, yet that they should be buoyed up to
that height of confidence as to make a farther attempt upon the Doctors
reputation.

And yet this they did, for upon the nineteenth day of this instant November
1679. John Lane had mustered up so much of his declined courages as to prefer
an Indictment against Dr. Oats, for an attempt to commit upon him the horrid
and Abominable sin of Sodomy. Which Indictment being brought to the Grand Jury,
the Incoherence, and slightness of his evidencence caused them to return an
Ignoramus.

Dr. Oats not willing to suffer his Good name, and the Credit of his Testimony
to depend upon the throwing out of that bill, brought an Indictment for the
King against the said Knox and Lane, (for Osborne had withdrawn himself) which
came to be openly tried at the King's Bench bar, November twenty five 1679. An
account whereof the whole Nation does expect, and wherein satisfaction shall be
now given.

Novem. 25 1679. Dominus Rex versus Thomam Knox and Johanem Lane.
For the King.
The Indictment sets forth that whereas Edward Coleman, William Ireland, and
John Groves, and other false Traitors to the Jury unknown 24th. of April, in
the thirtieth year of the King that now is, at the Parish of Saint Margarets
Westminster, did traitorously conspire, consult, and agree amongst themselves
to kill and destroy the King, and to raise War against his Majesty within this
Kingdom, and to change the Religion by Law established, to the Superstition of
the Church of Rome, for which Treasons, Traiterous Conspiracies, Consultations,
and Agreements, the said Coleman, Ireland, and Groves were afterward
attainded, and put to death for the same.

And whereas William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, John Lord
Bellasis, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and Sir Henry
Tichbourn Baronet the thirtieth of Nov. last at Westminster, were accused of
the Treasons aforesaid, and thereupon according to due form of law were
committed to the Tower of London, to be there safely kept to answer the said
Treasons, whereof the said Earl of Powis, and the other four Lords were by the
Commons in Parliament assembled, Impeached.

And whereas Thomas Earl of Danby afterward, that is to say the thirtieth of
Nov. last, at Westminster was in lawful manner accused of certain Treasons and
other misdemeaners, and thereupon according to due form of law was committed
to the Tower, there to be safe kept to answer the Treasons, and misdemeanors
aforesaid, of which said Treason and misdemeanors, the said Earl of Danby is
Impeached by the Commons in Parliament assembled.

And that the Defendants knowing the said Lords to be accused of the Treason,
and misdemeanors aforesaid; and the said defendants being diabolically
affected toward the King, their natural Lord, and contriving, and endeavoring
with all their might, to disturb, hinder, and stifle the discovery of the said
Treasons by the said Earl of Powis, Viscount Stafford, Lord Bellisis, Henry
Lord Arundel, William Lord Petre, supposed to be committed, as aforesaid; and
as much as in them lay to elude the due Course of law, and retard the
prosecution of justice against the said five Lords, Sir Henry Tichbourn, and
Thomas Earl of Danby.

They the said Defendants the thirtieth of April last past at the Parish
aforesaid in the County aforesaid, falsely, maliciously, and unlawfully amongst
themselves did consult and agree to scandalize Titus Oats Clerk, and William
Bedlow Gent. Who had given informations of the Treasons aforesaid, and whom the
said Defendants knew to have given Information of the Treasons aforesaid
against the Earl of Powis, Viscount Stafford, Lords Bellasis, Arundel, and
Petre, and to represent them upon the Trial of the said five Lords, to be
persons of evil Conversation, and Witnesses not to be believed.

And that the Defendant Knox afterward, that is to say, the 30th. of April
last, at Westminster aforesaid in the Names, and with the consent and agreement
of the Defendant Lane, and William Osborne to villifie the Information of the
said Titus Oats, and William Bedlow to be given for the King against the said
five Lords last mentioned: falsely, maliciously, subtly and advisedly, did
write and cause to be written four Letters, and those Letters so written,
falsely etc. did direct, and cause to be delivered to himself, the said
Defendant Knox; by which said Letters, it was falsely, craftily, and deceitfully
declared that the said Lane, and Osborne, were very much troubled in their
Consciences by reason of certain matters, which they well knew, and did conceal
concerning the unjust contrivances of the said Titus Oats, and William Bedlow,
in accusing the said Earl of Danby to be guilty of the Treasons and other
Misdemeanors aforesaid.

And that the said Titus Oats was a person of a wicked, and vicious Life, and
did make an assault upon the said John Lane, and did endeavor to commit with
him the said Lane, Sodomy.

And further, that the Defendant Knox the sooner, and effectually to persuade
the said Lane, and Osborne falsely to accuse the said Titus Oats, and William
Bedlow, that they the said Titus Oats, and William Bedlow had unjustly,
contrary to all Truth, accused the said E. of Danby of the Treasons, and other
Misdemeanors aforesaid, and so to affirm against the Kings Evidence, against
the Trial to be had of the said Earl of Danby for the Treasons, and
Misdemeanors aforesaid, afterward the 30th. of April last, at Westminster,
falsely, advisedly, corruptly, and against the duty of his Allegiance, did give
to the said Lane, and Osborne diverse great sums of Money.

And did promise to the said Lane, and Osborne within a certain time by the
said Defendant Knox proposed, that they the said Lane, and Osborne should have,
and receive other great sums, and other rewards for the same, to the great
delay, obstruction, and suppression of Justice, etc.

To this the Defendants pleaded not Guilty.

The Names of the Jury Empanelled and Sworn, were as follows.
Sr. John Kirk Knight. Thomas Harriot Esquire. Henry Johnson Esquire. Simon
Middleton Esquire. Hugh Squire Esquire. Francis Derrington Esquire. John
Roberts Esquire. Rainsford Waterhouse Esquire. Thomas Earsby Esquire. Joseph
Ratoliffe Gent. James Supple Gent. Richard Cooper Gent.
The Names of the Counsel learned in the Law, who pleaded on behalf of the King
against the Defendants. Mr. Attorney General: Mr, Solicitor General, Mr.
Sergeant Maynard: The Recorder of London. Sr. Francis Winnington, Mr. William
Williams, Mr. Thomas Smyth, Mr. John Trenchard.

The Names of the Counsel assigned to the Defendant Lane: Mr. Holt, Mr. Darnel.

The Names of the Counsel entertained for the Defendant Knox. Mr. Withins,
Steward of Westminster Court, Mr. Soroggs, Son to the Lord chief Justice, Mr.
Saunders.

The Names of the Witnesses ready to swear to the particular Clauses hereafter
mentioned [only it is to be observed that the Cause being exceeding clear by
the Testimony of some few of the more considerable Witnesses, the rest were not
called.]
To prove the Attainder of Coleman, Ireland, and Groves, See the Records. To
prove that they were put to death: Mr. Tisser. To prove the Commitments of the
Lords and Sr. Henry Tichburn: Mr. Clare. Mr. Reynolds. To prove the said five
Lords Impeached: Mr. Clare. To prove the Accusation, and the Commitment of the
Earl of Danby: Mr. Reynolds. To prove the Empeachment of the Earl of Danby: Mr.
Goodenough. That Lane had a design at his first coming to Dr. Oats, in Nov.
1678, to accuse him, which his Father discovered by some expressions to Mr.
Radford, to the same effect that he was afterward accused: Mr. Radford. That
Lane desired after this to be readmitted in the Doctors service: Mr. Allen.
That Lane declared whilst he was with Doctor Oats, that he hoped to get one
thousand pound in a short time: Sam. Oats. That Lane desired Mr. Reex to find
out Sr. William Waller, so that he might confess the truth of the whole
Contrivance to him, being pricked in Conscience for the false Oaths he had
taken: Robert Reex. To prove that Lane and Osborn confessed that they were
suborned by Knox, to swear falsely against Doctor Oats before Sr. William
Waller and Mr. Warcupp, and that he had given them Money to do the same; and
this they confessed before a Committee of the Lords. These Examinations proved by
Sr. William Waller. Mr. Warcupp, Mr. Relfe, Mr. Snow. To prove that Lane, and
Osborne were made to Swear by Knox to stand fast to what he had instructed them
to write, and that the Lord Treasurer would not have surrendered himself but for
them: Sr. William Waller, Lanes Confession 3d. May, 1679, and Lanes 3d.
Examination. To prove the Letters Confessed by Osborne: Mr. Justice Warcupp.
As to Knox his Endeavors to take off Mr. Oats, and Bedlows Testimony.
To prove that Knox endeavored to suborn Henry Wiggins, offering him a reward
to swear against Captain Bedlow: Henry Wiggins, Mr. Wiggin's Mother. That Mr.
Wiggins acquainted Mr. Palmer a Yeoman of the Guard with these Proposals
presently after they were made: Mr. Palmer. To prove that Knox made several
Proposals to one Thurston, late Servant to Doctor Oats, and promised to be
very kind to him, if he could find any thing to swear against his Master: John
Thurstone. To prove that Knox, Lane, and Osborn being imprisoned in the
Gate House, for this contrivance Knox offered Slightham the Gaolers man a good
reward, to let him hold Correspondence with Lane by Letters, and desired him to
go to Lane, and tell him he feared Osborne had betrayed them about the matter
of Doctor Oats, and desired him to speak to him to stand fast to him, and then
they should be two against one: Richard Slightham. To prove that Knox, Lane,
and Osborne went to Justice Dewy, and Knox told him he came from my Lord
Latimer, who presented his Service to him, and that Knox was advised to come to
him by that Lord to take an Information against Doctor Oats: Mr. Dewy. That
they went also to Justice Cheyney at Chelsea: Mr. Cheyney. That Knox confessed
he lent Lane a Guinny, and that Osborn, and Lane confessed that Knox assured
(...) ^ever want Money nor Preferment: Sr. William Waller, Mr. W^^c^pp. To
prove that Knox confessed, to Sr. William Waller, and Mr. Warcupp, that whilst
he, and Mr. Osborn were Prisoners, he the said Knox sent a Note to Osborn to
inform him: that he would be examined the afternoon, and with these words, We
always clubbed, and you paid two shillings at the Sugar Loaf; Tear this: Sr.
William Waller, Mr. Warcup. That Lane has been kept this last Summer at the
house of the Earl of Powis, that he had ten shillings per week allowed him to
give Evidence against Dr. Oats. That Knox was to have thirty or forty Pounds,
to carry on the Business; and that Osborn, Knox, and Lane were to be rewarded
by the Lords in the Tower for their Evidence against Doctor Oats: Mr.
Dangerfield. Mrs. Blake, Mrs. Edwards. That Lane waited with a great Club to
knock down Mr. Reex, at Mrs. Maynards door, that Knox would have had the said
Mrs. Maynard swear that Mr. Reex offered her one hundred Pounds to swear in
Doctor Oats his business: Mrs. Maynard, Mrs. Tyrrel. If George Neal, one
Bowring, and George Deeplow be produced as Witnesses for the Defendants. To
prove that Neal has made application several times to be readmitted to Doctor
Oate's Service since he was turned away: Sr. Thomas Stringer, Mr. Weal, Robert
Gyde, Mrs. Brooks, Henry Lord, Mr. Smith. That Bowring was turned out of Doctor
Oats his Service for keeping company with Knox, Lane, and with Papists: Mr.
Saunders, Mr. Money, Mr. Allen, Samuel Oats junior. That Bowring has made
application to be readmitted to Doctor Oats his Service; Mr. Smith, Mr.
Robert Gyde. That Deeplow about a week before Doctor Oats turned him away,
declared that he wondered at the wickedness of Lane, and Osborn in accusing his
Master, Seeing he appeared to him a very upright, and honest Man: Moses Gwyn,
Mr. Samuel Oats, George Gregory. That Deeplow thanked Doctor Tongue for helping
him into Doctor Oats his Service: Doctor Tongue. If Lane's Mother, or Sister be
produced as Witnesses. To prove that Lane's Mother, said her Son was drawn in
by Plays, and Treats, etc. to accuse Doctor Oats, and that Knox offered her
Son Money in the Gatehouse to stand to his first Information: Margery Walker.
To prove, that Mary Lane said; Now my Lord Treasurer, must lose his Head for my
Brother has confessed All: Mrs. Sterling. That Knox was with Mrs. Wiggins on
friday last to persuade her not to come in against him, and then said, she
should have a Reward: Mrs. Wiggins.
And thus at length I have conducted the Reader through this dark and intricate
Labyrinth of Confederated Roguery, wherein some will question, whether there
was more of the Devil in the Contrivance, then of God in the Discovery and
Defeating of the Design: but we have seen Divine Wisdom and Mercy triumphing
over humane and hellish Malice, and Subtlety: I have studiously forborne to give
the Reader the trouble of the Minutes of the Trial; the judicious are better
satisfied with a brief Synopsis of the Cause, than with the tedious Speeches of
Witnesses, which are frequently interrupted with Questions, and some of them
perhaps not very material or pertinent.

Let it suffice, that the Evidence was so clear against the Defendants Knox,
and Lane, that the Jury without any delay found for the King against them; to
the very great satisfaction of the Court, and Company, which was exceeding
great: Many Noble Men, Gentlemen, and eminent Citizens coming with great
expectations of the issue of this Trial, which was managed with that Justice,
Impartiality, indifferency between the King, and the Defendants, that some have
been heard to say, they could never believe a (...) before, but now they were
abundantly satisfied.

Knox, and Lane, were immediately taken into Custody, and are now in Prison,
a^ending the Sentence of the Law, which though it has not hitherto been
pronounced, yet they must know, that the higher Justice lifts up its Hand, the
heavier it will strike; and compensate the slowness with the severity of the
Punishment; which being bounded by the Law, can never be too great for such
Monstrous Malefactors: Osborne indeed fled from Justice, which argues more
Modesty then these others can pretend to, which choose rather to outface Justice
then seem to fear it; and are more Ambitious of a Martyrdom, that may register
them in the Roman Calendar, though their Names never appear in the Roll of
Christian Worthies. Yet let us not despair of their Repentance, having
Instances before our Eyes, that as there are none so vile but the Catholics
will use them for Instruments, so there are none so obdurate but the Divine
Grace can make them Converts.

FINIS.

