ANSWER To a Scandalous LETTER Lately Printed and Subscribed By PETER WELSH,
Procurator for The Sec. and Reg. Popish Priests of Ireland.

ENTITLED, [ A Letter desiring a just and merciful Regard of the Roman
Catholics of Ireland, given about the end of October. 1660. to the then
Marquess, now Duke of Ormond, and the second time Lord Lieutenant of that
Kingdom.]

By the Right Honorable The EARL of ORRERY, One of the Lords Justices of the
Kingdom of Ireland, and L. President of the Province of Munster, etc.

Being a full discovery of the treachery of the Irish Rebels since the
beginning of the Rebellion there, necessary to be considered by all Adventurers
and other persons estated in that Kingdom.

Printed at DVBLIN by J. C. and Reprinted at London, 1662.

A Letter desiring a just and merciful regard of the Roman Catholics of
Ireland, given about the end of October 1660 to the then Marquess, now Duke of
Ormond, and the second time Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom.
SInce I had the honor of speaking last to your Excellence, I reflected, (by
occasion of several Discourses had this week with Persons of quality) on the
daily increase of the Fears and Jealousies of my Countrymen: Which is the
reason, That instead of waiting on you this morning about private Concernments,
(as I intended) I chose rather out of my unalterable affection to your self, to
give first this paper, and therein my thoughts and my desires relating to the
public, that is, to your self, and to his Majesty, and his Kingdom of Ireland.

My Lord, I thought fit to tell you, That considering the General fear seized
already almost on all the Nobility, Gentry, and others here of that Nation, and
reflecting on the vast differen^e betwixt my own belief and theirs, it seems
to me, I behold (in us particularly, who have for so many years so much relied
on your word and virtue) somewhat fulfilled, not unlike the mysterious
extinction of all the Lights to one in the Ceremony of Tenebrae in holy week.
For, my Lord, I observe in the generality of the Catholics of Ireland here,
even (I say) of those who have been so long as well your constant believers as
your passionate sticklers, a dimness and darkness seizing their judgments; even
your fastest friends heretofore, loosing at present their faith of your future
appearance for them, and hopes of their delivery by you at any time evermore:
Some through ignorance of State affairs, and intrigues obstructing as yet:
others through inconsideration of those ways you take much wiser, though
slower, than folly and rashness could chalk out: and some out of prejudice or
an evil passion, which blinds them and makes them abuse the timorousness and
credulity of all they can, to lessen your esteem and your dependencies, all
they are able.

My Lord, these are thoughts, which more and more trouble me daily: because I
have daily new occasions to reflect on them. And therefore would no longer but
give them your* Excellence, even in this method and in writing, that they might
take the deeper impression* as very much concerning you, since your own
welfare, and the Kings and the peoples (in my judgment) very much depends on a
good esteem of so great a Minister, as your great deserts have made you.

But withal, My Lord, I will give your excellence my most earnest, and most
humble desires that you delay no longer than shall be necessary, to clear these
clouds of darkness: and clear them in this present conjuncture, by an effectual
demonstration of that justice and favor you intended the Catholics of
Ireland, in your Articles of 48. when they so freely put themselves and their
power into your hands. I am not ignorant that some have after transgressed in a
high nature. But you know, my Lord, there are many thousands of Protestants in
the three Kingdoms, who have been far more hainously criminal, both against
his Majesty and against his Father, of blessed Memory, and who have
contributed, or intended as little for bringing home his Majesty, as the most
wickedly principled of the Roman Confederates of Ireland. And we all know (my
Lord) that all the Protestants are not only pardoned (except a very few of the
most immediate Regicides (but equalled in all capacities with his Majesty's
most faithful and approved subjects. Yet if these unfortunate Catholic
transgressors must be alone, in this general Jubilee of the three Nations, held
unworthy to rejoice in the Kings restoration; if they alone, besides their
most grievous and most unparalled sufferings under tyranny these eight or
nine years past, must anew suffer, and yet a more heavy judgment, under the
most clement Prince on earth; if they alone must experience all the rigor of
his Laws and judicatures for their offenses after the peace of 48. (which
offenses however criminal were not bloody) your Excellence may be nevertheless
pleased to consider the Transplantation cannot be continued on any such
account, nor on any other which may stand either with those Articles, or with
the equity of the Laws, and much less with the justice of a Prince whom God
has restored to redeem the oppressed from the yoke of tyranny, to lead
captivity captive, and give gifts to men. And your Excellence may be further
pleased to consider that the Corporations generally cannot be excluded on this
account, nor on any other may stand with his Majesty's gracious concessions in
these Articles. Neither do I think there can be any reasons of State may accord
with the dictates of a good conscience to exclude them. I confess, my Lord, the
undutifulness of some, two or three peradventure deserved punishment, and
Limerick a severe one. But this, my Lord, is long since inflicted by the hands
of God and man. The plague and famine, the sword and gibber, even by the power
of tyrants destroyed them, and revenged your quarrel; though, I am sure, you
are more divinely principled than to mind your own revenge on any. Besides, my
Lord, your Excellence knows there have been very many faithful subjects in
these towns, even in the most crimina^ of them.

My Lord, you are more just than to involve the just in the punishment of the
wicked. God, himself, whose power cannot be limited by Laws, would not punish
the just, not even when he was most incensed by the most criminal Cities that
ever stood on earth. He assured the prophet Jeremy, that could he find one just
man in all Jerusalem (when most sinful and reprobate, and by his revenging
justice designed for a ^eneral desolation) he would single out that man from
the wicked and ^ave him (for so our translation reads) nay, for his sake be
merciful to the whole City (if your Translation be right.) When the crying sins
of Sodom and Gomorrah forced open the floodgates of heaven to power down those
prodigious flames of fire and brimstone, we read in Genesis yet would not the
justice of God permit execution, before he had put in a place of safety one
just man that was found in Sodom. And, which is yet more observable, was
further pleased to assure Abraham, that he was so far from intending to involve
the just in the destruction of the wicked, that i^ in these great places
designed for so great vengeance, he could find but even ten just men, he would
for their sake pardon all the rest, that is, not Sodom alone, but the five
Cities, and the whole Pentapolitane region annexed. My Lord, our gracious King
has in ^mitation of this mercy of God, pardoned for some just men's sake all
the Protestant Cities of his Dominions. And will he not pardon the miserable
remainders of one poor Catholic Town? or two? or three at most? if perhaps
there be so many that have any way offended. I am sure, what ever their offense
has been, it has been these many years past sufficiently punish^d: and has
been, even of the most criminal, incomparably less than what may be charged on
most of all his Majesty's Protestant Cities. And I am sure there have been in
the very worst of them, and in the most disobedient more than fifty (the
greatest number Abraham proposed for mercy to Sodom) just men (I say) to his
Majesty, and your Excellence; then which you take no further cognizance of
justice in this particular. And what besides may render them unfit objects of
the general mercy, if not perhaps their Religion? Which nevertheless, being so
Chrstian, and allowed by Articles, can be no exception. Yet if notwithstanding
all this, the few and miserable Survivours and Heirs of the dead in the general
desolation, must suffer again, and under his royal justice: I beseech you (my
Lord) Let not the Tables of Sylla and Marius, let not their general
proscriptions or confiscations be renewed on this occasion, or affixed in the
Courts and Judicatures of the British Monarchy. Let not these bright days of
universal joy, be rendered to the Irish Catholics alone dark, sad, and dismal.
Nor let these days be infamously memorable to posterity for a distinction so
unequal. Even the greatest and worst of Delinquents, amongst the Catholics of
Ireland, even of those very Corporations or Cities, that have been most
refractory, were so far from being Regicides, or any way inclined unto them,
(and only such, and but very few of such, because only some of the most
immediate actors, have been hitherto thought fit to be excluded a share in this
joy) that they have fought against them even to despair: and fought against
them when England and Scotland, and the Protestants of Ireland, wholly deserted
the Royal cause: and fought against them as well in defense of his Majesty's
rights as under the title of his Subjects; till at last by long seiges, and
multitudes overpowred, and through Gods unsearchable. Judgments, and their
desertion by friends abroad, and home divisions they lost themselves and their
Country.

Nevertheless, my Lord, ^^^ be it from my thoughts to desire the obstruction of
any lawful and honest course may be justly taken to secure the peace of that
Country from rational dangers: if any such can be in our days from the
Catholic Natives. What I humbly beg is, That if these Catholics must be
always so unfortunate as to be thought unworthy His Majesty's Graces and
Favors to Protestants that fought against him, when they fought for him, or of
such as he vouchsafes; even Presbyters, Anabaptists, Quakers, Fift-monarchymen,
Independents (the greatest Enemies to regal power in some Tenets, wherein the
Roman Catholics are the surest friends) his Majesty may be at least graciously
pleased to let them have the benefit of his Concessions articled with them. And
what I beg, my Lord, is that his Majesty not so much regard the power of our
Adversaries as the Justice of our cause. My Lord, their power is no greater at
this time, than His Majesty is pleased to continue or make it. There is a huge
difference betwixt their influence on the meaner Officers and common Soldiers
now, and that it was in the time of the long Parliament, or in the days of
Tyranny and Anarchy. In a word it will signify a mere nothing, if once
uncommissioned by His Majesty, and the common Soldiers paid.

However, my Lord, their power cannot be so dangerous, as their unjust demands
of biased interest and pretended zeal, if complied withal by His Majesty, and
by a breach so notorious and so great of our Articles. For, besides that such
proceedings would, in all probability, estrange the hearts of the Irish
Catholics from his Majesty, and by a consequence of reason (how strange soever
this may appear at first sight) kindle and raise in all judicious Protestants
who have ever fought in any of his Dominions, either against himself, or
against his Father, even in the very Demanders (how much soever blinded at
present by proper interest) perpetual Jealousies, and distrusts of their own
safety, notwithstanding any Declaration from Breda, or Acts of Westminster
passed in this present Parliament: they would, (which is most of all to be
feared as the worst of evils, and may Providence divert it in obstructing the
cause) turn the heart of God from our good Prince; and bring his Judgments on
him. My Lord, never, or scarce ever did public breach of public faith escape
very public and very dreadful Judgments, even in this World, I mean.
Histories profane and sacred are full of sad examples of both kinds. And for
the peoples breach, our Irish Nation these fourteen years past so wonderfully
scourged beyond almost all example, for their breach of their first Articles,
those of forty six, with you (my Lord) will be recorded in after ages as one
of the saddest. But for a Princes transgression of this nature, and Judgments
following, even such as are infallibly known to have been for this only cause
inflicted, and by God's own immediate execution for the greatest part, and the
rest by his good will and pleasure, that of the 21. of the 2. of Samuel is
pertinent and formidable. The very first of faithful Kings, elected by Gods
immediate ordinance, anointed by God's immediate commandment, appointed by him
Ruler of his peculiar people, and Champion on Earth of his Church against
Infidels; even this beloved of God for a time, this dear darling of Heaven for
some years, ^o ^oone^ attempted against Articles, on the poor Gibeonites, and
their four Cities, but those most fearful and exemplar Judgments, recorded by
Samuel, were decreed against him, and, for this very fact alone, against his
posterity, and against the whole Kingdom of Israel. Neither could all the
miseries of his own life after, nor the ignominy of his own death, and of the
best of his children, which followed very soon, nor the Army of God perishing
with him by the swords of Idolaters, expiate this public breach of public
Articles. Not although they were his own Subjects with whom he broke, and not
Subjects only, but slaves born, and by covenant; nor slaves alone, but
Amorites, whose Towns and Lands, and fortunes had been the free gift of God to
the Children of Israel, in his promise to Abraham 700. years before, and long
after appropriated the second time unto them by the Law of Moses, and by his
particular command for extirpation of the ancient Inhabitants, and of the
Amorites by name, and for never entering any League or Peace or Covenant with
them. Not although these Gibeonites, when they articled by their Predecessors,
were Infidels, Enemies of one true God, and their Articles made with true
believers, and believers infallibly such, and not with Saul, but with Josue,
300. years before the Reign of Saul, and never by him ratified. Nor although,
what is more observable, these Articles were obtained of Joshua through his
ignorance of the people that treated with him, and by their lies and
circumvention of him. Nor finally, although these Articles were assented unto
by Joshua only, and his twelve chief Captains; the whole multitude (concerned
in this business) not consenting otherwise; as appeared within three days
after the Conclusion, by their general murmur against the Prince. My Lord, note
of all these extenuating circumstances, nor altogether, not even backed with
zeal for the people of God (the scripture noting particularly that Saul sought
to slay the Gibeonites in his zeal to the Children of Israel and Judah) no
excuse, no pretense whatsoever could obtain so much mercy of the great
Justicier of Heaven, as to inflict the punishment of this article-breaking on
the person of Saul alone; not even together with his beloved Jonathan's, or on
his Legions, and People in his own days only. The vengeance of God must pursue
his Posterity and Kingdom, long after his death, and for this cause alone. A
mortal Famine of three years continuance must consume the twelve Tribes of
Israel, even in the reign of his Successor; and for this very sin only, as God
himself revealed to holy David. Nor would the Famine cease, till by David's
commandment seven of Readiness Children and Nephews were delivered to the
Gibeonites; and by the hands of these very men, whose Articles he broke,
crucified alive upon a Mountain, to expiate this public and horrid sin, even
in the face of the sun. May Providence, and the Kings Righteousness, and your
sage Counsel (my Lord) obstruct all occasions of reflecting on this, (and so
many other examples of God's revenge of Article-breaking) any further than that
the best of Kings may see the worsts of evils attending the Counsels of our
Adversaries: and that their power, whatever it be, cannot be so dangerous as
their demands against our Articles.

My Lord, I conclude here, but with my hearty wishes, That in the House, and at
the Councels of our great King, your Excellence may both appear and approve
your self hereafter what you are in part already, another Joseph. That by the
best of Advices you may preserve the best of Princes, and all his people of so
many different Nations of the British monarchy. May it be so, my Lord! And may
the Catholics of Ireland in particular owe you a great Deliverance! as I
cannot but confidently expect from you in due time; for my light in the
triangle cannot be extinguished. But (my Lord) may not innocent beloved
Benjamin alone, nor friendly Reuben only, but even Simeon and Levi, and their
Accomplices against you heretofore, have cause to bless God for you hereafter.
May they all find in effect, that you have the bowels of Joseph, to forgive and
compassionate them, and his power to deliver them, and his faith to believe,
That God permitted their evil against you, even in forcing you twice away from
them, of purpose to preserve you for their good; and that you might return,
even this second time, their great Deliverer. Propitious Heaven, and your own
good Genius, my Lord, second my wishes! And may your faithful believer see
with his own eyes the full accomplishment! that he may employ all his days
after, and all his Labors in consecrating to posterity your Name, with this
Elogium of Joseph, the Savior of his Brethren, and of his Country, and of all
the People. And these are the hearty wishes of

( My Lord) Your Excellencies most humble, most obsequious, and most devoted
Servant, P. W.

The Answer. etc.
HAving lately seen a Printed Paper, the Title whereof is, [ A Letter desiring
a just and merciful regard of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, given about the
end of October, 1660. to the then Marquess, now Duke of Ormond, and the second
time L. Lieutenant of that Kingdom:] Subscribed by P. W. And finding it in
effect, whatever the words of it are, extreemly undutiful to his sacred
Majesty, very disrespectful to the Duke of Ormond L. Lieutenant of Ireland, and
most scandalous not only to the Protestants of Ireland, but also to those of
the same Religion in his sacred Majesty's other Kingdoms: I have esteemed my
self obliged, as a faithful subject to the King, as an humble servant to the
L. Lieutenant, and as a son of the Protestant Church, whose Members are as
highly as falsely asperst by it, to expose in print an Answer to that Le^ter,
which before I enter upon, I will only say, P. W. professing not a little to be
his Graces servant, if he meant not this Letter as a respect to his Grace, why
was it written? if he did, why was it printed? But P. W. despairing to receive
from His Grace the effects of his unjust desires for his Countrymen, chose
this way to acquaint them, 'twas not for want of his solicitation. He would
let them see, since he could not make them beholding to My L. Lieutenant, that
they were so to him.

Since I shall often have occasion to name IRISH PAPISTS. I have thought fit
here, once for all, to declare, That I mean not thereby in all, or any part of
my answer any of those Worthy persons of that Nation and Religion who have
still faithfully served the King, whose merit I highly respect, and the more,
because it has been preserved from infection even in a very Pesthouse; nor any
of those, who having been truly sorrowful for having rebelled in the constancy
of their subsequent services to his Majesty, have washed themselves clean; For I
take a perfect delight in any change from bad to good; and I heartly wish, that
every one of them had not so much endangered their being polluted again, as
interceding and pleading for their guilty Countrymen does amount unto. Having
thus made this necessary digression, I shall now proceed.

The parts separate of this Letter are three. First, a Preface. Secondly, a
Petition. Thirdly, a Conclusion or concluding Wish. P. W. prefaceth, First, the
Fears and Jealousies of those whom he calls the Catholics of Ireland.
Secondly, His own affection to, and confidence in his Grace the Duke of Ormond.

Fears and Jealousies are no less than must in reason be expected in the
Generality of the Irish Papists; For though the goodness and indulgence of the
best of Kings may make their condition safe: yet the conscience of their own
guilt will never suffer them to be secure. Pretended Fears and Jealousies* were
the Forerunners, if not Causers of Troubles past; I hope P. W. intends them not
as such, for Troubles to come.

Fear is founded on, at least attended with Hatred; and if one of the best of
His Majesty's Servants, one of the chiefest of his Ministers, be thus, 1.
Universally, 2. Intensly feared, and therefore 3. hated, 4. as P. W. says, by
his own Countrymen: (but let all that P. W. prints, stand or fall, as this
last particular is true or false; for his Grace is neither his Countryman by
birth, Religion, or any other Relation to which that Name is appliable;) yea 5.
by his own Fiduciares (as is expressed in the printed Letter.) If, I say, all
this be not true, why does P. W. say it? if it be true, what can others expect?
For if the flame be so in the green Tree, what will it be in the dry?

The Irish Papists in their former and later Apologies for the horridest of
Rebellions, have not to this very day (within any of his Majesty's Dominions)
even pretended publicly any other cause for their Rapines, Murders, Massacres
and Treasons, but what resolves it self into Fears and Jealousies. And if their
passions be the same, it is to be feared their Wills are not altered. And if
their Wills be the same, nothing under God, can prevent the effects, but want
of strength.

^specially considering that 1. in 1641. no such antecedent animosities or
hatreds had prepared matters for Fears and Jealousies, as by the worst of
Rebellions is now become even nationally violent, (but by the way, it seems to
me somewhat hard, that those which give the rise for the Cause, should first
cry out in the Effects.) 2. In 1641. these Fears and Jealousies (if really in
any) were but in a Few; but now P. W. confesses, That they have seized upon
almost all the Nobility, Gentry and others, yea the Generality of the
Catholics of Ireland, even the constant Believers of, passionate Sticklers
for, and fastest Friends to his Grace the Duke of Ormond; and this so intensly,
that it produces the loss both of Faith and Hope.

Here it may well be observed what temper they are of, whom P. W. pleads for;
Jealousies, Fears and want of faith are so inseparable from them, that those in
1641. were only said to be derived from his Majesty's Enemies, but now (all
such by the mercy of God being blown away) they are derived from his Majesty's
chief Minister of State of this Kingdom; and who is made such, as P. W. says,
and as I most heartily acknowledge, by his own great deserts. What is it can
suppress the Fears and Jealousies of P. W's. Countrymen, when His Majesty's
free Election of a chief Governor, and such a one as the Duke of Ormond is,
cannot do it? This acknowledgment of P. W's. fully proves, that the Irish
Papists Fears and Jealousies of the chief Governors of this Kingdom in 1641.
were only taken up by those, and not cause given for them by these. The plain
English is this, though his Majestly should from time to time nominate for Lord
Lieutenant of this Kingdom, the wisest and the faithfullest of his Subjects;
yet because the King commissionates them, or because they are such, or both,
many (I wish I could not say most) of the Irish Papists will be jealous and
fearful of them.

Concerning P. W's. affection to, and confidence in his Grace the Duke of
Ormond, expressed by several instances of free and frequent access to him, of his
and others relyance on his word, of his daily care and trouble to support his
esteem, and of blaming distrusters as guilty of ignorance of State affairs, and
the Intrigues obstructing, as yet; or of inconsideration of those wiser ways,
though slower, than folly or rashness could chalk out, or of prejudice and evil
Passion. I will only say, That though P. W. would make us believe, as if some
word in secret had past by his Grace to the Irish Papists, which they dare thus
mention to himself, and publish to the world; at least that he who is a professed
Enemy to the English interest, and Protestant Religion, is his Graces intimate
and familiar Confident; and by such as visible, as false arts, endeavor to
infect the Protestants with the disease of him, and his Countrymen; Jealousies
and fears of the L. Lieutenant. Yet I dare as truly, as confidently averr,
though P. W's. Oratory were as great as his malice, his insinuations could not
shake, much less overthrow that irremovable confidence his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects of Ireland, have built with great reason and experience upon his
Grace, even on the double Accounts, of his Principles and Practices. To attempt
to betray with a Kiss, is neither a new Art or a new Sin, but he that would
destroy by undermining, would do it by open force, if his Power proportioned
his Will.

Concerning P. W.'s affection to his Grace, he says no more for that in
particular, than he says in general for his Country-mens having a right to the
Peace made in 1648. Therefore I believe his Grace will take his measure of the
former, by his knowledge of the later.

After this Preface, P. W. petitions, That his Grace would no longer delay,
than shall be necessary, yea that be would in this present conjuncture,
effectually demonstrate that justice and favor h^ intended to the Catholics
of Ireland, in the Articles of Peace made in 1648.

Though P. W. in the first clause, pe^it^ons only that his Grace would no
longer delay than shall be necessary; yet as if struck with the Fears and
Jealousies of his Contrymen, and not daring to submit the determination of
that period of necessity to his Graces judgment, he petitions limitedly, if
not positively, in the later clause, for the present conjuncture.

If the subject matter of that Justice and Favor petitioned for, may be
measured (as is expressed) by his Graces intendment, I a^ confident the
Protestants of Ireland, should his Majesty think fit) will freely submit their
All, to that Decision; without either articling with him first; or breaking
Articles after the guilt of making them.

P. W. inforceth his Petition by Arguments pretending to

Justice
Distributive In the common case considered Absolutely. Comparatively

Communitive In some special cases of the Transplantation. Corporation.


In respect of the common Case considered absolutely, P. W. argues, That the
Irish Papists in 1648. FREELY put themselves and their power into his Graces
hands.

But Freely in this instance, if it signifies ought meritoriously, it signifies
the same as gratis; when as it was made, 1. upon Articles; 2. even upon such
Articles, as forced from his Majesty all the Regalia, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal; 3. when as at such a season, and in such a tempest every good Subject
should freely have cast his Goods overboard, to prevent the common Wrack, even
then the Irish Papists would not contribute to prevent one Leak, but at a Rate
unproportionate, and as the Tempest or Leaks increased, so increased their
Rates. But to show how freely the Irish put themselves and their power into his
Majesty's hands, I* need but rehearse his sacred Majesty's own words, in the
preamble of his Majesty's Gracious Declaration of the 30. of November 1660.
page 3. viz. We well remember the Cessation of the Peace, which Our Royal
Father of blessed Memory had been FORCED, during the late Troubles, to make
with his Irish Subjects of that Our Kingdom, and by which he was COMPELLED to
give them a full pardon for what they had before done amiss, upon their return
to their duty, and their promise of giving his Majesty a vigorous assistance.
In the same page of the same Declaration, soon after follow these words, viz.
We could not forget the Peace which Our selves was afterward NECESSITATED to
make with our said Subjects, in the time when they who wickedly usurped the
Authority, had erected that odious Court for the taking away the life of Our
dear Father, etc.

That which his Majesty calls Forced, Compelled, and Necessitated, P. W. Freely
putting themselves into his Graces hands; so that that untrue suggestion of his
needs no other refutation as to the time past, and as to the time to come, I
wish I had not cause to doubt, if ever they put themselves into his Graces
hand, that which they will call Freely, will be an effect of Compulsion, Force
and Necessity. Whatever the Submission was in 1648. and how* Free soever
pretended; yet the express letter of those Articles, (Article 18.) precludes
all Offenses which shall be committed or done after their Date; and after that,
the Irish Papists instead of freely putting themselves and their powers into
the L. Lieutenants hands, signally declared their Contempt of him, Disobedience
to him, and Opposition against him. For proofs whereof, among many, I shall set
down one undeniable instance of each.

1. For their Contempts: In April 1650. by a Message they desired the L.
Lieutenant to Leave the Kingdom, and commit the Government to one of their own
election, in whom they could confide. That which Now P. W. varnisheth with a
modester phrase of Fears and Jealousies, was then contempt and diffidence. At
the same time that they owned the L. Lievtenants Authority, they desire him to
resign it, without his Majesty's consent, nay so much as his knowledge; yet
this is but consonant to the whole Series of their practices, never to
acknowledge the Kings Right, but to affront it, or to get their ends by it.

2. For their Disobedience when the L. Lieutenant refused upon weighty reasons
of Piety, Duty, and State, to conform to this Message, and leave the Kingdom;
in August following they by their public Declaration professed their
Dissobedience in these very words: We do hereby manifest to the people, that
they are no longer obliged to obey the Orders or Commands of the Marquess of
Ormond. Words which so clearly evidence their Rebellion, and the vastness of
it, that they need no Comment, nor ought but the Text it self to prove both
those Truths. Nor is there need of any other proof to evince their entire
breach of those Articles which they now so fiercly plead for the benefit of.
They are so far from giving proofs of their duty to the King, and of their
gratitude for his Mercy extended in those Articles; that least any should
suspect them guilty of those, they declare their power paramount to his
Majesty's Authority.

3. They proceed from bad to worse, from worse to worst; from Contempt to
Disobedience, from Disobedience to downright Opposition. And accordingly the
very next month they cause their Clergy to excommunicate not only the L.
Lieutenant, but all that should feed, or adhere to him. That which Christ
commands us to do to our enemies; ( if thy enemy hunger, feed him;) and that
which even common Charity makes us do to the very beggars at our gates, they
not only refuse to do to him they so recently acknowledged to have his
Majesty's Authority, nay who had the honor to represent his person: but also
they prohibit all others to do it, and upon no less penalty than
Excommunication; and that nothing may be wanting to sublimate their wickedness
to the highest, Religion is made the instrument of their iniquity.

The Notoriety whereof, and of many other acts diametrically opposite to that
free submission immediately pretended, is so undeniable, that P. W's. own
Conscience squeezes out this confession, I am not ignorant that some have
after transgressed in a high nature.

But first, the aformentioned Declaration runs in the name of the Catholics of
Ireland; now some, was then all.

Secondly, All the premised instances of Contempt, Disobedience and Opposition
were not the Acts of private, but of public persons, even of those public
persons into whose hands the Irish Papists may truly be said to have gratis put
themselves and their power.

Thirdly, The general silence and submission of the body of the Irish Papists
to the premised instances, conclusively argues, a general consent thereunto, at
least subsequent, if not antecedent; for either they were generally consenting,
or dissenting; if dissenting, why did not that Generality punish the
Transgressors, or even oppose and deny the Transgression? if generally
consenting, that extenuating patricle some, declares more affection in P. W. to
those Consenters, than either to His Majesty or his Viceroy.

The next argument respecting the General Case, is propounded by way of
Comparison, and that as frequent as untrue, charging, (1.) Protestants, (2.)
Many Protestants, (3.) Many thousand Protestants, (4.) In the three Kingdoms;
1. To have been more hainously criminal; 2. To have contributed, or intended as
little for the bringing home of his Majesty, as the most wickedly principled of
the Roman Catholics of Ireland.

If ever any, this Comparison is odious, between many thousand Protestants in
the three Kingdoms, and not barely the Irish Papists, but the most wickedly
principled of them: so that if P. W. may hold the scale, the Crimes of those
Protestants shall weigh more, and their Services for His Majesty, at least
their intendments, less.

But let P. W. prove any one of those many Thousands thus wickedly principled
to be a Protestant, and he will with the same labor disprove his charge. Let
him prove his charge in any one particular, and he will with the same labor
disprove his instance to be a Protestant.

I believe most in the three Kingdoms have been first or last hainously
criminal, so that every mouth must be stopped. But certainly their guilt
gradually differs, and the most wickedly principled of the Roman Catholics of
Ireland deserve not the lowest degrees in it. Yet possibly some others in the
three Kingdoms may run parallel with them; but I assume, such are more closely
allied both in principle and practice, to the Irish Papist, than English
Protestant.

Suppose all be involved in one Common guilt, is the eye of P. W. evil, because
his Majesty's is good? or, is there any necessity to extend the same Grace to
all; or to render a Reason, where only Grace makes the difference? I presume P.
W. expects a greater degree of favor than many others of his Countrymen, and
therefore his Fears and Jealousies are less; his affection and confidence more;
and may not his Majesty's Grace make a general as well as personal difference?

Lastly, As God who is glorious in all perfections, does magnify his Mercy
above all his works: so his Majesty who abounds in all Royal virtues, does
above all abound in Grace and Goodness, and from that Grace and Goodness,
without the lest pretension of merit (the Popish tenent) or Articling, (the
Irish practice) the English Protestants confess to derive their All. Yet they
humbly conceive, there are rational inducements for His Majesty in the degrees
of his Grace, to discriminate between the Irish Papists and the English
Protestants.

1. In all Societies the public acts of FREE Representatives, virtually and
interpretatively include all, who declaratively oppose not. But the English
Representative, though under a Force, would never consent to cast off his
Majesty's Authority, and as soon as freed from Force, brought home his Majesty;
the Irish when at most freedom, and after a submission pretended, distrusted,
disobeyed, opposed his Majesty's Authority; yea banished and excommunicated
(him in effigy in) his Viceroy; and his, namely, all that should feed him or
adhere to him; nor did they ever as a public Representative, either witness
their repentance, or contribute to his Majesty's Rest oration.

2. The English Protestants, as became Subjects, submitted to his Majesty
freely and absolutely; but the Irish Papists, as became Enemies, not only
articled with his Majesty, but compelled him in the day of their height and his
necessity, to such Articles, as they knew nothing but necessity could compel
him to. The English Protestants may therefore claim his Majesty's Grace, which
is as great as their guilt; the Irish Papists can only claim what is due by
Articles, the foundation whereof being dissolved on their parts, they can
justly claim nothing by them, though his Majestiss mercy has given them much.

3. The forfeited Estates of the English Protestants were fully at his
Majesty's dispose, and might be freely remitted; but the forfeited estates of
the Irish Papists were sold by his late Majesty of blessed memory, and that
sale for the satisfaction of the Adventurers, countenanced and declared in
Parliament, and therefore the forfeited Estate of the Irish Papists could not
be remitted without satisfaction to the Innocent Purchasers.

4. His Majesty may rationally expect more future Obedience and Loyalty from
English Protestants, than Irish Papists. For (1) the English Protestants are
the Conquerours, the Irish Papists the Conquered, and ancient as well as modern
experience has made it appear, the Conquered never did (some think morally
never will) love the Conqueror; and though his Majesty should give the Irish
Papists not the half only, but the whole of this Kingdom: yet they will never
probably forgive the English Protestants for conquering them, nor consequently
heartily love that Royal authority which first commissionated the Protestants
to do it.

5. Until these last unhappy and unnatural troubles, the English Protestants
in Ireland were never charged as guilty of any Rebellion; but the Irish Papists
in all opportunities never other than rebellious. Queen Elizabeth was the
mirror of her age, yet during all her Reign the Rebellions of the Irish Papists
in Ireland were very frequent. King James was another Solomon, a Prince of
peace, yet was his peace interrupted by the Rebellion of Irish Papists, and by
that only. King Charles the first was a greater than that Solomon, and the
wisest of men thought the Irish Papists fastened in 1641 to his Majesty by the
best of Goverments; and to the English Protestants, by the strictest Ties of
Interess, friendship, marriage and (which is more in their esteem) Gossiping
and Fostering; to the public peace, by their as flourishing, so free
condition; and to all, by those Royal Graces which his sacred Majesty at that
time indulged their Commissioners, such as themselves could desire; 'twas then
but ask and have: yet all this Honey turned into Gall; for at that very time in
which the King was exercising such high acts of Grace to them, the Irish
Papists plotted, and soon after perpetrated the worst of Rebellions; the worst
extensive, exulcerating generally; and intensive, breaking forth with more
perfidy, barbarism and cruelty than can be paralleled in any History.

6. Principles of Religion engage English Protestants to submit to the King as
Supreme; but Principles of Religion engage Irish Papists to advance as Supreme
a Foreign Prince, and limits all their obedience, with a Saving to the
pretended Apostolic See. Certainly his Majesty may expect more future
obedience from Protestants, whose Consciences engage them to Loyalty; than from
Irish Papists, whose Consciences are engaged to the Pope. Can his Majesty trust
them, if they be not faithful to their Conscience-ingagement? and if they be,
can he trust them when their Consciences engage them to his Enemy?

The next sort of Arguments respect some special Cases, as (1) of the
Transplantation, (2) of the Corporation.
Concerning the Transplantation, P. W. peremptorily concludes, That it cannot
be continued on account of their Crimes since 1648. nor stand with the
Articles, or with the equity of the Laws, much less with the Justice of the
Prince.

1. This Conclusion without any proof, with the same facility as it is said,
may be gainsaid.

2. The Foundation of those Articles, and consequently the Articles themselves
are thrown down by the Irish Papists; wherefore it matters not as to his
Majesty, what can or cannot stand with them.

3. Many other Countries and Ages have formerly on less grounds used
Transplantation, and been justified therein as just and equal, by Lawyers and
Casuists.

4. Observe his Sacred Majesty's Royal and Fatherly Indulgence even to those
Irish Papists, who being Innocent, sued out Decrees, and obtained possession of
Lands in the Province of Connaught and County of Clare. First, Positively; for
though they had bound themselves up therein by their own Act, in which though
his Majesty says in the 14. page of his Gracious Declaration of the 30. of
November 1660. We might without any injustice deny to relieve them; yet his
Clemency is so great, That in the same 14. page of his said Declaration, he
breaks those Fetters which they had bound themselves in, and orders them to be
restored unto their former estates.

Secondly, Comparatively; his Majesty uses those innocent Irish Papists with
more tenderness than even those which He honors with the high Title of his
Friends in England and Ireland, as appears in the 18. and 19. pages of the said
Declaration: For though such are not to expect that his Majesty should pay back
to them the Moneys they were compelled in the evil times to disburse for their
Compositions, the payment whereof they would have avoiden, had it been in their
power, as much as the Irish Papists would have avoided their Transplantation:
yet his Majesty's Friends are not relieved from their own Act, when the
innocent Irish Papists are relieved from theirs.

5. Observe the insolency of P. W. for though his Sacred Majesty in Council, by
his said Declaration published to the world in print, declared that some other
transplanted Irish are to stand bound by their own Act, and not to be relieved
against it; yet P. W. is so far from acknowledging and magnifying his Majesty's
Mercy in using the innocent Irish Papists with more favor, than even those
happy persons whom his Majesty honors with the high Title of being his
Friends, that P. W. peremptorily says, viz. The Transplantation cannot be
continued on account of their crimes since 1648. nor can it stand with the
Articles, or with the equity of the Laws, much less with the Justice of the
Prince.

6. That the Justice of his Sacred Majesty in Council may appear to be such, in
not breaking so much of the Transplantation, as is confirmed by the said
Declaration, I desire these following particulars may be thoroughly considered:

(1) If such transplanted Irish Papists into Connaught and Clare should plead
that the Force of the late horrid Usurpers constrained them to go thither in
person; I answer, yet no Force lay upon them to sue out Decrees, and obtain
possessions of Lands there in lieu of their former sorfeited Estates in the
other Provinces. And it is only in point of Land that the said Transplantation
is continued: so that their doing of what they could not avoid, is not made
conclusive to them, but only their doing of that which they could avoid, and
yet solicited and brought to effect, is made binding to some of them. To which
I shall add, that those to whom it is made obliging, are only such as having
no title to innocence, (for all Innocents are freed from Transplantation) have
no title to any of their former Estates. And therefore this confirming of them
in the compensation of that, to which they had no right, should invite them to
acknowled his Majesty's Mercy, which yet P. W. in their behalf exclaims against
as injustice.

(2) Though all these guilty Transplanted Irish have forfeited their right to
the Articles extorted from his Majesty in 1648. and though by those Articles
(had they been as punctually observed by them, as they have been generally and
often violated by themselves yet) his Majesty was not obliged to hinder them
from making an unequal bargain or exchange for those their forfeited Lands,
which by his mercy they were restored unto, nor to confirm to them those Lands
which they sued for in satisfaction of their former Estates; yet his sacred
Majesty confirms to them, in confirming their Transplantation, those Lands
which they themselves had obtained from the Usurpers, as a compensation for the
Lands they left, and to which they had not the least shadow of a Title, because
they had broken, yea often, if not always, the said Articles of peace
vouchsaved to, and extorted by them, in the year 1648.

(3) The persons themselves who are transplanted have by their public Agents,
made the continuance and settlement of the Transplantation the subject matter
of several Petitions and Addresses to the RVMP: therefore as for them to decry
it now, argues in them a fuller readiness to obey Force, than Right: so the
continuance of it being in effect but a granting of their own desires and
petitions, they can justly blame none but Themselves. To prove the truth of
this, I shall set down the Titles and chief Heads of two petitions presented to
the RVMP. The one is in print, and thus addressed: To the Supreme Authority,
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. The humble Petition of Sir
Robert Talbot Baronet, and Garrot Moor Esquire; on the behalf of themselves and the
distressed Irish, Submittees upon Articles of War, and others who are to have a
certain proportion of their estates by the Act for the settling of Ireland, held
forth in the year 1652. Wherein, to use their own words, They humbly show, That
the Petitioners upon confidence of enjoying the Benefit of several Declarations
and Articles of War held forth unto them by Authority of this Parliament, etc.
did readily subject and put their Consciensciences, Lives and Fortun^s as in a
secure Sanctuary under the protection of this Commonwealth, having ever since
walked peaceably and in due conformity to the Government, without the least
defection therein; That since the interruption given to the sitting of this
Parliament in the year 1653. no Christian Nation can parallel the sufferings of
the petitioners, etc. which render the petitioners as fit Objects of your
Honors piety, justice and compassion, as any who may challenge your
protection. Notwithstanding the Petitioners withered hopes, and former
confidence, being a fresh revived by your Honors return to the management of
the present Government, and their propensions so great to peace and quietness,
that rather than ravel into the settlement, They do willingly acquiesce in the
Transplantation, albeit it was not executed by any legal power, as not being
derived from your Honors. Soon after in the same Petition follow these words:
They do apprehend that contrary to your Honors pious intentions manifested in
the said Act for settling of Ireland, they may be postponed or neglected,
unless provided for in the Act of settlement now to be established: And
therefore the Petitioners humbly pray, etc. This Petition was delivered by the
said two Agents for the Irish Papists at the door of the House of Commons in
England, and entered by the Clerk of the Rump.

The other petition was in writing, and subscribed Robert Talbot, Garret Moor:
the Title of it is, To the supreme authority, the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, etc. Supplications humbly tendered by Sir Robert
Talbot Bar. and Garret Moor Esquire, for and on the behalf of themselves and
the distressed Roman Catholics of Ireland, in order to be therein relieved by
the Act of Settlement now to be passed. Their second Supplication in this
petition is set down in these words, viz. That the Estates assigned unto the
Petitioners in the Province of Connaught and Country of Cla^e be confirmed unto
them. The third Supplication in the said petition is in these words, viz. That
the Decrees obtained by any of the Petitioners pursuant to the Articles and
Qualifications be put in a way of satisfaction and for the time past put in
equal condition with others who have had the benefit of their Decrees. The
fourth Supplication of this petition is expressed in these words, viz. That
there having been no time limited by this Parliament for the Petitioners to
enter and prosecute the claims according to their respective Qualifications,
and the interruption given to the sitting thereof soon after the Act of
Settlement, having hindered many from doing the same; and that others through
absence, poverty, and the short sitting of the Court for the adjudication of
Claims, appointed since the said Interruption, could not do it, That a farther
time be allowed unto such to enter and prosecute (as aforesaid) their Claims.
The fifth Supplication is expressed in these words, viz That several of the
Petitioners are able to make appear their constant good affection and adherence
to the Commonwealth, for whom a competent time to be allowed to make out the
same, is humbly supplicated, and that these and such of the Petitioners as have
already done the same, may have the benefit held forth unto them by the Act for
settling of Ireland.

These expressions being verbatim in the said two petitions, I shall only
observe from thence what follows, 1. The persons who presented these Requests
to the RVMP, did it not only for themselves, but for the Papists of Ireland, in
whose behalf they own themselves to be Sollicitors. 2. Those two Gentlemen
(their public Agents) were persons of too much knowledge and discretion to
have done any thing, especially of so high a nature as this, for so great a
body of people, without sufficient power from themselves so to do. 3. That
these their Agents Addresses to the RVMP were by allowance and command from
themselves, needs not better to be proved, than by the Irish Papists ever since
continuing those their two Agents in public employment for them, even to this
day.

4. To that very RVMP by whose immediate Commission the horridest of Murders
was acted, they scruple not to make their application, and even by the style of
the supreme authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. and
that twice. If P. W. should say they were necessitated to petition, and that
their petition would not be received without it were so directed, I answer, No
consequence of their suffering could be so great, as the guilt of owning the
RVMP by the twice before mentioned Titles. The single Advocate of the Irish
Papists, viz. P. W. lays it as a guilt upon all the Protestants of Ireland,
that some of them fought under one of the Regicides to recover their own
Estates, and punish the guilt of the first Rebellion, and their often violation
of their Articles; and yet their public Agents in behalf of all the Papists of
Ireland, own all those Regicides to be that supreme Authority.

5. But if the Consciences of the Irish Papists were hardened enough to run
into a certain sin, but in the expectancy of an uncertain advantage, why yet in
their printed petition did they use these guilty expressions, viz. They did
readily subject and put their CONSCIENCES, Lives and Fortunes as in a secure
Sanctuary under the protection of that Commonwealth. Though if they would
petition, they may say there was a necessity to style the RUMP, the Supreme
authority; yet sure they cannot say there was a necessity in the body of the
petition to insert such criminal words: therefore since the Body of the
Petition is more than consonant to the Title of it, it is but reasonable to
believe, the Title they gave the RVMP, was as voluntary as the expressions with
which they treat them. If they would but make his Sacred Majesty, what in print
they acknowledged the RVMP was to them, viz. A secure Sanctuary to put their
Consciences, Lives and Fortunes in; if what is past could not be remedied, yet
the mischiefs to come might perhaps be prevented.

6. But as if the immediate before mentioned respects to the RVMP had not been
sufficient, they pay them others, professing in these words, viz. Their
withered hopes and former confidences are afresh revived by the RVMPS return to
the management of the Government, under which their propensions to peace and
quietness are so great, that they willingly ACQVISECE in the TRANSPLANTATION.
Would they be but as joyful for his Sacred Majesty's restoration, as they say
they were for the RVMPS, and had they been as willing to express their
propensity to the peace and quietness of this Kingdom, under his Majesty's
undoubted authority, as under the RVMPS usurped power, P. W. had been exempt
from the Guilts of writing and printing his Letter, and I from the trouble of
answering it. The Irish Papists are not only content to declare, They willingly
acquiesce in the Transplantation; but to heighten the merit of that
performance, they add these words, viz. Albeit it was not executed by any legal
power: yet had they stopped there, those their last words had been true, and
sure the RVMP would have had arrogance enough to have assumed to themselves
without an explanation from the petitioners, that thereby was meant, what their
Agents positively say in the immediate next following words, viz As not derived
from your Honors. Though the Irish Papists in their engagements, nay Oaths to
others, are not without their Equivocations and Mental reservations, etc. yet
to the RVMP; when they might have left themselves, (as to the last expression,)
to a fair explanation, they voluntarily cast it behind them, in these clear
words, As not derived from your Honors. Those which now pretend to such Loyalty
to His Majesty, voluntarily confess, No execution was legal that was not
derived from the RVMP, is not this implicitly, if not explicitly, an owning
in the Irish Papists the legality of the RUMPS power, even in the bloody
Murder of his Sacred Majesty, that being derived from those the Irish Papists
call Their Honors. But it is no wonder, that those to whom the Irish Papists
did readily subject themselves and put their Consciences, lives and fortunes as
into a secure Sanctuary, should have so much plainness, kindness and obedience
for them. May we not too from thence infer, till they consider his Sacred
Majesty, as they professed they considered the RUMP, his Majesty may not well
expect from them that ready Subjection and propensity to peace, which in their
said Addresses they promised to those Usurpers.

7. Observe, all this is said and done since the peace of 1648. yea part of it,
and that the most criminal too, but some few months before his Majesty's
blessed Restoration; with what face could the Irish Papists by the same Agents
plead for the Articles of peace before his Majesty, as inviolable observers of
them; who but a few weeks before owned the RUMP for the Supreme Authority:
owned that they readily did subject and put their Consciences, Lives and
Fortunes, as in a secure Sanctuary, under their protection: owned their
withered hopes and former confidence was afresh revived by the RUMP'S return to
the management of the Government: owned their propensions to peace and
quietness under the RUMP to be so great, that as one evidence thereof, they
willingly did acquiesce in the Transplantation; with these superlative
expressions, Albeit it was not executed by any legal power, as not being
derived from their Honors. The very Murderers of his late Majesty of glorious
memory are the elected Sanctuary of the Irish Papists, not only for their Lives
and Fortunes, but even for their CONSCIENCES also. That bloody power which made
the Royal Line of England, and all good Subjects of England, Scotland and
Ireland so long wither, is by their return to Government, that only which
makes the hopes of the Irish Papists to revive and spring. That power is by the
Irish Papists owned to be the only Legal one, by which all our Laws and
Liberties were cut up even by the very Roots. Were the^e noth^ng but this to
make them forfeit the Articles they so plead for, it were but too much; if this
be their observance of their Recognition of his Majesty, though the Pope may
absolve them, God will not. Sure P. W. cannot prove any one of the Protestants,
whose whole number ^e so calumniates, to be so criminal, as I have proved even
the Generality of the Irish Papists to be, in this one particular; I bate him
many others. And doubtless 'twas a less sin the seduced Protestants to submit
for a while to him who cast down those English Murderers, and helped them
against these Irish Murderers, than readily to subject their Consciences,
lives and Fortunes to those Parricides, yea to own them as their Secure
Sanctuary for All, and so pathetically to exult, in their second usurpation.

8. In the many forementioned passages, both of the written and printed
petition, they press for the Confirmation of the Transplantation, and the
benefit of the Rules for adjudging of Qualifications, and make the granting
thereof to be e^^ects of the RUMP'S Piety, Justice and Compassion. The Irish
Papists are pleased to beg that Grant, as an act of piety, justice and
compassion in the RUMP, which his Sacred Majesty confirming, (and much more to
the advantage of the Irish) P. W. calls an Injustice. And in the 6. and 7.
Paragraphs of the said written petition, they set forth that several of the
Petitioners are able to make appear their constant good affection and adherence
to the Commonwealth, that some have already actually done it: And in effect,
That the number of those so adhering and of constant good affection to the
Commonwealth was so great, that they sue even for a longer time than had been
allowed, for the proving thereof; they being so many, that they were
straightened in time to make out that truth.

There are other clear observations and inferences which I could make out of
those two petitions, which I decline; enough having been said to evince what I
promised to prove upon this Head: and I have much behind to answer, to which I
hasten.

The Guilt of the Coporations in part instanced.
The 2. special Case concerns the Irish Corporations which P. W. with his usual
confidence determines, cannot be excluded on any account that may stand with
his Majesty's Gracious Concessions; nor can there be any reasons of State which
may accord with a good Conscience to exclude them; yet he confesses with a
peradventure, That two or three of them deserved punishment, and Limerick a
severe one.

The Corporations of Ireland that P. W. mentions were so notoriously guilty in
overthrowing the foundation of that peace wrested from his Majesty, that it
seems strange how any one can be found to plead for them, especially to his
Grace the Duke of Ormond, who knows their actings. Their Education rendered
them most able of any to know their duty; their Incorporation most capable of
any to deliberate concerning their duty; their Fortifications and men most
secure to discharge their duty; yet these above all other persons and places,
put forth with greatest Arguments of Choice and Freedom, the highest acts of
Treachery and Rebellion. The evidences whereof amount to much more than P. W.'s
peradventure, and the Subject reaches much farther than P. W's two or three
Corporations, it being the general practice of all such, into which his
Majesty's L. Lieutenant desired admission. P. W. confesses, That Limerick
deserved a severe ^^nishment, and certainly the demerit must be great, which
extorts this Confession even from their Advocate; nor was their Crime less than
laesae Majestatis, for they insolently opposed the admission of his Majesty's
Viceroy: though 1. their Mayor had invited him, 2. Iretons storm threatened
their wrack, 3. the L. Lieutenant offered to steer that Vessel, and to
adventure his person and Fortune in the same bottom with them. But surely if
Limerick deserves many stripes, Gallway and Waterford proportionally to their
crimes deserve more. Gallway after the Articles of 1648. (so much and
groundlesly pleaded) 1. searched (to use his Graces own words) with force and
arms for the L. Lieutenant, as if they judged him a Traitor. 2. They treated
with the Duke of Lorrain to be Protector of Ireland, as if they judged
themselves Lords of all. 3. They refused to admit any Garrison commissionated
by his Majesty's authority, and surrendered that Town (as if they esteemed
themselves a Free State) without consulting the Marquess of Claurickard then L.
Deputy, though resident within few miles thereof, and though he were of P. W's
own Nation and Religion. But I will not say that even those double Ties were
less powerful to beget a respect for him, than his representing the Kings
person, and his own worth, were incitements to P. W's Countrymen so highly to
affront him. Waterford likewise after those Articles of 1648. denied a passage
to the L. Lieutenant and his Army, though at that time his Lordship was
strengthened with the conjunction of the Vlster Forces, in pursuit of the
Enemy, who were weakened by a long Winter March, Multiplicity of Garrisons, want
of necessaries, and sickness of the Soldiers; nay offered himself to become an
hostage, and to commit the Army to another conduct; yea so horrid was their
perfidie, that when afterward the L. Lieutenant and seven more were
occasionally received into that City, the Citizens combined either to take away
his life, or deliver him up prisoner to the Usurpers; for the prevention
whereof, he was forced suddenly and secretly to withdraw thence.

What falsehood will P. W. be afraid to suggest to Strangers, and what
wickedness will he be afraid to patronize at home, when he shall dare thus to
assert to the L. Lieutenant himself, and publish it in print to the world, That
no reasons of State can accord with the dictates of a good Conscience, to
exclude these Corporations from the future capacity of repeating such signal
acts of Rebellion. But P. W. as farther motives of favor to the said
Corporations, adds and says, 1, The hand of God has punished them; 2. Some
were faithful among them; 3. The English Protestants are more criminal.

First, The hand of God has punished them: But that the Magistrate should
spare, because God punishes, is a non sequitur. Though the Lord sent Hornets
before Israel to drive out the Hivite and the Can^a^ite and the Hittites; yet
he commands Israel to destroy those Nations, and their name from under Heaven.

2. P. W. says, There have been many faithful Subjects in those Towns, even
in the most criminal of them; and God was so f^r from involving the just in the
destruction of the wicked Sodomites, that if he could find there but ten just
men, be would for their sake pardon all the rest.

1. The sin of Apostasy seems worse in some respect than other sins; and
therefore on this sin, Lot's Wife, whom God had rescued from the destruction of
Sodom, though but for looking back to it, is immediately turned into a pillar
of Salt. I heartily wish the Irish Apostates would remember Lot's Wife.

2. Though God would not involve the righteous in the punishment of the Wicked,
but delivered just Lot; yet he transplanted him into Zoar, and condemned Sodom
and Gom^rrae with an overthrow, making them an Example to those that after
should live ungodly. Even so his Majesty has taken care for the Innocent, in
his Gracious Declaration, without justifying the Wicked, and for the Innocent
has provided a Zoar, whether their Souls may escape and live.

3. Since P. W. professes his thoughts to be far from desiring to obstruct the
securing the peace of the Country; let him consider how advisable it is to
put a Sword into a Madmans hand, or to capacitate such rebellious Spirits to
hurt themselves and others.

Since Limerick, notwithstanding the hand of God, and mixture of good, deserved
a severe punishment; and since Gallway and Waterford are not less deserving;
ought not those Corporations and their Advocate rather to acknowledge his
Majesty's gracious indulgence and mercy, in remitting the severity of the Laws:
than to exclaim thus insolently against his Royal proceedings as unjust,
unequal, and such as cannot accord with a good Conscience.

The Guilt of English Protestants and Irish Papists compared.
Thirdly, P. W. returns to his former Comparison between the Irish Papists and
the English Protestants; and in prosecution thereof urges, 1. That the worst
of the Irish Papists were never Regicides; 2. That they fought against such
men, when England, Scotland, and the Protestants of Ireland deserted the Royal
Cause.

As to the first, That the Irish Papists are not Regicides; let it be
considered, That the Doctrine of Regicide is common in the Romish Schools, and
the practice in their Courts.

2. That to touch the Anointing, is virtually to touch the Anointed. Take
away the Regalia, and in effect you take away the King. The Irish Papists were
so guilty hereof, that they not only usurped all the Royal peculiars, but also
set up a Government distinct from, and opposite to his Majesty's in a General
Assembly; yea therein they Enacted, viz. That no Temporal Government or
Jurisdiction should be assumed, kept or executed in Ireland, or in any Province
or County thereof, other than what should be approved or instituted by their
General Assembly. Had the Devil had leave to touch Job's person, he would not
have spared him, when he touched all that was his.

3. Did not the Irish Papists, distrust, disobey, oppose, and excommunicate the
L. Lieutenant, and absolutely disclaim his Majesty's Authority in him; did they
not conspire to Murder Him, or which is worse (if worse can be) to deliver him
to the worst of Murderers? Surely those who dealt thus with such a Servant, if
the Son had been sent to them, would not have scrupled his Murder, that the
Inheritance might wholly be theirs.

As to the 2. That when England, Scotland, and the Protestants of Ireland
wholly deserted the Royal C^use, the Irish Papists fought against the Regicides
in defense of his Majesty's right.

1. It is no less calumnious than false, to charge England, Scotland and the
Protestants of Ireland to have wholly deserted the Royal Cause: and it is
amazing to consider how any Irish Papist (I am loath to say Rebel) dare thus by
a Letter even to the Duke of Ormond, and printed paper to the whole World,
impeach the Nations of England and Scotland, and all the Protestants of
Ireland, to have wholly deserted the Royal Cause: what may not Foreigners
credit against us abroad, if P. W. dare thus to charge us at home?

But a Narrative of the matter of Fact is the clearest expedient to refute this
Slander: wherein let England and Sootland answer for themselves; (if any Answer
seem necessary to so palpable a falsehood) and let the Protestants of Ireland
excuse my zeal, if I urge some clear instances (though I pretermit many) for
their vindication.

Those which P. W. slanders with having deserted the royal Cause, when the Irish
Papists fought against the Regicides in defense of his Majesty's Rights, were
even the very first in Ireland which proclaimed his Majesty, my L. Lieutenant
also at the head of them; and that duty was performed by the Protestant army in
the Province of Munster, the same year in which by giving the Irish Papists some
considerable defeats, the said Papists were reduced to a real necessity of
submitting to his Majesty, which yet they but seemingly did. But possibly P. W.
was at that time so busy in preparing those Articles of Peace which were to
fetter his Majesty, that he had not leisure to hear how his Protestant Subjects
freely proclaimed him. It is also undenyably true, that a considerable Body of
the Protestants of Ireland under the L. Lieutenant, though mingled with the
Irish Papists, fought constantly against the Regicides, nay after the said
Irish Papists would have been Regicides themselves, at least so far such as
conspiring to murder his Majesty in effigy at Waterford, etc. did amount
unto, and never declined that Quarrel, till by the infidelity of their
Accusers, they were not only disabled to prosecute it, but as several of
themselves have confessed, were reduced at last, even for the preservation of
their lives, to keep as strict Guards against the Irish Papists as against
Cromwell. All which his Grace having found was but too true, he withdrew
himself at last out of the Kingdom and permitted those Protestants to withdraw
themselves from the Irish: Therefore let any unbyassed person judge whether the
Irish Papists or all the Protestants were wholly the Deserters of the Royal
Cause; or which of them fought longest against the Regicides: if the insolence
and disloyalty of the Irish Papists were such, even when Cromwell was at their
gates, what would it not have been without that Curb. But I see though P. W.
remembers wha^ he should not, ye^ he can forget what he should remember.

In the years 1641. and 1642. the Protestants in Ireland not only fought as
his Majesty's Subjects, but by his Command and with his Commission against the
Irish Rebels; in the year 1643. a Cessation was concluded by his Majesty's
Authority, and the Irish engaged by Articles; both English and Irish by duty,
to transport their Armies to England for his Majesty's service. The English did
it, the Irish only made a show (till the English were gone) of doing of it, and
then plotted and attempted the destruction of the few English remaining in
Munster, whereby the Lord of Inchiquin, who then commanded in that Province by
the Kings Commission; and the English with him were necessitated to stand on
their own defense, yet this is the first pretense which the Irish Papists make,
that the English Protestants deserted the Royal Cause. Can even Malice it self
judge, the Protestants designed the deserting of the Kings service, when they
sent their Army to the King, by which only they were capable of disserving
him: nay sent it in that very Juncture of time, wherein they had as much cause
to fear the ruin of themselves and Families, from the often Violations of the
Cessation by the Irish Papists, after that Cessation was made, as from their
inhumanities before. But yet, when his Majesty's Service required it, though
the answering thereof, by transporting their Armies into England, threatened
more than a probable ruin to them at home from the Irish Papists, who then
delayed, and indeed never after would send an Army to the King into England;
yet the Protestants did not so much as hesitate, but cheerfully exposed
themselves to the danger, to pay the duty, and receive the honor of their
obedience.

The same Infidelity and Treachery which Munster, and the parts more remote
first experienced, the L. Lieutenant and the Protestants with him at Dublin at
last tasted: and his Grace was thereby compelled in the year 1647. (with his
Majesty's permission, if not Order) to resign Dublin and all the adjoining
Garrisons in^o hands of the Parliament, which is the second pretension for this
slander.

On these occasions the English Protestants of Ireland (not by Choice but
Necessity, (and a necessity only created by the Irish Papists themselves) not
by the Protestants own private acts, but the necessitated Acts of those that
were set over them by his Majesty's authority) came into the Stream, with the
violence whereof they confess themselves afterward hurried into such
miscarriages as made their hearts ache; yet (they hope) less criminal than those
in the Irish Rebellion, or to any degree of Apostasy, which deserves the
scandal that P. W. lays on them, of wholly deserting the Royal Cause.

For 1. Notwithstanding the violent endeavors of both Papists and Anabaptists,
not many of the Protestants of Ireland have declined the Church of England, in
her greatest Trials; whose principles are not only most consonant to Truth, but
also most useful and duti^ull to the Royal Cause: and for that reason were
opposed most by the two Extremes. So that Old Protestants in the Anabaptists
Dialect, was the same with Royallist, and by them the Protestants of Ireland
were dealt with accordingly. And 2. as the principles, so the practices of the
Protestants vindicate their loyalty. 1. They submitted this Kingdom to his
Majesty; not as England and Scotland, by the concurrence of the General and
General Officers, but without them, nay against them. 2. Though they saw the
difficulty of that attempt, and foresaw the hazard from Anabaptists (who then
in chief commanded the Army in Ireland) if they succeeded not; and from Irish
Papist pretenders (whose necessities had driven them to serve themselves by his
Majesty in Flanders) if they succeeded; yet were they early (if not the first)
and free without Articling in the duty of their Submissions. And least P. W.
who saye^ many things that are not true, should deny this, which is so signally
true, I will cite the undeniable Testimony of his Sacred Majesty himself, which
follows in these words in the 2. page of his Majesty's gracious Declaration for
the Settlement of Ireland: We acknowledge that our good Subjects of the Kingdom
of Ireland have born a very good part in procuring this happiness, that they
were EARLY in their dutiful Addresses to Us, and made the same professions of
a resolution to return to their Duty and Obedience to Us, during the time of
Our being beyond the Seas, which they have since so EMINENTLY made good and put
in practice.

Here is not only a profession of duty, but a making of it good, and putting it
in practice. Here is not only an early owning of His Majesty's Authority, but
an owning it when he was divested from the actual exercise of it, and that too
(as to Ireland) by the Irish Papists. And this is also the first fruits of the
Protestants having recovered the power of Ireland, and that with no less hazard
than loyalty.

3. To make the Discrimination yet clearer: The Irish Papists at first
murdered and fought against his Majesty's good Subjects, to take from him his
Crown. The Protestants of Ireland fought against his Enemies to restore him to
it. The Papists of Ireland we^e seemingly good Subjects, but to become more
dangerous Rebels. But the Protestants of Ireland if seemingly Rebels, were
such, but to become more useful Subjects. The last action of the Irish Papists,
when they had the power, was to expel His Majesty's Authority, with
circumstances as wicked as the very sin; but the first action of the English
Protestants, when they were in power, was to restore His Majesty's Authority,
with circumstances almost as dutiful as the Action it self.

Lastly, Not to hold a candle longer to the Sun, I will but instance one other
experiment, and against an experiment there is no arguing; and the instance of
this experiment is even in the very case now controverted, and in which also my
L. Duke of Ormond himself was the Judge. In the year 1650. when ^^ came in
Question, which were the worst, the Irish Papists, or the seduced Protestants.
He permitted all those worthy Protestants which till then had served under him,
to come off to the rest of the Protestants, though then headed by Ireton
himself; esteeming them safer with that real Regicide so accompanied, than with
those pretended Antiregicides, so principled. Certainly he esteems those less
ill to whom he sends his Friends, than from whom he sends them. If so wise and
so faithful a Servant to his Majesty, as the L. Lieutenant is, had had any
hope that the Irish Papists, would ever have returned to their Loyalty,
doubtless he would never have sent away from them, so many powerful helpers of
it, and friends unto it: and if his Grace had not had more than hopes that the
English Protestants would have returned to their obedience as soon as they had
got the power of doing it, he would never have sent his friends unto them. The
Wisdom of his Grace's foresight has been happily justified in the Result. For
all the Protestants which then came off, were eminently instrumental and
concurring in the duty of accomplishing that blessed Event. I dare as truly as
confiden^ly say, the most of the Protestants of Ireland only served under the
Usur^ers, but to bring the Irish Papists to those terms which without the force
of English swords they* would never have been brought unto. The ancient and
modern often breaches o^ faith which the Irish Papists were guilty of, made it
too evident to many of the Protestants, that nothing could bind them but steel,
and iron. The truth of both these po^itions is clearly read in that issue which
the providence of God has effected. However the once seduced Protestants of
Ireland are willing to take shame to themselves, and give glory to God, in
con^essing their Guilt such, (though not by causing, yet by complying with the
late Usurpation, though to a good end) that they readily acknowledge they owe
their Lives and Estates wholly to His Majesty's Grace and indulgence; and will
be more joyful to employ both in the honor and duty of his service, than now
they are in having received both from his mercy and goodness. For it is fitter
to discharge obligations, than to contract them. The lively sense the once
seduced Protestants of Ireland have of their failings, and of His Majesty's
Clemency, so justly humbles them, that they can take no pleasure to recriminate
others, farther than by showing the Injustice of P. W's. comparisons; which
they are more troubled he gave them a rise to do, than after the rise was given
they were troubled to find out what fully has done it. But in regard the Irish
Papists in all their Discourses, as well as their papers, pretend to the
defense of His Majesty's Right; it seems even necessary, by way of answer to
the other branch of this proposition, to rub up their memories. 1. Tha^ in 1641
the Irish Papists unprovoak'd (1) rebelled, (2) robbed the Protestants of more
personal estate, than the Fee-simple of all the forfeited Lands in Ireland is
worth; (3) in a few Months murdered about two hundred thousand innocents; (4)
with a sin next to Blasphemy, as now they pretend his Majesty's defense, so
then they pretended his Authority. The pretending whereof having been so horrid
a sin, (for it was no less than to have entitled his then Sacred Majesty to all
their unparalled crimes, nay to have made him the Author of them) I think it
a duty to the memory of that Glorious MARTYR, to present the Reader in this
place with what will clearly evince their malice therein to be as great, as his
then Majesty's Innocence; and nothing can better illustrate the vastness of
This, but by proving it is a parallel to That. I could instance many signal and
clear evidences of this Truth, besides that memorable one which follows: But
since I have in most part of my Answer made use of their own Writings, and
prints to make out their guilt: in this very particular I will pursue that
method, and only cite the preamble of their own Remonstrance, delivered by the
Lord Viscount Gormanston, Sir Lucas Dillon, and Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, to
His Majesty's Commissioners at the Town of Trim in the County of Mead, on the
17. of March 1642. In which Remonstrance of Grievances (for so they call it)
after they have taken notice that his Majesty had authorized Commissioners to
hear what they should say, or pr^pound, these very words follow, viz. Which
your Majesty's gracious and Princely Favor we find to be accompanied with
these words, viz. Albeit we do extremely detest the ^dious Rebellion which the
Recusants of Ireland have, without ground or color, raised against us, Our
Crown and Dignity. Word which deserve to be written with a Beam of the Sun, as
eternal mon^ments of his Majesty's Justice, and their guilt; nor were they
spoken ^n a corner, ^ut spoken under the Great Seal, and even in that
Commission which those False-accusers were to see and hear read, and by those
expressions they were sufficiently ^rovoked to have p^eaded that Authority they
so fa^^ely pre^ended, had they had the least shadow for that black ca^umny. In
these Royal expressions also (if at least the Irish Papists have the modesty (I
bate them the J^stice) to acknowledge the King was a fitter Judge of their
Crimes, then they themselves were) the actings of the chief Governors of
Ireland, when that horrid Rebellion brake out, are fully vindicated: for the
said Irish were so far from being provoked unto it by those, that no less a
Testimony than the word of that great, just and wise Prince proves, they had no
ground, nay not so much as a color for it.

2. In the year 1646. and after a peace concluded with them, they attempted, by
a Treachery not to be paralleled by any but themselves, to cut off the Lord
Lieutenant and Army with him, who marched out of Dublin on security and
confidence of that peace.

3. The same year, the Council and Congregation of the coufederate Catholics
of Ireland, obliged their General Preston by a solemn Oath, in these very
words, viz. To exercise all acts of Hostility against the L. Marquess of Ormond
by name, and his party; and to help, advise with counsel, and assist in that
service the L. General of Ulster employed in the same expedition.

This Oath is a fruitful Theme to declaim upon, but I will l^mit my
observations upon it, only to these following particulars. 1. Least any should
doubt they are his Majesty's Subjects; least any of themselves should repent
the sin of not having been such, they swear (that they may raise their crimes
above pardon) to exercise all acts of Hostility against his Majesty, in the
person of that noble Lord who had then, as now, the high honor to represent
him; if killing be an act of Hostility, they in this Oath swear to kill him; if
this be not actual Regicide, I am sure it is not their fault that it is not.
This horrid Oath takes off all disguises, and makes their sin as visible as
great. And if such a Crime be capable of accession, it did contract it by the
same persons engaging private^y, about the same time, (as I have been assured
by an undeniable Testimony) That he would serve the King, which he afterward
endeavored to excuse only by saying, His Army was not Nuntio-proof. By which
it appears indisputably whether the Irish Papists are Subject to the King, or
to the Pope.

(2) Instead of repenting and making amends for the late violated peace in the
year 1646, they swear to destroy him, with whom they had made it.

(3) This Oath reduced the taker of it to a sad Dilemma, either to Rebellion or
perjury.

(4) This Oath evidences that nothing is so powerful with the Irish Papists, as
to destroy his Majesty's Government; since the uniting of the old Irish Papists
and the old English Papists, which the Pope himself could not effect: the
dethroning of his Sacred Majesty has accomplished. They that could never agree
in any thing else, agree in this, and it is made the very bond of their
iniquity. I will say no more on this subject, but that Herod and Pilate could
be friends, when it was to crucify Christ.

4. In the year 1647. from Kilkenny Jan. 18. the Popish Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons of the confederate Catholics of Ireland employ
Commissioners to Rome, France and Spain, to invite a foreign power into
Ireland, particularly to Rome their titular Bishop of Ferns and Nicholas
Plunket Esquire; (who was Knighted by the Pope for his good service therein, and is
now one of the confident Advocates for the Irish Papists as defenders of his
Majesty's Rights, and against the Protestants of Ireland as deserters of the
Royal cause) these, I say were authorized to declare, viz. That they raised
arms for the freedom of the Catholic Religion; which are their own very words
in the third Article of those their Instructions.

In their Remonstrance in the beginning of the Rebellion, whatever they said
necessitated some few discontents to take up arms, then they took off the vail,
and positively said, That they raised arms for the freedom of the Catholic
Religion. Certainly if ever they may be believed to speak true, it is when they
speak to the POPE; and if ever any thing may be believed to be the voice of all
the Irish Papists, it is when the Popish Lords Spiritual and Temporal and
Commons of the Con^ederate Catholics speak in one Assembly. What is meant by
the Freedom of the Catholic Religion has been practically expounded by the
professors of it in Ireland; not only affirmatively, that those which are of
it, should enjoy the public and undisturbed exercise thereof themselves; but
Negatively, to be an exclusion of the public, if not private, exercise of the
true Religion. Many instances I could present the Reader of this, but I shall
only set down two: The 1. is Dean York a reverend Minister of Gods word, during
his residence at Gallway, was not allowed to pay the last duties of Christian
burial to those Protestants which died in that Town; but was forced to bury
them, nay his own children, privately in his Garden. The 2* is, That my L. Duke
of Ormond, though owned by the Irish papists to be the Kings L. Lieutenant and
consequently representing his Sacred Majesty's person, was still denied the use
of so much as one Church or Chapel, wherever the said Papists had the power;
nay one of the Generals of the Irish PAPISTS, now living, told my L. Lieutenant
at Kilkenny, That if the King in person came into Ireland, he should not be
allowed by them One Church to celebrate his Devotions in: to whom his Grace
made a return, proportionate to the disloyalty of that Declaration, and part of
that return being prophetical, and since fulfilled, I shall here insert the
words, viz, I hope to live to see all of that mind to be without one Church in
Ireland to say Mass in. By these two instances it is evident, That the direct
meaning of those words, The Freedom of the Catholic Religion, is no other than
the total banishing out of this Kingdom the exercise of the Religion
established in it, by truth it self, and by the good and wholesome Laws of the
Land.

5. In another part of the third Article of the said Instructions, these^ very
words are inserted, viz. The confederate Catholics do intend that you let his
Holiness know, their resolution to insist upon such Concessions and Agreements
in matters of Religion, and for the security thereof as his Holiness shall
approve of, and be satisfied with.

This palpably evinceth, that the Papists of Ireland being Subjects, or Rebels,
depends wholly upon the Popes pleasure: For let his Majesty grant them what he
will, yet his pretended Holiness's approbation must be the rule by which only
they will be bound. And this is made most evident by the words of the ninth
Article in the said Instructions, which follow in these words, viz. In case his
Holiness will not be pleased to descend to such Conditions, as might be granted
in matters of Religion, then you are to solicit for considerable aids, whereby
to maintain a war, and to ascertain and secure the same, etc. And soon after in
the same ninth Article, these words follow; viz. You are to make application to
his Holiness for his being Protector of this Kingdom; and by special instance
to endeavor his acceptance thereof, etc.

Still the Pope is there King; and that he may be so almost in name as well as
in power, they solicit him by special instance to accept that Title, under
which he might act that power: so that it is not the Confederate Catholics
fault, if a PROTECTOR were not in Ireland, before the Sectaries had set up one
in England. Nay their Commissioners then sent to France and Spain, were
required in case of the Popes refusal of being their Protector, to offer it to
either of those Kings, nay to any Popish Prince, from whom (to use their own
words) they might have most considerable aids. In effect, they are willing any
one should govern them, but he who only had the Right to do it. But yet as
becomes obedient Sons of the Church of Rome, the Pope has the advantage of the
preemption.

It appears the Irish Papists hang, as their faith in God, so their Loyalty to
their Prince, on the Popes sleeve; and certainly it is not probable that those
should defend his Majesty's Right, over whom (1) a foreign Prince, (2) such a
foreign Prince as considers His Majesty as an Heretic, and consequently an
Enemy, has full power; and (3) That power on the strongest account, even that
of Conscience of Religion.

In the year 1648. another peace was concluded with the Irish Papists, but
after that, they disowned, disobeyed, opposed, conspired to murder,
excommunicated, and banished His Majesty's Viceroy, as appears by the former
instances.

In sum, when the power of Ireland was in the hands of the Irish Papists, they
designed and endeavored to betray it to Foreigners: But when in the hands of
the Protestants of Ireland, they absolutely, and without antecedent conditions,
submitted it and themselves to His Sacred Majesty.

As to their fighting against the Regicides.
I answer, 1. Vicious extremes are not only opposite to virtue, but also one to
the other; Papists and Sectaries oppose each other, and both the Protestants.

2. The Spaniard and the Dutch fought against the Regicides, yet neither of
them in the day of trial, proved themselves friends to his Majesty's Rights.

3. It Is the Cause, not the suffering only, which makes the Martyr; it is not
the fighting, but the ground and end of the fighting, which proves which is the
good Subject, and of that, let even P. W. judge by the former instances.

The last argument pretends to commutative Justice, and is ushered in by a
comparison and preoccupation.

The former thrice pressed way of comparison, is yet propounded here again, but
with less injustice here, than before; the comparison before was between
Papists and Protestants, here between Papists and Presbyterians, Anabaptists,
Quakers, Fifth Monarchy men, Independents.

To which I shall only say, Whatever tenants opposite to Regal power may be
found among any Sectaries, are, if not learned from, I am sure taught by the
Romish Schools. Papists and Sectaries like Sampsons Foxes, are tied by their
tails, though their heads be divided; their way may seem contrary, but they all
tend to the same end, the ruin of the Corn-field.

As P. W. ushers in his Arguments on one side with a comparison: so on the
other with a preoccupation, re^a^ing to the power of those which he calls
Adversaries, and declares it to be no greater than His Majesty is pleased to
make it.

To the truth of this Declaration the Protestants of Ireland freely consent;
professing to the World, that though their Army is such, as sufficed to subdue
the Irish Rebels when universally confederated throughout the Kingdom, and
supplied by Foreigners with Money, Arms and Ammunition, and strengthened with
no less than the Popes Blessing and Nuntio: yet their power consists not in
Arms or Armies, Fortifications or Men; but in Loyalty and Obedience to his
Sacred Majesty's Commission and Authority; and is consequently, as P. W. says,
no greater than his Majesty is pleased to make it. And since this is the true
state of the Protestant, both Principle and Interest, As in truth it is, even
their Adversary being their Judge, it is likely therefore that P. W. declares
they are his Adversaries, (for I believe his Friends are other guess men) But
doubtless those are fittest to be trusted with Power, who are no stronger by
it, even by their Enemies acknowledgements, than He which gives it, is willing
to make it; than those who never had power, but what they forced from his
Majesty; and who never employed that Power (the whole stream of their own
actions being their Judges) but against that Sacred Majesty from whom they
wrested it.

The Arguments following plead Justice, and that Justice grounded on the
Articles of 1648. and judged by the sad consequences threatened on the breach
thereof, whether we regard men or God.
Though concerning the Arrticles of 1648. enough has been instanced already,
yet to leave P. W. without occasion of Cavil, it will not be unfit to add
somewhat more here.

1. The Contents of those Articles are in themselves unwarrantable, except in
Case of Necessity which has no Law.

2. The Condition of those Articles whereon they were principally, if not only
founded, has been often and entirely violated by the Irish Papists.

The Contents of those Articles are unwarrantable, unless in Case of Necessity,
because they are contrary to an higher Obligation, according to the Rule both
of public and private Justice.

1. His Majesty at his Coronation, binds himself to God, to govern these
Kingdoms according to their respective Laws; and let P. W. himself consider,
how agreeable it is to Law or public Justice, that the Militia, Treasury, an
Army of fifteen thousand Foot, two thousand five hundred Horse, of Irish
Papists, and even in effect the Legislative power it self, should be in the
hand^ of twelve men to be chosen by Irish Papists; or that there should be no
alteration in England of what they in Ireland should think fit to transmit to
his Majesty for the settlement of that Kingdom; or even that the Irish Rebels
should be pardoned without the consent of Parliament, when his Majesty in
Parliament the seventeenth year of his Reign, adjudged such pardon before
Conviction to be null and void; hereby even when they treated with his Majesty
concerning the Affairs of this Kingdom, assuming the Legislative authority of
it, by repealing the Statute made the 10. of Henry the VII. (commonly called
Poynings Law) and the explanatory Law thereof, in 3. and 4. of Philip and Mary.

And though hitherto they chiefly pleaded before his Sacred Majesty in Council,
but for so much benefit of the Articles of peace in 1648. as would restore them
to their forfeited Estates: yet if they had prevailed therein, upon the score
of that plea, it must in consequence have adjudged for them the benefit of all
the other Articles as a Right. For if any of those Articles are due to them by
an Obligation of Justice, all are then d^e to them by the same Obligation; and
since, as appears by his Majesty's Gracious Declaration in Council, of the 30.
of November 1660. that they have no right to any of their forfeited Estate^,
nor any title but what his Majesty's mercy and bounty has vouchsafed to
diverse of them; it thence follows, That his Majesty in Council has adjudged,
They have no right to those Articles. For as an adjudication of his Sacred
Majesty of their Title to any one of the said Articles, had entitled them to
All: so an adjudication of his Majesty in Council, That they had not a right to
that One they pleaded for, has adjudg'd them to have no right to any.

2. Was not his late Majesty of glorious memory before those Articles; (1)
preingaged to the Adventurers for many of the forfeited Lands in Ireland; (2)
in the strictest form of Engagement, even by an Engagement in Parliament; (3.)
on the account of strictest Justice, even by way of sale; (4) on the best
account o^ sale, the end thereof being to reduce the Irish Rebels: therefore
might not these Arguments which P. W. urges in this instance against the
breach of public Faith, be at least more applyable to this Engagement of his
late Majesty, to his now Majesty's Declaration at Breda, and his Gracious
Declaration of the 30. of November 1660. which were all Acts of Choice,
Premeditation and Freedom: than to those Articles of 1648. which was an Act of
Necessity and Rebellious force. The Casuists and Schoolmen will easily resolve
P. W. that the later and lesser Obligation, ought to give place to the elder
and greater. But if P. W. object, That if his Majesty were under an Obligation
preceding and opposite to theirs, why did he enter into an Obligation unto
them? To that I answer, 1. That then it was not Res integr^; for his Majesty's
Rebellious Subjects, even some of the Adventurers themselves had super-induc'd
a necessity upon his Majesty, which as he could not foresee when he made his
first Contract: so by all the ties of natural preservation, he was bound to
take away, when they were brought upon him; and it could not be a breach of
Faith in the King to them, who made it (as things then stood) impossible to
perform it. 2. Though Necessity be an unhappy plea, yet when it is a true, it is
an allowable one. 3. That very Necessity which constrained his Majesty to those
Articles, had they been observed by those with whom they were made, would have
invited all honest Englishmen to have cheerfully waited, till by the expected
fruits and effects of that Peace, his Majesty might have been enabled to have
satisfied them; nay they would rather have lost their money, than his Majesty
should have broken his Faith with them, that had kept it with him, and would
have been so serviceable to him; besides his Majesty might have been so soon
reseated in his Throne, that the debts of the Crown would have been so small,
and his Subjects ability and affections so great, that he might and would
easily have satisfied the Adventurers desires, without forfeited Land in
Ireland, even by their own consent. But the breach on the Irish Papists side,
has occasioned so long and chargeable a War, that their forfeitures, together
with the vast sums sent out of England into Ireland, and raised in Ireland it
self, are scarce able to defray that expense, which their own violation of
Faith has engaged the Crown in: so that it is but just, that the Bear-skin (as
far as it will go) should contribute to pay for the healing of those Wounds,
which the Bear it self had given. His Sacred Majesty in the 3. page of his
Declaration, speaking upon these Articles, uses these very words, viz. When
they who wickedly usurped the Authority in this Kingdom, had erected that
odious Court, for the taking away the life of Our dear Father; no body can
wonder that we were desirous, though upon DIFFICVLT CONDITIONS, to get such an
united power of Our own Subjects, as might have been able; with Gods blessing,
to have prevented that infamous and horrible Parricide.

In these clear and Royal expressions the World may see what was the only
incentive to his Majesty, for his granting of that Peace, even no less than the
preventing of the Murder of his blessed Father, and the bloody consequences of
it: And therefore if That were the hopeful effect of those Concessions, had
they been observed on the Irish side; may not we (without too much straining)
infer, that the breach on their side, contributed to, if not acted that
unparalled Crime. To commit the Sin, and not to prevent the Sin, when men
have the preventative power of it, are very near allied, if not the same Crimes.

I shall also here again observe, that what P. W. calls Freely putting
themselves and their power into my L. Lievtenants hands; his Sacred Majesty
justly marks with these observable expression^, [ upon difficult Conditions;]
may I not therefore from thence also well infer, That P. W's. Clients do
nothing so freely as when they put difficult Conditions on his Majesty.

Though I have said and proved by undeniable evidences, That the Irish Papists
have violated and broken the Articles they extorted in 1648. yet becauss P.
W's. Tenants obliges (...)


