AN ANSWER TO THE CHALLENGE Of Mr. Henry Jennings (Protestant Archdeacon of
Dromore) which evidently makes-out the present Church of Romes doctrine to have
been maintained in the first five ages, and the adversarys Principles to be
only a heap of heresies lawfully condemned by the primitive Church.

To which is annexed An Answer to one Whealy.

Set forth by JAMES O SHIELL Reader of Divinity.

Remember the days of old consider the years of many generations, ask thy
Father, and he will show thee, thy elders, and they will tell thee. Deuteronomy c. 32.
v. 7. Permissu Superiorum. 1699,

TO THE QUEEN
MADAM,
THis little book makes bold to adress it self to your Sacred Majesty, not to
inform or instruct you in any thing it contains, for beside the gifts of
nature and great perfections, with which your Majesty is so richly endowed;
you had the adva^tage of being born and bred in the most Catholic Country of
Europe, and being well educated and throwly instructed in virtue, piety,
religion and in all other things, proper for so great a Princess to learn. The
end and scope of this small treatise is Madam; first to answer a Challe^ge made
to all Catholics in General, by one of the most dareing, and most presumptuous
of the protesa^t it party; next to prevent unwary, and well meaning Christians
from being seduced, or imposed upon by such artifices which it will effect by
Gods help; so it be but countenanced by your Sacred Majesty; If you consider
only its style and contexture, or the Author that composed it, it cannot on
either of those accounts deserve this honor: but the Docttrine it comprehends,
being compiled and faithfully extracted out of the scripture, holy Fathers, and
Ancient Cou^cils, it may on that score well pretend the patronage and
protection of so great a Quen; a descended from the Glorious House of Est,
which has furnished Europe for many hunderds of years, with Illustrious Dukes
and Princes, Famous Generals, great statesmen and most Eminent prelates, and
Churchmen; and yet never did oblige it more than in giving it so great a
Princess, so fit a consort for our Gracious King, whose piety and zeal are
without example, who for his religion only, has lost the Imperial crown of
three Kingdoms, and for his great resignation, and Christian patience, will
infallibly receive a crown of everlasti^g Glory; your Majestyes Heroycal and
sted fast resolution of still prefering religio before all Temporal in^rest,
and your great zeal for the service of God and the Catholic cause do evidently
prove that no other Princess, but yourself could be so agreeable to his
Majesty; and so conformable to his generous inclinations in this particular,
as well as in all other Royal perfections. The King, and your Majesty's chief
study is to mai^tai^ and support that religion for which both have sacrificed
your all; and your daily business is to comfort the poor, to cloth the naked,
and to feed the hungry, to provide for the Fatherless and widows, and to
supply all their wa^ts, ever to the straitning of yourselves; and in a word to
promote in others' by your own example the practice of all the works of piety
and Charity imaginable. Now since standingup in defense of truth and
endeavoring to instruct the ignorant in matters of salvation, has ever been
accounted a work of Charity, this little book, (how ever meanly write) may
deserve your Majesty's Royal protection and approbation, this will render it
more acceptable to all good Christians, and supply it is want wherever it is
defective either in language or composition; for this reason Madam, the Author
does most humbly presume to lay it at your Majesty's feet, and to beg you would
be Graciously pleased not only to afford it the honor of your Royal patronage;
but also ot accept of it, as a small testimony of the fidelity, and greatfull
respect, justly due from all his Country, where with he is obliged daily to
pray for your Majesty, and ever to continue.

MADAM, Your Majesty's Most obedient, and most Loyal and most Humble Subject,
and Sevarnt. JAMES O SHIELL

An Answer to Mr. Iennings Challenge.
Although this Treatise be but small, yet it treats not of small matters, the
subject of it being of no less consequence than the salvation of those
christians, who are led astray from the true faith, because they are not guided
by any christian motive or Authority, but rather by their own wordly interest,
and libertinism; whith now a days too many prefer before gods cause and the
salvation of their own souls, notwithstanding all the convincing arguments both
of our ancient and modern controvertists, who with a great deal of pains have
shifted the wheat from the tares, and inspite of all oppositio^, have made out
very clearly the real and naked truth of their assertions in all controverted
points between our pretended reformers and the present church of Rome; for
which reason I would at present forbear writing of a subject so often scanned
and discussed before, but that I was over persuaded at the earnest request of a
certin person of quality, who faithfully promised to be come a Roman catholic,
if she cu'd get but a satisfactory answer to an extravagant bold challange of
one that styles himself a prelat of the church of England, now residing in the
north of Ireland, where he makes a great figure, and would feign, persuade the
ignorant and unwary to belive that his notions are truly catholic. To prevent
wdich imposture, and in hopes that some copyes of this little work may for the
good of souls pass over the seas to that afflicted country, where books of
controversy are very scarce. J made it my business to get it printed, havi^g
composed it as succint and compendious as the subject could possibly permit
that it may-be no burden in a man's pocket. If the reader be not of the church
of Rome, I do advise him to perruse it with a serious consideration and remorse
of conscience, which if he does, perhaps it may be an ocasion of leading him to
the true light, and way of salvation, whatever he may carp upon the method or
language; I shall bear it patie^tly if he does but observe and consider the
meaning, and doctrine thereof. But before I proceed further, I must take notice
of this daring champions legerdemain, who being sensible ^^ of his own want of
proofs, and authoritys to make out any one point now controverted, he would
feign turn the scale and impose upon the Roman catholics to prove their
assertions; whereas it is plain that since he owns the church of Rome to have
been in a legal possession of the true faith for above 300 years after christ,
he ought consequently to suppose that she kept the same faith all along, unless
he can prove the contrary: yet this is no peculiar device of our bold
challenger, but rather the ordinary practice of all pretended reformers, who
finding no solid grounds for their new notions are forced to trust wholly to
negatives, and endeavor upon that account to impose the proof upon the lawful
possessors; but among all methinks it seems very unfair for any that styles
himself of the church of England, to deny this principle of lawful possession,
since their own best writers do much insist upon it to make out their right
against thoses secttaryes, who like new swarms separated from the stock. As the
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Quakers, sosinians etc. But to come to the present
point let us see the arrogant challange of this proud Goliath, which runs to
this purpose.

Whosoever is deserious to find and embrace a church where the old incorrupted
principles of christianity are taught, and such doctrines only as were
maintained by the ancient and pure church even of Rome for upward of 300 years
after christ, let him embrace the present church of England, where the said
principles are duly professed the old church of Rome and the present church of
England, being the same in principles; whereas the doctrines which the presnt
church of Rome has added over and above what the church of England, maintains,
and wherein the said churches do now differ, were never maintained by the said
ancient church of Rome, but newly brought-in, some eight or nine hundred years,
others seven and the most of the^ 600 years after christ. In justification of
which charge we always have and still do bid defiance to any Roman catholic
livi^g to bring any sufficient sentence out of any old doctor or father, or out
of any old council, or out of the holy scriptures or any one, example of the
primitive church whereby it may be clearly, and plainly proved.

1 That there was any private mass in the whole world at that time for the
space of six hundred years after christ.

2 That the communion was administered unto the people under one kind.

3 That the people then had their common prays in a tongue, which they
understood not.

4 That the bishop of Rome was then called the universal ^ishop, or the head of
the universal church.

5, That then the people were taught to believe that christ's body is really or
substantially in the sacrament.

6. That then the people did fall down, and worship it with godly honor.

7. That in the sacrament after the words of consecration there reman only the
accidents and show, without the substance of bread and wine.

8. That whosoever had then said the sacrament is only but a figure, a pledge,
a token, or remembrance of christ's body, had therefore been judged for an here
tick.

9. That images were then set up in churches to the intent that the people
might worship them.

10. That then the people did invocate saints, or pray to them.

11. That then the people believed that there is a third place, which commonly
the Papists call purgatory.

12 That then the people were forbidden to read the word of god in their own
tongue.

If these things be as we allege, it follows that whosoever mai^tai^e the
aforsaid abused principles, are not of the a^cie^t church of Rome but only of
the present corrupted church of Rome and if our allegatio^s be false, we desire
to be disproved.

Before I come to any particular answer to the several points of this
extravagant challange, which the man's ignorance or vanity makes him belive
unanswerable. I will only thus in general retort his own argument upon himself,
that J may form his discurse, in the true and right method.

Whosoever desires to find and embtace a church wherein the old incorrupted
principles of christia^ity are taught and such doctrines only as were
maintained by the ancient and pure church even of Rome for upwards of 300 years
after christ, let him embrace the present church of Rome, wherein the said
principles are duly professed, the old and the present church of Rome being
still the same in principles, whereas the doctrines of those who now call
themselves the church of England, and wherein the said churehes do now differ,
were never mai^tain'd by the a^cie^t church of Rome, but rather impiously
brought in by a series of heretics, who for those very doctrines were from
time to time co^demn'd by many general, national, and provincial councils and
also by the most eminent fathers and doctors of the catholic church in those
respective ages; whose authorityes, and very words. I will hereafter produce in
my answer to the several points here controverted, that every impartial reader
may see how all the aspersions, and calumnies raised by our pretended reformers
against the church of Rome, are but mere fictions without any toserable ground,
reason or authority.

In the mean time I think it is very plain that my retortion ought to take
place before my adversaryes preca^ious sort of discourse, and consequently that
such a challange belogs properly to the church of Rome, and not to any upstart
sectary whatsoever, for as J hinted before, it is a principle in all well
governed commonwealths that a peacable possessor ought not to be disturbed
until by manifest proof he is convicted to be an unlawful possessor: but the
church of Rome which undenyably was a peaceable possessor of the true faith for
the first 300 or as my adversary is willing to allows for six hundred years
after christ was never convicted by any competent authority or proof, that ever
she fell from the true faith of Jesus christ: therefore it necessarily follows
that she must be still supposed to retain the same true faith to this very
day. The major is manifest, and a maxim in law, and the minor J prove thus. If
the church of Rome could at any time be juridically condemned, or declared to
have fallen from the true faith, it must have been either by some immediate
revelation or commission from God, as the written law was abrogated to make
Place for the law of grace and as the high Priesthood was transferred from the
house of Heli, to an other family, or by some other Church called and summoned
by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, in some National, or general Council, as
the Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Pelagians, Eutychians, and many other
Heresies were condemned in former times, but neither of those can be alleag'd
in the case proposed, the first is not so much as pretended, nor can the later
be alleag'd by any man in his wits; for no National, or General Council, no,
nor any old Chronicles, Registers, Ecclesiast^al, or profane Histories, makes
tention that ever the Roman Church fell from the true faith: so that if we
except the inconsiderable dregs of co^demn'd Heresies; which lay hid in obscur^
corners of the earth, there wa^ no Church, or society of Christians exta^t in
the sixth, seve^th, eighth^ ninth, etc. Centuryes, but were a^^ in communion
with the Church o^ Rome, in their respective ages, and all the eminent Doctors
and Father^ of those times, seriously expos^ her cause as the cause of Christ
wherefore either the Church Rome, kept the true faith inviolably all that
while, or Christ ha^ no true Church upon earth: which is plainly giveing the
lie not only to the Angel Gabriel, who d^clar'd that ^ of Christ's Kingdom which
is his Church, there shou^^ be no end. Luke chap. the 1. v. ^ but also to Christ
himself, who expressly promised, that the Gates of Hell should not prevail
against his Church. Math. chap. the 16. v. 18. and that he would be with his
disciples in the administration of their function, even to the end of the
world. Math. chap 28. v. the 20.

For a further confirmation of this point, it is evident, that no Church, or
society of Christians, can show their lineal, and lawful succession of
pastors, and Bishops, ever since the Apostles time, but the present Church of
Rome, and such as are in communion with her; for those that now style
themselves, the Church of England, cannot for their lives show any before
Cranmer, in Edward the fixth time; as appears by Goodman, the Protestant Bishop
of Hereford, in his Catalogue of all the Bishops of England since the first
pla^tatio^ of Christian religion amongst them, where he expressly names, Thomas
Cranmer to be the first protestant Bishop, tha^ was ever seen in England. Upon
the whole matter, since none but the present Roman Catholic Church, can pretend
to have had since the Apostles time, a continued series of Bishops, with whom
all their co^temporaryes of the orthodox* part of Christians always agreed in
one faith and comunion, it plainly follows that she alone can pretend to the
purity of the Christian faith. And therefore, whosoever desires to find, and
embrace a Church, wherein the old incorrupted principles of Chrstianity are
taught, and such principles only as were maintain,d, by the Ancient and pure
Church of Rome, for upwards of 300. years after Christ, let him embrace the
present Church of Rome, wherein the said principles are duly professed; as I
shall manifestly prove in my Answer to the aforsaid points: for being the
ancient Father St. Basile in his 63. Epistle, declares unto us. That we ought
not to pase ^^er calumnyes; not out of revenge but lest we should seem to give
way to a lyeor suffer men seduced to be further decev'd: I shall (therefore)
answer my Adversary a challe^ge, in the same order that he has laid ^^, chap.
1. Proving both public and priva^^ Masses, to have been celeb^cated in the
premitive Church.

This Challenger, seens to lav his main stress, upon the word private Mass, but
what he means by it, he does not explain: it is certain, that although Masses were
said privately in all age, especially during the persecution of the Heathens
when Christians performed their Devotions, in caves, and vaults, under ground;
yet the word private mass, was seldom used by Catholic writers, either before
or since the year 600. until Martin Luther by his book de-Missa privata,
obliged Catholic Divines, to write upon that subject, and confute to the full
Luthers arguments against it, but why is the question raised about private
mass does my adversary own that public Masses were in use, in the primitive
church? If so, he must either quitt the old, as well as the present Church of
Rome, or condemn his own Church of England, which declares against all masses,
both private and public; and indeed whosoever admits one, can have no tolerable
reason to deny the other, contrary to the practice of so many ages. But let him
deny or own what he pleases, it is evident to us by the undeniable testimonies of
several Fathers, and Councils, more ancient than the year 600, that both
public, and private masses, were then in use in the Catholic Church, and
offered to the Almighty, both for the living, and the dead, as occasion
required. St. James the Apostle speaking to Almighty God in his liturgy says:
we offer unto thee an unbloody sacrifice for our sins, and for the ignorance of
the people. And St. Andrew likewise said, (as the Priests and Deacons of Achia
in the book they writ of this Apostles passion I sacrifice daily unto Almighty
God, an immaculate lamb -- who, when he is truly sacrificed, and his flesh
truly eaten remains still wholly and alive. St. Ireneus, who lived the year 180
in his 4. book against heresies, c: 32: after speaking of the sacrifices which
were offered in the old law: says, that our Lord taught the Apostles to offer
anew sacrifice, which the Church afterward being taught by the Apostles
offered through the universal world St. Cyprian, who lived the year 250.
prohibit'd to offer any sacrifice for the soul of Gemininus Faustus, because he
did not observe the decree of his own antecessors, the Bishops. Cornelius
Bishop of Rome, who lived about the year 254. complains, that the persecution
was so great in his own time, that they could not say masses, either in public
Churches, or in Caves under ground, which Authority may be seen, Tomo. 1.
Biblia Sanctorum Patrum. Tertuiliam who lived in the same century says: in his
book decorona mi^it s, c. ^. that masse^ were then offer ^ so the souls of the
dead. and Fusebius Cesariensis, who lived the year 326, relates in his 4. book
c, 4^. that there were masses said for the soul of Constant the Great St Cyri^l
of Jerusalem who lived in the same century, Catech: 5. says thus: we belive
that the holy, and dreadful sacrifice* which is offered upon the altar, is
agreat relief to those for whom its offered, so Zomenus relates in his 7. book
c. 5. that St. Gregory Nazianzen said Mass in a private chapel, and Paulinus
(writing the life of St. Ambrose) affirms that St. Ambrose said Mass in a
certai^ Gentel somans house and St. Ambrose himself in his commentary on the
38: Psalm. ^ bids the Priests, to offer this holy sacrifice for others The^d^^et
(who lived the year 4^0. in his History c* 20.) declare^* himself to have said
mass, in a Hermits cell; and St* Gregory in his 37. Homily affirms that the
holy Bish^p Cassins was wont to say mass, in his oratory, being hindered from
going to the church, by reason of his infirmity: St. Hierome (who lived the
year 390. in his Commentary on the ^. chap of the proverbs) says the following
words: Its to be Observed, that although there is no hopes of pardon for the
wicked, after their death, yet there are those who dye with small sins. and
after their death, can be discharged, either by chastifing them with
punishments, or by their friends pray^rs, alms, and celebration of masses. In
his commentary on St. Paul's Epist: to Titus, he says thus If the Laity are
commanded to abstain from their wives in the time of communion, what is to be
supposed of the Bishop* who daily for his own, and the peoples sins, offers to
God the underfiled sacrifice; he has such an other Authority, in his first
book against Jovinian, c. 19. speaking of the priests. St. Chrysostom who
lived in the later end of the 4. century in his; homily on St. Paul's Epist. to
the Philippians, speaking of those who dye in the fear of God) says thus: It
was not in vain the Apostles ordered that they should be remembered in the
venerable, and terribile mysteries, for they knew this to be a relief, and help
to them for when all the people with open arms, and the priests offer that
dreadful sacrifice, full of veneration, how shall we not pacific God, praying
for them he has such an other Authority in his 41. Homily, on St. Paul's first
Epist: to the Corinthians, and in his 7. Homily on his Epist: to the Hebrews,
he says thus, speaking of Christ, we offer always the same, truly noe other,
but still the same, therefore it is one sacrifice for this reason; because he
is offered in several places. are they many Christ's, no, not at all, but one
Christ, in all places, who is wholly and entirely, here, and there, one bo^^ in
his 32. de Consubstantiali ^^ Sharply reprehend, those who neglect to hear
mass; and in his 2^ Homily (de baptismo) he compare those, who leave mass
before the last benediction) to Judas, who the Lords last supper, depart
before giving thanks, More ^^ his Authorityes may be seen, n^ only in his
liturgy, but (also) i^ several places; manifestly proving, the ancient practice
of celebrating masses: St. Augustine (wh^ lived in the beginning of the 5.
century) declares (in his 9 book o^ Confession c. 12. that there w^ mass said
for the soul of his own Moth^ Monica, her body being laid beside t^ sepulcher.
In his 32 Ser: de verb is Apostoli, speaking of the dead, he says the
following words: the prayers of the holy church, the comfortable sacrifice, and
the alms, which are offered for those spirits, is not to be doubted, that they
are helped by them -- for this have been delivered by the Fathers, which new
the universal Church observes; that those whodye, in the communion of the body,
and blood of Christy are remembr'd, when the sacrifice is offered -- who doubts
them to be favored for prayers are not in vain offered for them to God. And in
his Enchiridion c. 110. he (also) says: that it is not to be denied, that the
soul of the dead are o^s'd, when the holy sacrifice is offered for them. In his
22. book of the city of God, chap. 8. he relates, that when Hesperious's
country house was troubled, by malignant spirits; tha^ he desired one of his
priests, to go thither, by the virtue of whose prayers, the spirits might give
over: one of them went (says he) and offered there, the sacrifice of the body
of Christ -- and afterward the House, was no more troul'd. More of St.
Augustins Authorityes may be seen, in hi^ 46. Epist. in his book de cura
promorcuis: c. 18. in his book desancta virgin: c. 45. in his first book de
origin animae c. 9. 11: and in his 84. treatise in Joa^nem. All which I omit
to produce for breviti sake; and shall only insert, that of venerable Bede, who
in his first book c: 29 ^^lates* that St. Gregory had sent Priestly ornaments
to St. Augustine, the apostle of England, and in his 4 book c: ^2 he tells, that
when J^ma was taken captive by the enemies that he could never bety'd by reason
of several masses, which his brother Tunna the monk said for his soul;
believing that he was killed in the battle and also in his 5 book c. 13.
speaking of that terrible vision of Driethelme, who after his death reviu'd and
told wonderful things concerning the pains of purgatory from which (said
venerable Bede) Prayers, alms, fasts, and celebrations of masses do release
many before the day of Judgment. Now let us see the councils Authorityes, It
was decreed in the 5 can: of the council of Vasens (atowne in France where 18
Bishops gathered the year 442) that kyrie eleison should be said in the masses
throughout all the Churches of France; as it was said long before in the East
and in all Italy, here are the councils very words: quia tam in sede
apostolica, quam etiam per totas Orientis atque Italiae provincias dulcis, et
nimis salubris consuetudo in tromissa est, ut kirieelcison cum grandi affectu,
accompu^ctione dicatur, placuit etiam ut in ominibus Ecclesiis nostris ista
consuetudo sancta, et ad matutinum, et ad missas, et ad vesperam deo
propitiante intromittatur. Likewise it was enacted in the 6 can of the same
council that the following words, holy, holy, holy, should be said i^mornig
masses, i^ the masses of lent and in those masses which were offered for the
dead, as it was accustomed to be said in solemn Masses the words of the Cou^cil
are these: In omnibus missis, sive matutinis, sive quadragessimalibus sive in
illisquae prodefunctorum commemorationibus siunt semper sanctus, sauctus,
sa^ctus, eo ordine quo ad missas publicas dici debeat, quiatam dulcis, et
desiderabilis vox etiam die noctuque possit dici fastidium non potest generare,
et hoc nobis justum visum est ut nomen Domini Papae quicunque sedi apostolicae
praefuerit in nostris Ecclesiis recitetur. Which Authorieyes do not only make
out the ancient practice of celebreating Masses, but also the Popes supremacy
of which I shall treat in my answer to the 4 point. In the mean time let us
hear the Declarations of other old Councils concerning the present point. We
read in the 18 can: of the council of Agato celebreated the year 506 that the
seculars were then obliged to receive the Communion trice in the year (viz) at
Christemas, haster and Whitsuntide, and in the 47 can of the same cou^cil it is
expres'd that they were obliged to hear mass every sunday. Which plainly
makes. out, that in the primitive Church it was lawful for the Priest to say
mass though none else would receive the Communion along with him; to confirm
which I shall produce the Authorityes of the two following Councils, who sat
above a thousand years ago the fathers of the 12 council of Toleto can* 5,
sharply reprehend'd certain Priests for not receiving the Communion when they
said Masses; which is asign, that they acknowledged the Mass to be lawful
though none would communicate, but only the Priest. And the council of Nant c:
30 (quoted by Ivo p: 3 deer: e 70 ^ prohibit'd the Priests to say mass alone
witho^ut the assistance of one to answer them, which Authority proves the
ancient practice of celebrating private masses, Though Luther and his doctrine
aleadges the contrary) for the fathers of that Council only obliges the Priests
to have clerks to answer them, but mentions not a word of a second person to be
requisite for receiving the communion along with the Priest, for they knew too
well that there was no divine, or Ecclesiastical precept obliging the Priest
not to say Mass, if none else would communicate along with him; and moreover,
that there was no Precept commanding others to receive the Communion as often
as the Priest would celebrat Mass, (for that was left to the peoples own
Devotion) but in the time of the aforesaid solemnityes specified by the council
of Agatho. all which may be confirmed, by St. Chrysostomes words, who in his 3.
Homily on Saint Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, complains, that then the people
were so undevout, that though there was Mass daily celebrat'd yet none of them
Communicated. There are several other Authorityes, that might be produced, for
the further proof of this point, but to avoid tediousness, J will conclude
with the following passage. It Is not pertinent to the Essence of a Sacrifice,
the standers by or those for whom it is offered to be partakers of it: but Mass
is a Sacrifice: therefore it is not pertinent to the essence of Mass the
standers by, or those for whom it is offered to be partakers of it. The major is
evident out of the 6. and 7. chap. of Leviticus, where we read that the Priests
of the old law were commanded to offer Sacrifices and that the standers by or
any of those for whom they were offered did not take the least particle of
them; the minor also is evident, out of the 9 the canon of the Apostles; and
out of the 24 chap: of the 3 Council of Cartage. who sat in the year 397: and
declared mass to be a lawful sacrifice; as for the consequence it is
undeniable, being the argument is in form:

Chap. 2 Prov^ng that the Communion was admi^nistred under one kind in the
Primitive Church
The Authorityes which my adversary defies to be produced do clearly make-out
the ancient pratice of Receiving the Communion under one sole species in the
Primitive Church therefore this doctrine was not first brought in by the
present Chuch of Rome, either in the 6, 7, 8, or 9 age; the consequens is
manifest, as will appear hereafter. As for the anticedent* it may be proved by
the example of Christ himself, Luck c. 24 v: 30. 35 where we read the
following words. It came to pass as he sat at me^t with them, he took bread
and blessed i^ and b^ake, and gave to them. And they told wha^ things were done
in the way, and how he wa^ know^n by them in breaki^g of bread. But there is no
mention made of the cup: no, not in the whole Chapter and St. Hierome in
Paula's epitaph St. Augustine in his 3 book d^ consensu Evangelistarum c: 23
venerable Bede, Theophilactus and several others in the commentary of this
chapter, do^ plainly affirm^, that our saviou^ gave then the blessed sacremen^
to those two disciples? moreove^ we read in the acts of the Apostles [c: 2 v:
42) that the beliver^ Continued steadfastly in the Apostle^ Doctrine and
fellowship, in breakin^ of bread, and in prayers; but w^ see no kind of mention
made o^ the cup, but rather a confirmation of the contrary, as is manifest b^
the 46 verse of the same Chapter: wherefore I may lawfully i^fe^ that our
Savior Jesus Christ did not oblige all the belivers to Communicate in both
species; otherwise certainly himself would not be the first transgressor of his
own law; neither would he promise everlasting life to those who would receive
the communion under the form of bread, as he did, John c. 6 v: 51 saying thus;
I am the living bread, which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever; where by we see plainly that everlasting life is
promised to us, for eating worthily that heavenly bread.

Now let us see did those of the primitive Church ever practice to give the
communion in one sole species; to prove which will produce the Authority and
examples of those, Father^ who then lived. Tertulian, wh^ Lived the year 230,
in is bo^^ of Oration c. 14 and in his book ad Uxorem, c. 5. gives ^^
understand that it was then custom to carry the Euchar^ home for private
Communi^^ St. Ambrose who lived in the Century, relates in his Oration ^^ Obitu
Satyri that then the peop^^ were wont to keep the Euchar^ about them, and that
his o^^ brother Satyras once in a shi^^^rak was miraculously Sa^^ from being
drowned* by the v^tue of the blessed Euchar^ which was tied about his ne^^ St.
Basil, who lived in the same Century expressly affirms (in his Epist: to
Caesaria Patricia) that it was a common practice to bring the Eucharist home to
their houses, and to receive it, when they pleased; which is a manifest sign
that then the people did not always receive the Communion in both species, for
those who took it under the form of wine, received it in the Church from the
Priests, or Deacons; as St. Cyprian relates in his ser. De lapsis, and those
who pleased to bring it home under the form of bread for private Communion were
not hindered; until by reason of several abuses, which happened; the Father of
the Council of Caesaragust: who sat the year 382 Can: 3, prohibit'd it. St.
Denis who lived in the 2 (...) in his book de Eceles: (...) Chap: affir^s that
it was (...) custom to give the Communion to the children under the (...) of
wine, and St. Cyprian, who lived the year 250 in his sermon Delapsis, makes
mention of acertain child, who received the Communion under the form of wine
and also of three more who received it under one sole species. St. Denis of
Alexandria, who has been St. Cyprians contemprory, in his Epists to Tobias,
tells of a certain Priest* who gave a particle of the consecrat'd host to aboy,
in order to bring it, to serapion, who wa^ desparate ill in his dying bead.
Paulinus, who has been very familiar with St. Ambrose and present at his deah,
relates (writing his life) that he received the Communion only under the form
of bread; and St. Basil did the same, as also we read in his Life; which
neither of them would offer to do, if they had believed it to be either against
the doctrine of the Church, or the institution of Christ. Sozomenus in his 8
book c: 5, and Nicepherus in his 13: Book c 7 writes of a certain woman who was
infected by the Macedonian heresy, but thinking to conceal her wickedness, and
pretending before the people, to be a Catholic, she received the blessed
Sacrement under the form of bread from the hand of St. Chrysostom, which
afterward she gave privately to her maid thinking to eat in its sted other
bread, which she brought from home* but it seems, that God Almighty was
pleased to discover her profane intention, for that bread which she thought to
eat, was sude^dly turned into a stone before all the congregation. The
Manichees who abhorred wine (believing it to be the Devils gall) never
Communicated by only under the form of bread: as St. Leos 4 Ser: in ^ent
expressly testifies: but Epiphanius, St. Augustine and several others who writ
of the Manichean errors never mentioned that they erred in Receiving the
Communion in one sole species. But I acknowledge that the Bishops of Italy
about the year. 444. did much Recommend the use of the Chalice, that the
Manichees might be discovered, who lurking amo^ghst the Catholics always
Received the Communion under the form of bread; but never the Chalice and
whosoever then during that Heresy would not at the public Communion of
Easter Receive the Chalice was suspected to be a Manichean; whereby the reader
may plainly see, that the Church has reason to forbid at one time, what it
permits, at an other; Christ having left unto it a dispensing power to alter
all matters of indifferency in the discipline thereof, as the time, place, and
circumstances would require, which St Augustine (in his 118 Epistle openly
declares, and it may be confirmed by St. Paul's first Epistle: to the
Corinthians. c. 11 v. 34. but the Manichean heresy being smothered, the
Receiving of the ^ommunion under one kind was afterward Commonly practiced in
the Church as Hugo de sancto Victore, who lived about the year 1130 relates in
his book

Now before I shall proceed further in my Answer, let the reader observe those
four points, which Commonly have been in practice in the Primitive Church (viz.
that then the people would bring the Eucharist home to their houses under the
form of bread for private Communion.

Secondly that the Communion was sent and given to the sick under the same
form.

Thirdly that infants and children Received the Communion under the form of
wine only:

Fourthly that the Primitive Christians Received publicly in the Churches, the
Communion either under one or both species as they pleased, until the Fathers
of the Council of Constance about the year 1414.) ordered the layties to
Receive in one sole species; not decreeing that the Receivi^g thereof in both
species was unlawful, or ever prohibited before by the Church, but for several
other weighty reasons, of which I shall produce only two.

First, that (thereby) they might supresse and smother the Heresy of certain
Germans and Bohemi^ns who then obstinatly denied the integrety of the Sacrement
to be contained in one sole species.

Secondly that for the future they might preve^t several abuses and
prophanations which formerly happened, when the Chalice was given to the laity,
who through their weak zeal, and cold Devotion permitted very offte^ drops of the
holy blood to be spilt, as St. Chrysostom. ostome (in his first Epistleto
Innocentius, and Eneas Silviusin his dialogue de utraque specie) relate^, which
is against the sub^ime Reveren^e due to this most excell^t Sacrament.

Wherefore it evidently appears, that neither the G^^c^a^, or Lat^nes ever
believed that all which is written in the Gospel touching the Communion under
two species, is to be so universaly understood that it ^on prehends all
Christians* but that they always supposed and believed from the very beginning
of Christianity that one sole spe^^es was s^fficient for a true and lawful
Communion; so that the Council of Constance did but follow the tradition and
Doctrine of all precedent ages, when it defined that the Communion under, one
sole species, was as good, and as sufficient as under both species; and that
those who would Receive it under one kind, would neither contradict the
institution of Christ or deprive themselves of the fruit of this holy
Sacrament; for whether we eat or whether we drink, or whether we do both
together, we always apply the same Death of Jesus Christ, and always Receive
the same substance of the blessed Sacrament, and the same effec^ of grace, for
the true flesh, and blood of Jesus Christ are whoely and ^ntirly contained in
ever^ drop of the blessed blood, an^ in every particle of the blesse^ Host:
(...) as well as he is co^tai^d the whole cup, or in the whole Host or in both,
therefore let no body foolishly belive, that more benefit is Received by
taking the Communion in two species, than in taking it in one alone; for being
that every drop of the blessed blood and every particle of the divided Host, is
a maine Ocean of spiritual Blessings, many of them by the same moral action
Received, affords no more grace then one alone; being that one alone contains
the whole fountain intirly: therefore it appears that it was never our
Saviors intention to oblige all Christians to Receive the Sacrament in both
species, for if this had been his intention, he would certainly institute i^,
in a materia more common to all nations, as he did in the institution of the
Sacrament of baptism; knowing the wine to be so scarce in several parts of the
world, that the poor inhabitants t^ereof could but very seldom, or perhaps
never Receive the Communion for the want of wine, therefore our Saviors
intention was (when he said Drink ^e all of this ^o oblige the Disc^ples who
only then were present, and also their successors w^o are the Priests, that
da^^y offer this most holy Sacrifice under both species, and when he said to
his Disciples John* c 6. v. 63. that the flesh profitteth nothing, his meaning
was, that it profitteth nothing ^o believe his body to be only human flesh
excluding the divine nature as the Jews beliv'd, who denied Christ to be the
son of God.

C^ap 3 provi^g that the Co^m^n Prayers were (...) gen^^ally unde^stood by all
those of the Pr^mitive Church.
The holy scripture encourag^s us to p^ay though we ^^de^stand ^o^ what is said:
the^ef^re ^^is lawful and expedient for us ^o pr^y though we underst^nd no^
(...) is sa^^ the an^^cedent is manifest by S^ Paul^ first Epist: to ^^e,
Cor^nthi^ns, chap. ^4 v. ^ whe^^ ^e says thu^: (...) ^pea^eth ^n (...) unknown
tong^^, ^^eak^^h not (...) men but unto God, for no man understands him. Nay
some times the speaker did not understand what himself said for the gift of
languages and the gift of interpreting languages are two distinct gifts as is
evident by the 11. v. and did not always meet together as may be seen by the
13. v. of the aforsaid chapter for there the Apostle exhorts him who speaks
in an unknown tongue to pray that he may interpret; which is a sign that
ordinaril^ he could not; as is manifest by the 14. v; where he says thus, ^^ I
pray in an unknown (...) spirit p^ay^eth, but (...) underst^n^^^g is
unfruitful where (...) see, that St. Paul (...) un^erstanding to be
unfruitful and not our prayers, when we pray in an unknown tongue; moreover
you see, that St, Paul gives to understand that it is lawful, and not
prohibited to pray in an unknown tongue.

Now let us prove the consequen^e what the Apostles did, and practiced, is
lawful and expedient for us to practice: but the Apostles public liturgies
have been in languages, which were not Generally understood by all the nations
they Converted therefore it is lawful and expedient for our liturgies to be in a
language not generally understood by all nations (...) use them: the major is
evident and I shall prove the Minor ^he Apostles public liturgies were all in
Hebrew, Greec^, Syriack, or Latin, as is manifest by all Ancient writters.)
which were not generally known languages, to all n^r ^alf the Nations by them
converted, and it was also in the same languages those of the primitive Church
had their own public l^turgies, after the Apostles death, as all the
following. Fathers do openly declare St ^iprian (who lived in the 3 Century
expounding the Lords Prayer) affi^ms that then the public liturgy was in
Latin, and St. August^^ ^ in his bookde Dono pe^^e^, chap 13, in his ^. book de
Doct^in Ch^istiana chap. 13, and also expounding the 123. Psalm: and in his 173.
Epistle declares that all the western Churches had their Mass in Latin and St.
Hierome ((...): in (...):) affirms that all the ^^stern Churches had their
Mass in Greek and used St. Basils Greek liturgy: but then the Latin and Greek
were not the vulgar languages of all Nations for before those times there were
several other languages as is manifest, by the acts of the Apostle^: Chap: 2.
V. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. where we read the following words: and they were all filled
with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave
them utterance. and there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men out of
every Nation under heaven, Now when this was noised abroad the mult^^ude came
together and were confounded, because that every man hea^d them speak in his
own language, and they were all amazed, and marvell'd, saying one to an other;
behold, are not all these who speak Galileans, and how hear we every man in our
tongue, wherein we were born. Whereby it plainly appears, that neither the
Apostles or the Fathers of the Primitive Church, ever judged it to be expedient
or necessary to translate the public liturgy into the mother tongue of every
Nation; nor consequently that it was Requisite, that it should be immediately and
expressly understood by every one of the hearers; for they knew too well that
the end, for which the public liturgy has been first instituted. does not
require this: for the drift which the Church had in appoin^ing liturgies, is
that thereby a continual tribute, or homage of prayers, and thanksgivings,
might be publicly offered to God by the Priest and also that the Christians
(by their personal assistance at this public service might unanimously
exercise exterior acts of Religion agreei^g With the whole Church represented
by the Ecclesiastical meeting of every pious congregation: moreover that every
Christian by his presence at this service, might consent to the public
Prayers, and thanksgiving of the Church, in order to be made partaker of the
graces, fruits, and benefits, which the Church commonly obtaines by its
liturgies and public oblation, for when the Priest celebrats Mass, or says
any publck prayers belonging to it, he offers them to God for the people
present, for the whole Church, or for any other necessity of the people who are
absent: so that it matters not, whether the people understands him or no:
because they have as much benefit by his prayers, and oblation as if they had
understood what he says; for if they hear him not speaking aword, they might
be partakers of his prayers, and intercession, being God to whom they are
offered, hears and understands him: for in Sacrifices, Prayers, and
thanksgivings; the Priest speaks not to the Congregation, but to God: according
to that of St. Paul's first Epist: to the Corinth: c 14. v 2: which is
Confirmed by the following example: when any man lays sick, or in distress at
home, he sends to the Church to be prayed for, by the Priest, and Congregation:
now, shall we believe? because he neither hears, or understands the prayers
offered for him, that he obtains no benefit thereby? no, (the Lord forbid) for
if so, the Prayers of the Righteous would avail nothing, which is against that
of St, James. c. 5. v. 15 16: and which is more, we would never be the better
for our Saviors intercession for us* to his heavenly Father because we neither
hear nor understand him, or know when he interceds for us: yet we Receive
innumerable benefits by his intercession: and also by the Priests intercession,
when he Celebrats Mass, or says any other public office or prayers
instit^ted by the Church: for in this Common office he represents our Saviors
place one earth: and we are certain that the fervent Prayers of a Righteous man
avails much, according to that of St. James c. ^ v. 15. 16. whether we
understand them, or no^ for their effects do not depend of our intelligence,
but rather of the acceptance of God Almighty, to whom they are offered.

But now ^o discover the folly of those who do uncharitably censure the Church
of Rome for having her Common Pray^rs in an unknown tongue: let them know, that
there are many Millions of the said Church, who do understand it in Latin and
those who do not, that they are so well instructed by the C^ergy, that they
know when to kneel, when to stand, when to Pray* when to give thanks* and when
to do reverence, and when not: besides they have the most part of the Mass if
not the whole, in their English, Italian, French, Dutch, and Spanish prayer
book^: which also was formerly in the Irish prayer books* and would continue so
still; but that the penna^ laws of that Kingdom (in Qeen Elizabeth's reign)
prohibited any Irish Schools; which obliged them to use their Prayers in Latin
and English? exceptsome of the vulgar, who were not able to allow their Children
Schooling to learn either of them: yet they have traditionaly from their Clergy
and parents their prayers: and other necessary instructions in Irish, taught
them by word of mouth, and also that part of the Mass wherein they might have
any doubt, or scrouple. So that it is not said in Latin by the Priest, to the
intent that the people might not understand him; or to the intent that the
flock might be keept in darkness (as some of the pretended Reformers do falsely
report) but to the intent that the holy Catholic Church in her Liturgies
might use one general, and Common language, wherein all Nations do
indisputably agree, and which is more practiced than any other langauge, by the
whole world; so that if one trav^ls through all Europe, he shall always find the
same liturgy used in all Catholic Churches which conformity is a manifest
sign of good Government, which is in the Church of Rome.

Chap 4 Proving the Pope of Rome's Supremacy in the Premitive Church.
Christ's promise to St. Peter, and the charge which he committed unto him
after his resurrection, requires some ch^ef and Universal Pastor in the Church*
whom all the rest ought to obey: but it was always beliv'd in the Primitive
Church. St. Peter and his successor (the Pope of Rome) to have been that chief
and Universal Pastor: therefore it was always believed in the Primitive
Church, St. Peter and his successor (the Pope of Rome) to have been the chief
and Universal Pastor, whom all the rest ought to obey: the minor and
consequence are manifest: as shall appear hereafter. In the mean time, let us
hear our Savior's Promise to St. Peter. Matt: Chap 16. v: 18, and I say also
unt^ yo^, that thou art Peter, and upon this (...) I will ^uild my Church, and
the Gates of H^l^ shall not prevail against it. By which words our Savior
promised the Supreme Government of the whole Church on Earth, to St Peter: as
all the following Fathers and Doctor^, do openly Declare. Origines Homily 5 in
Exo^um, Tertullian in his book de Praescrip: St, Cyprian in his Epist: to
Quintus: St Athanasius in his Epist: to Felix: St. Basil in his book against
Eunomius St. Hilarious and St. Hierome expounding the aforsaid text: St.
Chrysostom Hom: 55. in Matt: St. Cyrill of Alexandria in his 2 book c 1: in
Ioann: St, Ambrose ser: 47, and in his book de Isaac c. 3, St. Leo ser: 11. of
our Saviors Passion, and in his 2 ser: of St. Peter and St. Paul, St, Augustine
in Psalm: Contra partem Donati, and in his 2 book against Gaudentius Epistles, c
23. which promise was effectually fullfil'd after Christ's Resurrection, as all
the aforsaid Fathers do Testify: and it manifestly appears by our Savior's
own words: John c. 21, v. 15 16. and 17 where we read that Christ Commanded St.
Peter thrice consequently to feed the flock, saying thus: feed my Lambs, feed
my Lambs, feed my Sheep, which words do plainly make-out, that it was our
Savior's intention to appoint Peter the Supreme head and chief pastor over all
Christians, under himself on earth: which is further Confirmed ^y the following
Testimonies. S. Denis the Areopagite (cited by S Damascen ora: 2. de dormitione
Deiparae affirms, that he and Timothy were both present: at the blessed V^rgin
Mar^'s death, to be hold that body, which gave the beginning of life: and that
there was also present both fames, and Peter the Supreme, and most an^^ent top
of Divines S, Irenaeus (who lived in the 2 Age, in his 3 book c 3) says, that
all Churches round about ought to resort the Roman Church, by reason of her
more pow^rfull Principality. Tertullia (who lived in the ye^^ 2^^, in his boo^
call'^ Scorpia^u^ (...), speaking to a heretic) says thus: so al^ho' you
th^^k heaven to be still (...) ^p: remember the Lord to have lef^ her it is
^eres, with P^ter, and by Peter to the Church. Origines (who lived about the
same time Ho^ 5 in Exodus: says thus: Ob^^rve what the Lo^d said to that great
f^^ndation of the Church, and most solid ^oc^ upon whom Christ built his Church
And o^ the 6 Chap. of S. Paul's. Epist: to the Rome: he also says, the
fol^owing whords: when the c^i^f char^^ of f^^di^g Christ*s sheep was given to
S. Peter, and the Church found^d upon him -- there was requ^r'd of him the
Confess^on of no virtue, but of Charity. S. Cyprian (who also lived in the same
Century. Epist to Julian) says thus: we hold Peter to ^e the h^^d and root of
the Church. Epist: 5, he says the following words: Peter upon whom the Church
ha^^ been bui^^ spo^e for all, aswe^i^g in the Church's name say^g, ^^nd to
whom shall we go: and in hi^ 71. Epist: he also sa^es thus: Peter whom the Lord
first choes'd, and upon whom he built his Church St. Epiphanius, who lived in
the year 3^0 sayes' (heresy 51) that Christ cho^s'd Peter first in order to
ma^^ him the Captain of his Discipl^s; and heresy 5^, ^e calls St. Peter the
^ri^ of the Apostles, St. Ambrose, who also lived about that same time, in his
Commentary on St. Paul's Epist: to the Gala: c. 1, speaking of St. Paul says
thus: I^ was ^it, that he longed for to see Peter, who was the chiefest of the
Apostle^, to whom our Savior entrusted the care of all the Churches. and also
in his Commentary on St Paul's 2. Epist: to the Corin: c* 12, he says: Andrew
first f^llow^^ ^ur Savior, yet Andrew Received not the s^premacy, but Peter.
Optatus, who lived in the year 365. says thus (in ^is 2. book against
Perminian) there is o^e chai^^, and you dar^ not deny to ^now that the chai^^
was first bestowed unto Peter in the City of Rome, where Peter the head f^ll
the Apostles continued. S. Basil (who also lived in the ^ame age in his ser: de
Iudicio dei) calls Peter that blessed one, who was preferred before the rest of
the Apostles. ^usebius Emissenus (who also live,d about the same time, in his
ser: de nativi: St. Joan* speaking of Christ) says that he first com^itted his
Lambs, afterward his sheep to Peter, bec^u^e he made him not only pastor, but
p^stor of pastors; and Ecumenius, who like wise then lived, says the following
words, in his commentary on the 1. Cap. of the acts, Not James, but Peter
raised up, as being both more fervent, and also the president of the Disciples.
S. Cyrill of Jerusalem (^ho lived in the same Century, Catech: 2: says thus,
Peter the Prince and most excellent of all the Apostles St Hierome (who lived,
in the year ^90, in his first book against the Pelagians c 14) calls, Peter,
the Prince of the Apostles, upon whom the Lord's Church has been built: and
also in his first book against Jovinian Cap. 14, he says, That one of the
twelve was choesen to be the head of the rest that the occ^sion of s^hisme
might be prevented St. Chrysostom, [who lived in the same time, in his 2 Hom:
de paenit: in Psalm. 50) calls St Peter the pillar: of the Church, the
foundation of the faith and the head of the Apostolical qu^re: and in his last
Hom: on Io^n he says, that the charge of the brothers (that is to say, of the
Apostles) and of the whole wh^^ld was c^mmited to Peter and also in his 55 hom:
on Matt: he says; that the pastor and he^d of the Church was onc^ a poor
fisherman. Theodoretus who lived in the year 430. says thus, [in his Epist: to
Leo.) Paul that preacher of the truth, and trumpet of the holy Ghost, run'd to
great Peter, that he might bring his Sentence to those, who indeavor*d, to
establish the legals in Antioch. S Augustine who lived in the same age in his 24
Ser: de Temp: ^ cas^'s Peter, the governer of the Church. And in his 68. Epist:
he calls him, the head of the Apostles, the gate keeper of heaven, etc. and in
his last Treatise in Joan: he says thus: whom Peter by reason of the Supremacy
of his Apostle-ship etc. S. Leo (who lived in the year 440, in his 3 ser: de
Aslump: sua ad Pon^i^:) says the following words: out of the whol^ world one
Peter ^is cho^sen, who is preferred before all people, and before the Apostles,
and before all the fathers of the Church, and although among the people of God
the^ be many Priests, and many pastors, ye^ Peter particularly governs them all
and Christ governs them principaly S Gregory (in his 4. ^ook 32. E. pist: which
is to Mauritius the Emperor) says: that it was ma^ifes^ to all that knew the
^hosple, the charge of the wh^le Church to have been committ^d by the lord to
Peter the Prince of all the Apostle. And the General Council of Calcedon,
wherein 630 Father^ were assembled, called (action 3) S. Peter the Rock and
pillar of the Church. All which proofs do sufficiently make-out, that it was
always believed, and acknowledged, by those of the Primitive Church, St. Peter
to have been instituted a supreme pastor: but the same charge still remains,
being the office of a pastor is an ordinary, and a perpetual office and as long
as there are sheep to be feed, so long there ought to be a pastor to feed them.
which because St. Peter did not perform in his own person those many hundred
years; there must needs be some other lawful successor, to execute the office
in his place: for we see by daily experience many strifes and contentions to
happen amonghst the flock, in matters of faith and discipline: who then shall
appease and reconcile them? you will say the Bishops; but how often does
differences of this sort araise, and happen amonghst the Bishops themselfs?
perhaps you will answer, that they ought to appeal to Primates and Patriarchs:
but what if they be also at variance? as Flavianus and Dioscorus, Cyrill and
Nestor were: peradventure you may say: that they ought to go to temporal
princes, and civil Magistrates: but it is not their part to engage themselves in
Ecclesiastical affairs; and their factions may be more dangerous then any of
the former: to whom then shall the people appeal? it will be said, to a general
Council: but who shall summon? who shall order? or who shall direct, and guide
that assembly? what if they decline from the true faith of Jesus Christ? as the
Council of Ariminium, the second Council of Ephesi^^' and several other
Schismatical Councils did? who then shall Judge their case? who shall deside
their dissentions? unless some certain head be appointed by the divine
providence of the holy Ghost: whose decrees are infallible and whose censures
ought to be obeyed, and in respect of whom St. Peter may be still said to
perform^ his duty, and feed the sheep entrusted to his charge? as the premises
do plainly make-out

Now let us see, if those of the Primitive Church did belive, and acknowledge,
the Popes of Rome (successively from age to age, since Peter's death) to have
been that Supreme head of the Universal Church (as St Peter was in h^s own
time, St. Irenous, who lived in the year 180, in his 3 book Chap 3) says, the
following words: The fou^ders of the Church delivered the Episcopa^y of
over-seeing the Church to Linus, and Anacletus succeeded Linus, Clemens,
Anacletus, Evaristus, Clemens: etc. numbering all the rest of the Popes of Rome,
who governed the Church, from St. Peter's time, to that very instant St. Basil
(who lived, in the 4 Century, in his 52 Epist: which is to St. Athanasius)
says thus: It is convenient, that we should write to the Bishop of Rome, that
he might take notice of what is done here, and produce his sentence -- and use
his Authority in the case, and choese some sound men -- who can c^rrect those
stoburn and cross people, that are here with us -- and cancel what has been
done, by force ud viol^nce in Ariminium. St. Athauasius (in his Ep: written in
the name of all the Bis^ops in Egypt, to Mark Pope of Rome) says the
following words: To the holy and Venerable Mark, Pope of the Universal Church,
ruler of the holy Aposto^ical sea -- we desire (by the Authority of your holy
sea which is the Mother, and h^ad of all Churches,) that we may know by the
present legates, what ought to be done, for the recovery and correction of the
faith full Orthodox; for being supported by your Authority, and s^r^nthn'd by
your Prayers, we can escape safe from the enemies of God's Church, and ours --
and and be able to root-out those committed unto us. such an other convincing
Authority may be seen, in St Athanasius's Epist: to Felix, and also in St,
Cyprian's Epistles, to Cornelius, Lucius, and Stephen, Popes of Rome. St,
Hierome (in his Epistle, to Pope Damas) says thus: although your grande^^
terrisies me yet y^^r mildness invicts me I do crave from the Priest, the
victim of Salvation, from the Pastor, succo^r to a sheep -- I speak to the
succ^ssor of the fisher, and disciple of the cross, following none bu^ Christ,
I do join with your holiness in communion, that is to say, with the chaier of
Peter, for I know the Church to have been built upon that Rock: whosover shall
eat the ^amb out of this house, is profane: St Crysostome (in his first Epist:
to Pope Innocentius beseeches him, to declare the proceedings of the Eastern
Bishops void, and of no effect, and to punish (with Ecclesiastical Censure) the
promoters of the discord, and in his 2 book (de Sacerdotio Ch^p ^^ he syes the
fallowing words (speaking of Christ) why did he s^ed his own blood? certainly
it was to purchase those sheep, whose care he committed both to Peter, and to
Peter's succesors, Theodoretus (in his Epist. to Pope Leo) says thus: I do
expect the sentence of your Aposlolical sea, and I humbly beseech, and Pray
your holiness, that your just and upright judgment may a^de me, appealing to
you, and command m^ to come before you: and in his Epist: to Renatus, he also
says thus: I beseech you to persuade the most holy Archbishop Leo to use his
Apostolical Authority and command me to appear, at your Council, for that holy
sea has, the Government of all Churches through the whole world: St Augustine (in
his 262 Epist: which is to Pope Caele^stinus) says the following words: I
congratulate your merits, that our Lord estab^ish'd you in that sea, without
any opposion of the people, secondly I do inform your holiness of what is
committed near us here that, not only by praying for us, but also by advising
and assisting us, you may rel^ef us -- I beseech you through the blood of Christ
and remembrance of the Apostle Peter's who admonished the chifest of the
Christian people) not to sufer these things to be done. All which Authorityes
do plainly make-out, that the holy Fathers and Doctors of the primitive Church
firmly believed, and acknowledged, the Popes of Rome to have been (successively
from age, to age,) the Supteam head of the Universal Church on earth: Which may
be further confirmed by the continual practice, and consent of several Nations:
who in the primitive Church appealed to the Popes of Rome: acknowledging each
of them [in his own time to have been Christ's Vicar-generall on earth: As for
exemple, to whose high tribunal did Flavianus the Patriarch of Constantinople
appeal from the ^ Ephesian Council^ but to that of Leo Pope ^ Rome: as
Liberatus in his breviate c 12. writes; whose assistance di^ Athanasius Bishop
of Alexandr^ (deposed by the Aerians] implore^ but the assistance of Mark
Feli^ and Julius, Popes of Rome: ^ St. Athanasiu's own Epistles (^ the
aforsaid) do expressly testifi^ and also Sozomenus, in his; boo^ c. ^. Under
whose wings, did S^ Chrysostom fly, for justice? (beit deposed by Theophilus,
and h^ adherences) but under the win^ of Innocentius the first: as appea^ by St
Chrysostom's 1. and 2. Epi^^ to the same To whom did For^^ na^us, and Felix
(being deposed Africa) appeal? but to Corneli^ Pope of Rome. as St. Cyprian ^^
his first book Epist: 3: declares. To whom did Basilide^ appeal? but to Pope
Stephen, as St. Cyprian testifies, Epist: 68. To the Pope of Rome, Valent, and
Ursacius came to give an account of their treachery against St. Athanasius, and
to crave pardon for the same as Epiphanius (heresy 68 relates) Marcion (being
excommunicated by his own Bishop in Asia (came to Rome, to be absolved by P^us
the first: as St. Epiphanius relates, (heresy 42) who deposed Anthimus, the
Patriarch of Constantinople? and established in his place Mena; but Agapetus
the Pope, as Liberatus affirms in his b^eviat^ 62. and also Zonarias, writi^g
the life of Justinian. Who deposed Flavianus the Patrian of Antioch? but Pope
Danias, Theodoret relates, in his 5 ^^^ c 23 who deposed Polychron^ Bishop of
Jerusalem* about ^ year 434, but Pope Sixtus the as appears, in the acts of
Six^ Who deposed Dioscorus Paarch of Alexandria? but the of Rome: as Gelatius's
Epistle the Dardanian Bishops, expre^^ declares: wherein he also rela^ that Pope
Julius the first, reslo^^ Athanasius Alexa^drinus, Pau^ Constantinopolitanus,
and Mar^lus Ancyranus to their own Bi^^opricks. who reestablished Pe^ (St.
Athanasius successor be wrongfully deposed by the A^^ans) but Pope Damas: as
Sozo^ ^us affirms, in his 6 bo^k c: 9. who ^estor'd Theodoretus (being also
^rongfull^ deposed, by the A^^i^ns in the 2 Ephesian svnod, but Pope Leo: as is
manifest by the first action of the General Council of Calcedon.

It was, only the Popes of Rome, that had (i^ the Primitive Church) their
deputies, and Vicargenerals in all foraign and remote Countries (viz.)
Anastasius Bishop of Thesalo^ica, in the Orient: as a^pears by St. Leo's 84
Epist: Potentius' in Africa as the same Leo's 87 Epist declares: A^acius
Patriarch of Constantino^le, in Egypt: whom the Pope of Rome, commanded to
depose the Bishop of Alexandria, as Gelatius, relates in his Epist to the
Dardanian Bishops. Celestinus Pope of Rome, Authorized St. Cyrill of Alexandria
to proc^ed against Nestor (then Bishop of Counstontinople) as appears by
Caelestinus's Ep: to St Cyrill: which is to be seen in St. Cyrill's 4. tome,
where also St Cyrill declares) in his Epist: to those of Counstantinople) that
the charge of that Bishopric, was committed unto himself by the Bishop of
Rome. Pope Hormisda instituted Salustius (Bishop of Sevil) his Vicargeneral
through Spain, and Portugal, as appears by the said Hormista's Epist: to the
same: and St, Gregory instituted Vigilius Bishop of Orleance to be his
Vicargeneral, through all France: as may beseen, in St Gregory's 4th. book Epist:
52.

It was also the Pope of Rome's Legates, that were Presidents in the General
Councils of the Primitivc Church, as for example; Hosius, Vitus, and
Vincentius, St, Sylvester's Legates, have been presidents in the General
Council of Nice: as Cedrinus in his Compendio, Potius in his book de 7,
Synodis, and St: Athanasius in his Epist (to those, who lead a solitary life)
do relate. St Cyrill of Alexandria, Pope Caelestinu's Legate preceded, in the
Council of Ephesias as Liberatus in his Breviate c, 15. and Evagrius in his
first book c. 4: do write. Paschasius L^c^^sius, and Bonifacius, St. (...)
Legates, were Presidents in the General Council of Calcedon, a^ is evident by
the ^ action of ^he ^ame Cou^cil, and also by S Leo's 47 Epist: Arch^d^mus, and
Philaxen^s Julius the first's Legates, pre^e^^d in the General Council of
Sard^s: as St. Athanasius in his ^ Apology, and Theodoretus in his a book c 15,
do declare.

It was, only to the Pope of Rome, the decrees and Canons, of all General, and
famous Councils, where sent (in the primitive Church) in order to be approved,
and confirmed, by his holiness: as for example: it was, to St. Sylvester Pope
of Rome, the Fathers of the Council of Nice, sent a letter most humbly
beseeching his holiness, to Ratify and confirm, the decrees of the said
Council: which letter is to be seen in the second Tome of the Councils. The
Fathers of this Council, were in number, 318, and sat in the year 325. The
Fathers of the General Cou^cil of Constantinople (being in number 150,
assembled in the year 381) writ to Damas Pope of Rome, by (Cyriacus Eusebius,
and Pris^ianus, Bishops) praying him, to aprove and confirm their Canons: this
Councils letter, is to be seen in Theodoret's 5th. book c. 9. The decrees of
the General Council of Ephes^s (wherein 200 Fathers sat, in the year 431) were
sent to Pope Celestinus, in order to be confi^m'd: as St. Cyrill's Epist:
testifies: which Epistle is to be seen in the 3 Tome of the Councils. The
Fathers of the General Council of Calcedon (being in number 630, and sat in
the year 451) sent their Canons, to Pope Leo, in order to be confirmed, by him:
as appears, by the said Council's Epistle to the same; which is to be seen in
the 4th: Tome of the Councils. The Fathers of the Milevian Council, sent their
Canons to Pope Innocentius the first, (in the year 416) to be confirmed: as
appears, by this Council's Epistle; which is to be seen* in the 1 Tome of the
Cou^cils. The Fathers of the Council of Carthage, sent their Canons, (the year
356, to be confirmed, by Pope Stephen: as is manifest by their own Epistle,
which is to be seen in St. Cyrill's 2 book, and also in the first Tome of the
Councils

I might produce several other convincing proofs, concerning this point; but
that I may be easy to the reader: I will conclude, only with these followi^g
Councils, who sat, in the Primitive Church and acknowledged in their very
Canons, the Pope of Rome's Supremacy (viz.) the 20 chap: of the Council of
Rome, who sat in the year 324. The 3 chap: of the 3. and 4th: Council of Rome,
who sat in the year 502. The 3, 4th and 9th Canon, of the Council of Sardis,
wherein 376 Fathers were. The 6th Canon of the General Council of Nice. The 5
Cano^ of the General Council of Constantinople. The 1, 2, 3, and 16. Action of
the General Council of Calcedon, who says thus: (in the 16th) we thoroughly
consider ^ruly, that all Pr^macy and chief honor, is to be keept, for the Arch
Bishop of old Rome.

Chap: 5 Proving, that the Real Presence, was believed by those of the
Primitive Church
The very words of Jesus Christ, and also the Authentical Testimonies of the
holy Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive Church do clearly affirm, that
Christ's true body and blood, are Really and Substantially present, in the holy
Sacrament: therefore this Doctrine was not newly brought-in, since the
Primitive Church: the consequens is most certain, as we shall see here-after,
and I prove the first part of the Anticedent, by our Savior's own words, John
c 6 v 51, where he says thus: I am the living bread, which came down from
heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread that
I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. But then
the Jews wanting true faith, said one to an other: how can this man give u^
his flesh to eat v 52. certainly then our Savior (who came to this world to
instruct, and lead us, out of all darkness, to the true light) hearing the
Jews murmuring so, and doubting of what he said to be true, would explain the
aforesaid words, if he had any mystical meaning: but he was so far from so
doing, that he confirmed and repeated them again, over and over^ as is manifest
by the 53 54 etc. v: where we read the following words. then Jesus said unto
them, verily verily I say unto ye, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in ye: whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has eternal life and I will raise him up at the last day:
for my flesh is meat indeed and my blood is drink indeed: he that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I (...) him: as the living
Father has sent me and I live by the Father: so he that eats me, even he
shall live by me. This is the bread which came down from heaven: not as your
Fathers did eat ^anna, and are dead, he that eats of this bread shall live
for ever. So that every faithful and sincere Christian may plainly understand,
that if our Savior then had not meant, that he was to give his own true flesh
and blood to be really eaten and drank, that he would not so proceed, in
confirming what he said in the beginning, and also that he would not suffer his
own disciples to part without declaring his mind to them, as he did often
before when he spo^e in parables; neither would he declare, at his last supper,
that he gave to his discples, his own body and blood saying thus: Take eat,
this his my b^dy: and he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying drink ye all of it; for his is my blood of the new test^me^t, which
shall be sh^d for many for the remission of sins. Matt: c 26 v: 26 27 and 28

I leave it to all faithful Christians, seriously to be considered; whether
Christ gave, only figuratively his own body and blood, for the remission of our
sins, or his real body and blood? If he gave them really for our Salvation;
he also gave them really t^ his disciples, as his own word^ do manifestly
affirm; to deny which, is of no less consequence, than to charge Christ with
untruth: or at lest that he had not words significant, to explain his
intention; which is rash and impious to judge of his infinite power: therefore
all Christians are obliged not to mistrust of the truth of Christ's words, or
doubt of their literal sense, in the aforesaid text: for being we acknowledge,
that Christ is omnipotent, and consequently that it is in his Power to make of
the bread and wine his own flesh and blood, (by his divine benediction) we
ought not to doubt of what he said to be true; and if in case he had not
expressed so plainly his mind unto us, concerning this mystery, we ought to
believe it firmly, by St, Paul's testimonye (^ae Corinth: c: 11 v: 23 24 etc.)
saying thus: for I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
ye; that ^he Lord Jesus (the same night in which he w^^ betrayed) ^ooke bread,
and when he had given thanks, he brake and said, take eat, this is my body
which shall be ^^liver'd for ye thi^ do ye in remembran^e of m^: afte^ the ^ame
manner also he took the c^p when he had supped, saying this cup is the new
testament, in my blood, this do ye, as often as ye drink it in remembrance of
me; for as often as ye eat th^s br^ad and drink this cup, ye do show the
Lords death till be come. whosoever shall ^at this bread, ^^ drink this cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the ^o^d. By
which words St Paul openly declares, that Christ gave his own body and blood to
his disciples, at his last supper; and also he affirms, himself to have been
taught this doctrine, by the Lord; and that he deliever'd the same, to the
Corinthians, that there by he might persuade them not to doubt of what he said
to be true; but to firmly believe the real presence, being it was the Lords
doctrine delieuer'd unto him, in order to teach it to the Christians.

Now let us hear the Authorityes of the holy Fathers and Doctors of the
Primitive Church, wherewith I shall prove the second Part of the antecedent.
St. Ignatius (the Apostles Disciple. in his Epist: to those of Smyrna, ci^ed by
Theodoret in his ^ Dialogue) says thus: they ^^mit not the Eucharists and
o^lations, because they confess not the Euch^r^st to be the fles^ of our
Savior, who suffered for ou^ sinne^. Let the reader take ^otice of those
heretics, against whose principles St Ignatius speaks in the aforsaid text:
for they rejected the Eucharist, lest they would be forced to confess, that
Christ had true flesh: but if the Eucharist had not then been believed to be
Christ's ^rue flesh, those heretics could have no kind of reason to re-ject it,
for they did no^ deny the figure or Image of Christ but what they denied was,
tha^ Christ had true flesh. The like argumen^ may be formed against the Jews
admiration (hearing the word* of Christ John c: 6 v. 51 etc.) for if then the
jews would believe that Christ was to give his flesh only in figure and
remembrance, they would have no reason to murmur, or to mistrust the truth of
Christ's words: so that it manifestly appears, that the Jews supposed, that
Christ meant his true flesh; and also that those heretics of the prmitive
Church believed and acknowledge, that it was then some of the Catholick^
Doctrine, to believe that Christ's true flesh, was really present in the holy
Eucharist St. ^^ustin Martyr (who lived in the year 150, in his 2 Apology to
Antoninus) says thus: we do not receive this as common bread, or as common
drink, but as the son of God Jesus Christ ou^ Savior in^^rnate, had flesh and
blood for our salvation, so -- are we taught, that the Eucharist is the flesh
and blood of the same Jesus incarnate St Irenaeus (who lived in the same
Century, speaking of the heretics of the Synagogue, who denied, Christ to have
been the son of God) says the following words: [in his 4th book c 34) how can
they be assured, the bread in which thanks are given to be the body of our
Lord, and the chalice his blood? if they acknowledge him not to be the son of
the maker of the world. Tertullian (who lived in the year 230) says thus: (in
his book of the resurrection of the flesh) the flesh is washed, that the soul
may be cleaned, the flesh is anointed, that the soul may be consecrated the
flesh eats of the body and blood of Christ: that the soul may be ^urish'd.
Orig^n^s (who lived in the same age,) says thus (hom: 7th in Eum: speaki^g of
the old law) th^n the manna was meat in figure, but now the flesh of God, is
meat inspecie, as himself says. my flesh is m^at in deed; and in his 5th Hom:
in diversa loca Evangely (speaking of the Centurian) he says the follwing
words: when you receive the holy meat and uncorrupted banquet, when you receive
the bread and cup of ^ief* you eat and drink the body and blood of the Lord,
then the Lord inters into your house; you therefore (humbling yourself)
immitate this Centurian, and say^ o Lord I am not worthy, that thou sho^^est
inter into ^y house. St Cypria^ who lived in same Century, in his 5th: ser: de
Lapsis) says thus Violence is inferred to his body and blood and they offend
now more the Lord wi^^ their hands and mou^h, than when the denied the Lord,
and in his ser: o^ the Lords supper, he also says the following words: the
doctrine of this Sacrament is streange, ^ the Evangelical schools publi^h'd
(...) this doctrine, and it first appeared to the world by Christ the teacher
thereof, the Christians should drink blood, who drinking is most strictly
forbidden ^^ the Authority of the old law -- but ^^ Gospel commends to drink
it. Before I shall proceed further, I mu^^ take notice of St. Cyprian's words
positively affirming, that this Doctrine of the real presence has been first
taught by Christ, and his Disciples, and also that Christians are commanded to
drink blood, which was prohibited by the old law: for the old law^ did not
prohibit to drink blood in figure, or in remembrance; for the Jews did drink
the blood of Christ figuratively, in drinking the water, which flowed our of
the Rock: therefore that which was prohibited by the old law, was only to
drink true and real blood: but St. Cyprian clearly affirms, that the Gospel
comma^ds the Christians to drink that, which was prohibited by the old law:
therefore St. Cyprian affir^ that the Christians are comman^ed by the Gospel,
to drink t^^ and real blood, and consequen^ not in figure, as my adversa^
would feign persuade. St. Hila^us (who lived in the 4th: Cent^ry, in his 18th:
book of the T^nity, says thus: If the word be t^^ incarnate, we do truly
receive the w^^ flesh -- of the flesh and blood's ^^^ there is noe room left
for being doubt, for by the Lord's own confes^ and by our faith, it is truly
flesh truly blood -- let us read what is wri^^ and let us understand what we
r^^ and then we will perform the dut^ perfect faith, for according to the tural
truth of Christ in us, what ^^ we learn, unless we learn it from ^ we learn it
imprudently, and impiously; f^r he said, my fl^^h is meat in deed etc. St.
Cyril of Jerusalem (who lived in the some Century, Catech: 4) say^^ the
following words. This of St. Paul's Doctrine can sufficiently make ye most
certain concerning the divine mysteries -- and seeing Christ himself so
affirms, and says of the bread, this is m^ body: wh^ afterward can presume to
doubt? and the same also saying and confirming, this is my blood; who I say can
doubt? and say, that it is not his blood. St. Ambrose (who also lived in the
same Century, in his book de Mysterys Initiandis c 9th:) says the following
words: Perhaps you may say; I see the contrary; how can you affirm to me, that
I can receive Christ's body? and this now we are to prove: therefore w^ use
great examples, that we may prove this not to be what nature formed, but what
benediction consecrated; and the benediction to be of more power, than the
natur^s, because even ^he very nature is converted by the benediction; Moses
threw a rod, which he converted into a serpent, and aft^rwards he took the
serpent's tail and converted the same into a rod: therefore you see the nature
of the serpent, and of ^he rod to have been twi^e changed by a Prophetical
benediction -- If human benediction be of such power, that it can change
nature; what do we say to the divine consecration? where the very words of the
Lord our Savior, do work, for the Sacrame^^ which you receive is perfected by
the words of Christ, what if Elias's words were of such force that they could
draw fi^e out of he^ven? will not Christ's w^rds be able to change the nature of
the elements? Of all the works in the world you have read! because he said and
they were made, he commanded and they were created: therefore Christ's words
which could make that which was not, of nothing, can they not change these
things, which are, into that, which they were not? for it is not less to give
things new beings, than to change their natures: but why do w^ use arguments?
but let us use his own examples, and prove the truth of this mystery by the
Incarnatio^'s example: did the course of nature take place, when the Lord was
born of Mary? -- it is manifest that the Virgin conceived contrary to the order
of nature, and this body which we perform is of the Virgin. Why do you i^quire
here the c^u^se of (...) Ch^^st's body? when the Lord himself w^^ ^or^ of the
Virgin beyond the co^rs^ of nature. Sur^ly the true flesh of Christ was
crucified; and buried, truly th^n the s^crament i^ of that same flesh. Though
what I have already produced of this eminent Doctor's, Authority might satisfy
any impartial reader; yet I will add these other Authorityes of his,
confirming the same: in his 4th: book de Sacram: c: 5. he says thus: The Lord
Jesus Christ declared unto us, that we receive his own body and blood, why
should we doubt of his Authority, and testimoney, and in his 6th: book c, 1, he
also says thus: as our Lord Jesus Christ, is the true son of God -- even so it
is true flesh, which we receive, as himself said. St. Gregory Naz^anzen (who
lived in the same age, in his 2 Oration de Pascha^e) says, the followings
words: eat the body and drink the blood, without confusion and doubt -- be
constant firm, and steadfast, you need not be any thing troubled in mind, for
the adversary's discourse. St Ephrem, (who lived in the year 365, in his book
de Natura Dei minima Scrutanda c: 5) says the following words: why do you
trackout unsearchable things? If you search curiously these things; new you
will not be called faithful, but curious, be faithful and innocent partake of
the immaculate body of thy Lord, with full faith, being sure that you do eat
the entire lamb, the mysteries of Christ are everlasting fire, do not rashly
sear^^ them over, ^est you should burn in their search. St. Epiphanius (who
lived in the year 370, in his book named Ancoratus] says thus: We see tha^ our
Savior took in his hands (as the Evangelist has) -- and when he gave thanks,
he said this is my body -- and none mistrusts his words, for he wh^ dose not
believe, it to be his true fle^h falls from grace and life; and in a another
place (cited by the Fathers of the 7th: General Council, in the 6th: Action) he
says the following words: Never shall ^o find our Lord, or his Apostles, or
the Fathers, saying that the unbloody sacrifice, which is offered by the
Priests, is an Image, but his very body and blood St. Hierome (who lived in the
year 390, Epist: to Hedib:) says thus: but let us know, that the bread which
the Lord brake and gave to his Disciples was the Lord our Saviors body;
himself saying to them, take ye, and eat this is my body. St, Chrysostom, (who
lived the year 398, Hon: ^1 in Matt:) says, the following words: he who
bestowed his own life for you, why will he s^orn to give you his own body?
therefore let us h^arken the Priests -- how noble how admirable is that thing,
which is granted unto us -- he has given us, his own flesh etc. He also says
thus: (Hom: 53) Let us believe God, let us not contradict him, although what he
says, may seem strange to our sense and imagination, for it surpas^es our
sense and reason. I beseech you, what may we suppose of his words in all
things, chiefly in mysteries not only considering ^hese things, which lays
before us, but also his words, for we cannot be deceived by them, but our
senses may easily be deceived: his words cannot be false -- therefore because
he said this is my body, let us he convinced by noe ambiguity, but let us
believe, and perceive this, with the eyes of our understanding -- O how many
now says! I would fain se^ his face, and countenance, I would wish to see his
garments; -- therefore you see him, you feel him, you eat him, you desire to
see his garments, truly he delivered himself to you, not only that you may see
him, but also that you may touch him, and intertain him, in yourself, In his 3.
book de sacerdotio, he says thus: he that ^its above with his Father, even in
the same instant of time, is touched by the hands of all, and gives himself to
all those, who are willing to receive him -- whereas Christ leaving his flesh
to us, yet ascending to heaven, there also he has it. More of St. Chrysostom's
Authorityes (plainly confirmi^g the same) may be seen in his 8^. Hom. on Matt.
45th. on John. 3 on St. Paus's Epist. to the Ephesians. in his 2. to those of
Antioch, and in his 6th. book de Sacerdotio. St. Augustine (who lived the year
420) expounding that of the 33. Psalm. he was carried in his own hands: puts the
question inquiring, how can these words be understod; and a^swers sayi^g thus:
we cannot find this in David according to the litteral sense; but we may find
it in Christ; for C^r^s^ (...) in his own hands w^e g^v^ (...) body* he said
thi^ (...) he ca^rid that b^d^ (...). In his ^. book (...), legis e^ Prophet c
9 he says, ^he following w^rds: w^ receive the Mediator of God and man Ie^us
Christ, with a fu^l heart and mouth, g^v^ng us, his own flesh and blood, to be
(...) and drank. Here the Reader may take notice of the word mouth, that
thereby he may understand S. Augustine to have openly declared, that we do not
receive the flesh and blood of Christ in figure, and by faith only (as my
adversary believes) which may be further confirmed, by S. Augustin's own words,
in his 2. ser. de verbis Apostoli, where he says thus: we underst^nd the true
master, divine redeemer, ki^d Savior, recommending unto us our price his own
blood, for he spoke of his own body and blood. More of S. Augustin's,
Authorityes (proving the Real presence) may be seen, in his 11th. 26th. 27th.
and 31 Treatise in John. in his comme^tary on the 98th* psalm. in his 2. book
against Petilia^s letters in his 17th. book of the City of God, c. 20. In his
3. book or the Trinity c. 4. and 10. in his, book super Leviticum, ^. 57. In
his 2. ser. de Temp. an^ in several other places, which wou^d be too tedious to
produce here: therefore I will conclude only, with the two following
Authorityes: S. Cyr^ll of Alexandria (who lived in the year 430, in his Epist.
to Nestor, which Epist. was aprov'd of, by the Fathers of the General Council
of Ephesi^) says thus: so immediately we come to the mystical blessings, and we
are sanctified, being partakers of the holy body, and precious blood of Christ,
the Redeemer of us all, not taking it to be, common flesh (God forbid) -- But
made the proper flesh of the word himself: that ^s to say of the son of God. It
was defined in the 18. Can. of the first General Council of Nice, That Deacons,
who have no power to offer sacrifice, ought not to give the body and blood of
Christ to Priests, who have that power. All which proofs, do evidently
make-out, that it was always believed (i^ the Primitive Church) that Christ's
body and blood, were really and substancially present in the holy sacrament*
and consequently that our Savior had no mystical, or figurative meaning, in
the institution of this sacrament. So that it is to be admired, what pretense
can my adversary aleadge, for denying the real presence, If he has not a mind
to deny all mysteries, that surpasles, his own weak understanding; if so, he
may be the same rule, Presume to deny that of the blessed Trinity Incarnation,
Resurrection etc. for they surpass his understanding and capacity, as well as
this of the real presence.

Chap. 6 Proving that the holy Eucharist was adored, and worshipped by those of
the Primit^ve Church.
If it was lawful to fall down and worship our Savior Jesus Christ with Godly
honor, when he was in this world, it is also lawful to falldown and worship the
holy Eucharist with Godly honor, but it was lawful to falldown and worship
our Savior Jesus Christ with Godly honor, when he was in this world therefore
it is lawful to fall down and worship the holy Eucharist with Godly ho^our. The
consequence is most certain, as we shall see hereafter, and the minor is
manifest Mat. c. 2 v 11. c. 14. v. 33. Jo. c 9 v. 38. as for The major it may
be proved t^us: the same Savior Jesus Christ, who was worshipped, in this world
is really and subst^ntially present in the holy Sacrament, as I have proved in
my answer to the adversarys 5th. point, and will confirm it, in my answer to
his 7th. therefore if ^t was lawful to full-down, and worship our Savior
Jesus Christ with Godly honor when he was in this world; it is also lawful to
fall-down, and worship the holy Eucharist with Godly honor. Though the aforesaid
argument might be a sufficient answer to this point. yet I will produce the
following Authorityes, to confirm the same. St Denis the Areeopagite (who lived
in the Apostles time, in his book de Eccles. Hier. c. 3) makes mention, of the
Incenci^g of the altar, of the Priest washing his hands, of ^^^ elevation of
the blessed Host, and ^ the adoration thereof. Origines (wh^ lived in the 3.
Ce^tury in his 3. Ho^ in Exodus.) says thus: I design to ^^monish ye, with the
examples of ^^^ own religion: ye know who are acc^^^m'd to be present at the
divi^ mysteries, when ye receive the Lord body, how with all caution ^^
veneration, ye take heed, least ^ small particle of it, should fall down, le^^
any thing of the consecrated gift sh^^ slip out: for ye belive your selves, ^^^
guilty, (and ye rightly believe) if ^ thing of it would fall by your
neglig^^ce. St Ambrose (who lived in the 4th. Century, in his 3. book of the
Holy Ghost c. 12. expounding, the of the 98. Psalm: where we a^ bid to worship
the footstool of his fee^) says thus: therefore by the footstool, the earth is
understood, and by the earth, the flesh of Christ, which, also eve^ at this
day, we adore in mysteries, and which the Apostles adored in the Lord Jesus. S.
Chrysostom (who also lived in the 4* Century, in his ^. hom. on S Pau'ls
Epist. to the Ephesians.] says thus: we speak of the body, and of him, who
differs nothing from it, how many are made partakers of that body? how many
tastes of his blood? remember that it is the body, and blood of him, who
refides above the heavens, who is humbly adored by the Angels. He also says
the following words (hom. 24th. on St. Paul's first Epist. to the Corinthians)
the wisemen regarded this body la^ing ^n the ^ange^, the i^pio^^ ^a^^arou^ men,
having le^t th^i^ (...) they and home, and made along voy^ and when they
a^riv'd, wi^h great ^^ and tremb^ing they wor^hipp*d ^ let us therefore the
Citizens of he^^ immitate the barbarous people -- do not see him in the m^nge^,
but on^ a^t^^, not a woman keepi^g: him, ^^ the Priest holding him -- let us
the^fore weaken our selves, an^ be gr^^ afraid, let us show a great deal n^
reve^ece, than these barbarous people^ for open the gates of heaven, and l^^
and then you will see, that whi^^ said to be true; for that which i^ t^^ most
precious, and most to be ador'^ a^l thinks, I do ^h^w you the same ^^ on earth,
even as, in a Ki^gs pal^^ that which is most magnifice^^ of things, not the
^alls, no^ (...) ^t the King^ ^, ^t that y^^ (...) do not h^w yo^ the A^g^l^*
Ar^^ge^s, o^ he heaves b^t t^^ir mas^er; ^^ have perc^^v'd, h^w ^ou (...) on
the ^^^h, that which is most excellent, and ^est to be regarded of a^l things,
neither do ^ou only see hi^ but also yo^ ^^^h him* and you ea^ him and after
you ^at him, you return home; clean and pu^ifie your soul, and prepare your
mind against the receiving of these mysteries^ ^or if a King's son wi^h a neat,
and pre^ious ^^own had been give^ to you ^o ^e carried, you would slight all
the things ^^ the world, but now receiving, not ^he son of a worldly King, but
the only ^egottn son of Go^ etc. St Augustine who lived in the beginning of the
5th. Century, expounding the 9^ Psalm) says that the earth, is the Lords
footstool, according to the of Isaiah c 66 v. 1. saying thu^ the heaven is my
throne, and the ear^ is my footstool, and he inquires ho^ is it lawful to
adore the earth without impiety: and then h^ says the following words: being
troubled in mind I do turn myself Christ, because I do seek him and I find*
how the earth is adored, without impiety, the footstool of his feet is adored*
for he received earth from the earth, because the flesh is of the earth and he
received flesh from the flesh of Mary* and because he walked here in that
flesh, and gave us the same flesh to eat for our safety, none eats of that
flesh if he adores it not before; it is found-out after what (...) ^^otstool of
^^ Lord may (...) not only, ^^t we do not (...) it, but ^^ we si^n, in not a
^ori^g it. More ^ S. Augustin's Author^^yes may ^ seen (to the same purpose) in
^s 118. Epist. c. 3. and in his 120 ^pist c. ^7. which I omit to produ^^ least,
I should be too trouble^^^e to the reader.

Chap. 7 Proving that Transubsta^tia^^ was believed by those of the Primi^^ve
Church.
I shall only here enlarge those ^^^ts of scripture, produced in my ^nswer to
the 5th. point, with the ^^llowing Authorityes of the ^^ly Fathers and Doctors
of the ^rimitive Church. Tertullian (who lived in the beginning of the 3.
Cen^ury in his 4. book again M^^cian c. 4^) sa^es (...) ^^ b^ead taken and
distributed ^^ his ^^sciples, he ma^e h^s ow^ body: St. (...) martyr, and S
I^eneus (who bo^^ lived before ^ertullia^ do aff^^ the same: as the reader may
see ^^ their Authorityes produced ^^ my answer to the 5. point. S: ^^prian (who
lived the year 25^^ his sermon of the Lord's sup^^ ^ayes thus: the ^read which
ou^ gave to his Disciples, being chang^ not in sh^pe, but in nature b^ the
^^nipotency of the word, was made ^le^^ S, Cyrill of Jerusalem (who lived in
the 4. Century speaking ^^ Christ in his 4. Catech.) says th^^ followig words:
he did once in Ca^^ of Galelee, only by his will, turn water unto wine, which
is near blood; and shall he not be w^rthy, to be believed ^o u^? that he tu^n'd
wine into blood ^^erefore let us receive the body and ^^ood of Christ, with all
assurance, for under the shape of bread the body is given to you, and under the
shape of ^ine the blood is given -- therefore let us not consider it, as bare
bread, and bare wine; for it is the body and blood of Christ, according to the
Lord's own words: for although your sense would not represent this to you,
nevertheless let faith confirm you: you ought not to judge these things by the
taste -- therefore knowing this and with all certainly holding, the bread which
is seen ^y us, not to be bread (although the taste perceives it to be bread) but
to be the body of Christ, and the wine which is see^ ^^ although it may seem to
the pall^^ be wine: notwithstandi^g it is not ^^ but the blood of Christ. Let
the ^^der be Pleased to take notice ^^ plainly St Cyprian affirms, (by ^^
former words) that the substa^^^ of the bread and wine is dissol^^ at the
intrance of Christ's b^^ and blood: and also how St. Cy^^ bids us not to judge
of this my^^^rie according to the apprehensio^ of our senses, but to firmly
believe the true and real presence of Christ's body and blood under the shape
of bread, and wine* that is to say under the accidents, which the bread and
wine had, before cheir substance was changed. St. Gregory Nysen, (who lived
the year 380. in his Oration termed Cateehetica c. 370.) says thus: I do also
now rightly believe the sanctified bread to be changed into the body of Christ
-- and these things he bestows transelementing the things that are seen, into
it, by the virtue of his blessings. which words do plainly make-out, that St.
Gregory positively believed the Transubstantiation, otherwise he would not
have said these words. St Ambrose (who siv'd about the same time, in his 4th.
book of sacraments c. 4th.) says thus: perhaps you may say, my bread is
ordinary, but the bread is bread before the words of consecration, but when
consecration comes it is the flesh of Christ a another convincing Authority of
St. Ambrose may be see^ in my answer to the 5th point St, Gaudentius (who also
lived in the 4th. age, in his 2. Treatis on Exodus.) says the following words:
the Cream and Lord of natures, who brought forth the bread out of the earth,
and again of the bread (because he can do it, and promised it) made his proper
body: and who of the water made wine, made of the wine his own blood S.
Chrysostom (who lived in the year 398. in his 83. hom. on S. Matt. speaking of
this mystery) says thus: these are not the works of human power which the
Lord performed in that supper, the same also offers now the sacrifice he
performs, we enjoy the office of ministers: truly it is he, who sanctifies, and
cha^ges these things. And (in his Homily of the Eucharist in ^^^aenys) he also
says the following words: do you see the bread? do you see the wine? do they
go like other meat to the privy? (the Lord forbid) you ought not to imagine so:
for eve^ as after wax is applied to the fire -- nothing of the substance
remains -- even so, consider here the mysteries, the substance of the body to
be consumed: that is to say, that the breads substance is annichilated, when
Christ's body inters under those accidents, which formerly the bread had before
it was annul^d St. Augustine [in his ^8, ser* de verbis Apostoli^ says thus: I
told ye, that the bread which is offered is called bread, before the words of
Christ; but as soon, as Christ's words are pronounced, then it is not called
bread, but it is called the body. And in the book of the Incarnation of Christ,
we read the following words: it is not to be believed, that the ^ubstance of the
bread, or wine remains, but that the bread is cheang'd into Christ's body, and
the wine into his blood etc, St. Cyrill of Alexandria, in his Epist. to
Calosyrius, and Eusebius Emissenus, Ser. de corpore Domini, do affirm the same.
All which Authorityes do evidently make. out, the thing signified by the word
Transubstantiation (that is to say the real change of the substance of bread
and wine, a^ the intrance of Christ's flesh and blood) to have been always
believed, and maintained by the holy Fathers, and Doctors of the Primitive
Church; so that it plainly appears, that this Doctrine of Transubstantiation
was not broughtin, by the Church of Rome, either in the 6th. 7th. 8th. or 9th
age; or by the Council of Latran (in the year 1215) as some of the prete^nded
reformers do falsely aleadge.

It is not worth my while to answer here the Adversary's 8th. point; for it is
sufficiently answered by what I have produced in my answers to the three last
points: for it is manifest, that all those, who contradicted (in the Primitive
Church) the aforsaid Doctrine, that they were esteemed and beliv'd (by the holy
Catholic Churh) to have been notorious heretics: as I will show in the
later end of this work.

Chap. 8. Proving the use, and veneration of Images, in the Primitive Church.
If it be lawful to worship other creatures, it is also lawful to worship
Images: but it is lawful to worship other creatures: therefore it is lawful to
worship Images, the major is manifest for the sa^e honor, which the scripture
forbids to be given to the one; forbids it to be given to the other: (as I will
show hereafter) therefore if it be lawful to worship other creatures, it is also
lawful to worship Images. whose making and putting up in Churches, is commanded
by the holy scripture: as evidently appears by the following texts (Exodus c 25
v. 18. 19. 22) where we read that God commanded two C^erubins to be made of
go^d which were to be set up on both sides of the Arc, before which the people
were to pray, and promised that there he would meet with Moses* we read also
(Numb. c. 21 v. 8 and 9) that the Lord commanded Moses, to make a fiery
serpent, and to set it up, on a pole and that it should come to pass, that if
any one, would be bitten by a serpent, that he would recover, when he would
look upon the serpent of brass. more examples may be seen in the 3 book of
Kings c. 6. v. 35. c. 7. v. 25. 29. and 36. c. 10. v. 19. in the 2. book of
Chronicles c 3. v. 10 and 14. where we read that Solomon caused, (at several
times) Images to be made, but we can never find out, that ever he was
reprehended for so doing.

Now let us see is it lawful to worship other creatures, that thereby the
minor may be proved, Lot seeing the Angels, bow^^ himself with his face to
wards the ground, Genesis c. 19. v. 1. Ba^aam did the same, seeing the Angel of
the Lord, Numb. c* 22 v. 31. and also Joshua: as may be seen Joshua c. 5. v.
14. Saul seeing the soul of Samuel, stooped with his face toward the ground
and ^bowed himself: as may be seen in the first book of Kings c. 28 v. 14. and
(in the 3. book of Kings. c 18 v 7.) we read, that Abadiah fell on his face,
and worshipped Elyah. The sons of the Prophets seeing Elisha, they came to meet
him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him: as may be seen in the 4th
book of Kings c. 2. v. 15. we also read in the 2. c. v. 46. of Daniel, that the
King Nebuchad-nezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and commanded
that they should offer an oblation, and sweetodours unto him. Chirist approved
of the making, and exalting of the brazen serpent, and owens it to have been
the type and figure of himself exalted on the cross, ^ohn c. 3 v 14. S. John
the Baptist worshipped the very latehet of our Saviors shoe the latchet of
whose shoes (says he) I am not worthy to unloose: John. c. 1. v. 27. for
which fact St Augustine on that place, concluds him to have been full of the
holy Ghost* the Patriarch Jacob adored, the top of Jo^eph's rod (a sign, or
Image of his regal power) as we read in S Paul's Epist to the Hebrews c. 1 v 2^.
the Primitive Christians venerated the very shadow, and garments of S Peter and
Paul, and received thereby special benefit: as may be seen in the acts of the
Apostles ^ 5. v. 15. and c 19 v. 11. and St. Paul in his Epist. to the
Philippians ^. 2. v. 10. commands us to honor the name of Jesus, which is only
asign, or Image of our redemption: as the name Ieho^a is of our creation, which
was in so great honor, with the Jews that the common people durst not utter
it: no! nor the very Priests but only in the time of sacrifice, and solemn
benediction: as Phil^ relates, writing the life of Moses, nay the very plate on
which the name of God was written, on the high Priest's forehead, is called the
plate of sacred veneration, Exodus c. 18. v* 36. 38. and we read in the 22. c.
v 26 of Ezekiel, that God commanded the temple (which was an Image of his
heavenly house) to be honored as a holy place, and reprehended those Priest's,
who poluted it, saving thus: her Priests have violated my law, and have
profaned mine holy thinks; they have put no diference between the holy and
prophen^.

Now let us see did those of the Primiti^ve Church, ever use or worship Images.
Tertulian (who lived in the 3 age, in his 2* book de Pudici.) affirms, that the
Image of Chri^st bearing a lamb on his sholders, was graven on the chalices
used in Churches, St, Gregory Nysen (who lived in the 4th. Century, in his
Oration of Theodorus) says: that the silent picture painted on the wall does
declare several things, and that it is very profitable, this same holy Father,
was wont to weep contemplating the Image of Abraham facrifizing his son Isaac:
as himself testifies, in his ser. preached in Constantinople. S. Basil (who
lived in the same Century, in his Epist. to Julian the Emperor) after
numbering seyeral points of faith* which himself believed; brings in, the
Apostles, Prophets, and Martyers, and then concluds saying thus: the characters
of their Images. I do honor and worship, thiefly being this was delivered by
the Apostles, and not prohibited: and why should it not be showed painted in all
our Churches. and in hisser. of Barlaam, he also says, the followi^g words:
^ye famous painters raise-up! and extol your arts in painting this saint's
Image -- and likewise let Christ's Image be painted St. Hierome (who lived in
the year ^90. writing the life of Paula) says, that she was wont to prostrate
herself before the crucifix, and adored it as if she had beheld the Lord
crucified b^fo^e her eyes. S, Crysostome (in his ser. quod veteris et novi
Testamenti unus sit Legislator) declared, that himself loved a picture of
melted wax full of piery. and (in his Liturgy) he says, that the Priest was
wont to how down his head before the Image of Christ: he makes also mention of
Christ: Image in his ser. deferia quint^ Caena D^mini Paladius (who lived in
the same time, in his 11th. Epist.) relates that the Bishop of Jerusalem was
wont yearly, at the solemnit^ of Easter, to expose the cross, to be adored by
the people, he himself first adoring it. St. Cyrill of Alexandria (who lived in
the 5 Century, in his homily against Nestor) says thus: hail mother of God --
through whom the precious cross is made famous, and adored throughout the
world. Caelius Sedulius (who also lived in the 5 Century, in his 5th book)
says the following words: neither is there any, who dose not know, that the
Image of the cross ought to b^ worshipped. S. Gregory (who lived in the same
Century, in his 7 book Epist. 5) bids the Bishop Januarius. to take the
crucifix and the Jmage of the blessed virgin from the Jews, who did not give
them the due veneration. And in his 53 Epist. (which is to Secu^dinus) he says
thus: I do know that you long for our Savior's Image, that by contemplating
it, you might burn the more with the love of the Lord, Eusebius (writing the
life of Constant the great,) relates, that agreat many of Golden, and Silver
Images were put up in the Churches, which he caused to be built, in Palestine,
and in his 7. book, c. 14. he affirms himself to have see^ the Apostles Images,
which then were very old, and in great veneration with the people. Damas
relates (writing the life of St. Sylvester) that the aforesaid Constantine
commanded an Image of pure Gold to be made, which he ordered to be put up in
the Church, wherein he was baptized, on the right hand of which, he placed the
Image of our Savior, and on the left hand, the Image of St. John the Baptist;
he also ordered the Image of our Savior, of four Angels, and of the twelve
Apostles, to be put up in the Church of St. John Latran, in Rome, in order to
be venerated by the Christians. Evodius (in his 2. book writing of S. Stephen's
miracles) says that his Image was put up in the same Church wherein his
relics were pre, served, and that agreat multitudeof people were used to
freqent that Church, out of particular devotion, who venerated both the Image
and his relics. The Disciples of S. Epiphanius, placed his Image in the
Church which they built in his honor, and were wont to pray most fervently
before the same Image: as the Fathers of the 7th General Council do declare, in
the 6th. Action. St. Ambrose (in his Oration of Theodosiu's death, says that
it was discreetly done of Helena to order the cross (where upon our Savior
was crucified) to be taken up our of the ground (where the Jews absconded it,
that it might be worshipped by the Christians: and (in his Epist. de invention
sanctorum Gervasy et Protasy) he declares, that he knew him, who appeared to
himself, to be S. Paul, by his Image, which he had before. S Augustine (in his
first book de Consensu Evangelistarum) affirms, himself to have seen in several
places Christ's Image, painted between S. Peter and St. Paul's Images: and (in
his 3th. book of the Trinity c. 10. in his 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 25. and also
in his 3. book c. 9) he says, that Images are very profitable, in order to
move the people to devotion. Metaphrastes (in the life of Constantine the
great) Euagrius (in his 4t^. book c. 26) and Dams^enus (in his first book de
Imaginibus) do relate, that a painter endeavoring to ^raw the Image of Christ,
whose splendor when he could not behold, our Savior himself took a piece of
white ^^nen and saving it on his face, imprinted there-on the Image of his
divine countenance, and after-wards sent it to King Abagarus, who longed to see
our Savior, which Image after awhile (out of of particular veneration) was
brought by Philip the General of Mauritiu^'s army unto the field, and gained
thereby a most glorious victory from the Persians: as Theopa^es relates in his
17th. book. Marianus scotus in his Cronicles (writing of the 39 year) makes
mention of an other Image painted after the same manner by our Savior, in a
handkerchief offered to him (by a devout woman called Veronica) as he sweared
carrying the cross to mount ^alvary, which Image in the reign of Tiberius the
Emperor,) was brought to Rome, and there honorably reserved, and showed to
the people every monday and thursday. Several other Images of Christ, were made
even by those who lived in his one time: as for example, there was one made by
the woman whom he healed of the bloody flux, which was set up in the city
Penades, where several miracles were wrought upon the account of it: as
Eusebius (in his 7 book c. 14th) Sozomenus (in his 5th. book c. 20) and
Damascenus (in his first book de Imaginibus) do relate, for a certain herb
which grew at the foot of that Image, when it came to be so high that it could
touch the hem of the Image, it received virtue to heal all kind of distempers,
and (as Sozomenus testifies) when Julia^ the Emprour ordered to fall it down
and to place his own Image in stead of it, his was immediately consumed by fire
from heaven, which miracle the Pagans seeing, most impiously (by the instinct
of the devil) brake our Saviors Image, not considering, that he who caused
their Emprours Image to be burned, might by the same power, cause also fire to
come down from heaven, in order to burn both themselves and their Emprour too,
only that his divine goodness and clemency had more patience to expect their
conversion of which the Emprours Image was incapable. another Image of Christ
was made by Nicodemus; which a Christian (43. years after it was made) carried
from Jerusalem to Berith a Village in Syria, where (in de^ision of our
Savior's Passion) it was by the Jews crowned whipped, pierced, etc and used
it with all manner of villainy as they used our Savior himself: but not with
out great miracle for as they pierced it, there issued out of it, abundance of
water and blood: by which diverse maladyes were cured, and several Jews conver
ted, seeing these miracles: as Athanasius (in his book de Passione Imaginis
Domini c. 4th.) and Gregory of Tours (de gloria martyrum c. 21.) do relate. To
which examples may be also added those Images of our blessed Lady; one made by
S. Luke, which is to be seen at this very day in the Church of Loretta in
Itali^; and an other of hers, which Eudoxia sent from Jerusalem to Pulcheria,
which she placed near her own seat in the Church, that she built in
Constantinople: as Nicepherus writes (in his 14th. book c. 2.) I^ might Produce
several other Images, which were made and worshipped by those of the Primitive
Church, If I had not supposed that any impartial reader might plainly perceive
(by what I have already produced) that the use of Images is no new Doctrine i^
the holy Catholic Church, and consequently that their worship and veneration,
is not prohibited by the second commandment, (as my adversary and his adherence
do falsely teach) for that which is prohibited by this commandment, and also by
the scri^ture in several places, is to worship, or adore any creature with that
honor, which is due to the Almighty God: as formerly the Gentiles did, when
they made Idols and false Gods; which afterward they worshipped and adored
even as if every one of them had been a true, and an Eternal God: wherefore
they are always believed by those of the Church of Rome to have been
Idolators, and impious for so doing; which they would not judge, if themselves
were guilty of the same crime, or of any other of that kind: therefore the
worship which is peculiar to God is commonly called by the divines, Cultus
^atriae that is to say, a sovereign honor, and the Church of Rome most
strictly forbids all her members, to give it to any creature: therefore the
honor and veneration, which she alowes to be given to Images, is not that of
Latria, or severaign as all the Fathers of the 7th. General Council do declare
(in the 7th. Action) but it is an inferior kind of veneration called relative,
that is to say, that they are worshipped, in as much as they represent unto us
Godly things and are instruments apt to move the people to think of what our
Savior and the Saints, have suffered and done in this world, so that they
serve in a manner as books to those who cannot read, and excites the people to
great devotion, and pietv, which other wise would not have interred into their
thoughts or imaginations: ^o that the reader may take notice, how uncharitable
the pretended reformers do continually preach to their poor ignorant flock*
that the Papists are Idolators and impious, by worshipping graven Images, as
Gods, that thereby they might render the holy Catholic Church odious and
abominable, to the very simple people, fearing that any of the^ would embrace
her principles, o^ offer to find out the real verity of her uncorr^pted
doctrine.

Chap. 9 Proving the invocation of Angels, and Saints to be lawful, ^
practiced by those of the Primitive Church
The Angels, and Saints his a special care of us, and we receive several
benefits by their assistance and merits: therefore it is lawful to invocate
them, that they may interced for us to God the antecedent is manifest by the
following tex^s. And the Ang^^ of God called t^ Haga^ ou^ of heaven and said
unto her, what aileth the Haga^? fear not: for God has ha^^ the voice of the
child. Genesis c. 17. and the Angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven
and said Abraham, Abraham; lay not their hand upon the child, neither do thou
any thing unto him, for I know that thou fear God. Genesis c. 22. v. 11. 12.
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil bless these boys. Genesis c. 48. v.
16. Then the Angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the
Assytian, an hundred and fou^ score and five thousand. Isaiah c. 37. v. 36.
Then the Angel of the Lord Answered and said O Lord of hosts! how long will
thou not have mercy in Jerusalem, and ^n the cities of Juda, against which thou
have indignation these three score and ten years. Zechariah c. 1. v. 12.
Michael one of the Princes come to help me. there is none that holds with me
in these things, but Michael Daniel ^, 10. v 13. and 21. But while he thought
^^ these things, behol'd, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream,
saying, Joseph son of David, fear no^ to take unto thee Mary they wife* for
that which is conceived in her is of the holy Ghost. Matt. c. 1. v. 20. Take
heed that ye despise not one of these little ones for I say unto ye that in
heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father, which is in
heaven. Matt. c. 18. v. 1^. And four and twenty elders felldown before the
lamb having every one of them harps and golden vials full of odours, which are
the prayers of the Saints. Revelations, c. 5 v. 8. and c. 8. v. 3. and 4. and
an other Angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there
was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of
all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the throne: and the smoke
of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints ascended up before God
out of the Angels hands. we read in the 2. book of the Maccabees c. 15. that
Judas Machabeus had seen Onias the high Priest and Jeremiah the Prophet (after
their death) interceding to God for the people of Israel, and that this book is
Canonical I will prove in my answer to the next point.) we read also in the 15
c. v. ^. of Jeremiah that the Lord spoke unto him saying thus: Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be towords this people cast them
out of my sight, and let th^^ go forth: which words our Lord would not have
said; If Moses ^ Samuel (though dead) were not wo^^ to interced for the Jews:
whi^^ may be confirmed out of Exod^ c. 32 v. 13. where we read th^^ Moses
himself begged of the Lord to show his mercy to the people for the sake of
Abraham, Isaac, a^^ Israel, his own servants. for (as Theodoret q. 67. on Exodus*
saye^ Moses thinking himself so ^^ insufficient to pacify the Lord he sets
down not only his o^^ promise, but also the aforsai^ Patriarchs merits, that
the reb^ the Lord might be more willi^^ to have commisseration upon the people,
and pardon them, which then he did: as is manifest by the 14 v. of the same
chap. Moses also endeavored an other time to pacify the Lord's fury through the
aforsaid Patriarchs merits, and assistance: as is evident out of Deuteronomy. c. 9. v.
27 wherre he says thus: remember they servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
look not unto the stoubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor
to their sin*

Was it not for the sake of Abraham (though dead) his son Isaac obtained several
requests and favors from the Lord? Genesis c. 26. v. 3. 4* 5. and 24. would
not the Lord divide Salomon's Kindom, and give it to his servants? If it had
not been for the sake of David: as may be seen in the 3 book of Kings c. 11. v.
11. 12. was it not for the sake of David Aby as obtained? that his son Asa
reigned in Jerusalem: as may be seen in the same book c. 15. v. 4. was it not
also for the sake of David (though dead) the Lord saved the city of Jerusalem
from being destroyed by the Assyrians: as is evident out of the 4th. book of
King^ c. 19. v. 32 and 3^. and ^. 20. v. 6. when Solomon begged any great
request from the Lord, was not he wont, to set down the merits of David? that
thereby he might the sooner obtain his request; as may be seen in the 131.
Psalm. v. 1. 10. which is in the Protestant bible the 132. Psalm.

Now let the reader consider what a great happiness it is to have a faithful
friend and Patron in great honor and request with God almighty through who^e
merits and intercission, one may obtain several benefits, which otherwise would
not be granted: as the premises do evidently make-out, for as God almighty was
graciously pleased (through the bountifullnesse of his infinite mercy) to grant
for the merits and intercession of these Patriarchs, (who then were but in
Limbo Patrum) so many benefits and requests, to those whom they protected in
this world why also now in the law of grace would not the same God (most
mercyfully) grant us any lawful request? for the intercession and great merits
of his holy Mother, beloved Apostles, faithful Martyrs, and true Confessors,
who are in great honor and request, residing with himself in ^eaven;
Especially being this dose not derogate to the honor of Christ* as I will
prove by the following passage.

If it be unlawful to invocate Angel, and Saints either it is because they
k^nown not what we say: or because it would derogate to the honor of Christ,
who is said to be the mediator between God and man, according to that of John in
his first Epist. c. 2. v. 1. not for the first, as I have already showed and
shall confirm it by the following examples. We read in the 4th. book of Kings
c. 5. v. 26 that Eli^ha knew (though ab^e^t) Gehazie's Simonie: and (in the c,
6th. v. 12.) that Elisha also knew what was said in the King of Syria's private
Chamber: and (in the 15th* c. v. 10. of Luke) that the Angels of God does
rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, which is the greatest secret that one
can have; yet it can be known to the Angels, and also to the Saints in heaven,
either by a distinct revelation from the clear vision of God's essence, or by
the vision of themselves: as S. Gregory [in his 2. book of Dialogues c. 3.)
affirms saying thus: what is it, that there they know not? where they know him
who knows all.

Neither dose it derogate to the honor of Christ, for the Church of Rome
certainly believes, Christ to be the chief Mediator between God and man: as St
Paul affirms, (in his Epist to Timothy c. 2. v. 5.) therefore she dose not
allow to invocate Angels or Saints in order to obtain any request immediately
and directly from themsleves, for she acknowledges that to be a folly, and
consequently not to be in their power. So that she only allows to beg of them
to join their prayers, and intercession with those of the faithful, that
thereby they might the sooner and easier obtain from God their requests, through
the meri^^ and in^e^cession of Jesus Christ, which is manifest out of St. Leo's
2 Oration de Jejunio, and also by the public Orations of the Church, wherein
she implores the intercession of Angels and Saints: for she would have them to
be efficacious through the assistance and merits of Christ; it is therefore they
always end with the following words: Per Domi^um nostrum Jesum Christum Fili^m
^^um, qui t^cum vivit, et regna^ in unitate spiritus sainti, Deus per osnnia
saecula sae^ulorum A men, whereby the reader may plainly perce^ve, that the
invocations of Saints dose not derogate to the honor of Christ: otherwise St
Paul might be accused for beseeching the Romans Colossians, Hebre^s, and
Theslalonians, to assist himself in his prayers, and also to pray for him to
God: as is e^ident by St Paul's own Epistles: to the Romans c, 15 v. 30. to the
Hebrews c. 13. v. 18. 19. to the Colossians c. 4. v. 3. in his first and second
to the Thessalonians c. 5 v. 25. c, 3. v. 1 so that the Adversary must either
Confess the invocation of Saints not to der^gate Christ's honor; or else to
condemn St: Paul's Doctrine: for I d^fie him ever to make-out that the
intercession of those, who live in this world, is acceptable to God, and not
the intercession of those, who are co^firm'd in grace and glory: or that one is
prejudice to Christ and the other not

Now letus hear the holy Fathers Authorityes and the practice of the Primitive
Church. St Ire^aeus^ who lived in the 2 Century, in his 5th book against
hereses) says thus: and as Eve was seduced that the might avoid God: even so,
ma^y was advised to obey God that she might become Eves advocate Origines who
lived in the 3 Century, in his first homily on Ezech:) says thus -come Angel
and receive the converted from the former error, from the devilish Doctrine --
call the rest of your compa^ions that ye may together inst^uct in the faith,
all those who formerly has ^een deceived: more of Origen's Authorityes may be
seen hom. 3. in Diversa Loca Novi T^estamenti hom. 16. in ^osue, and hom. 26:
in Nume. Cornelius (who lived in the same century, in his first Epist. says
thus we are Praying God, and our Lord Jesus Christ that by the intercessions of
his own holy Apostles, he may purge out the blemishes of your sins. St.
Cyprian (who also lived in the 3. Century, in his book de Disiplina, et Habitu
Virginum speaking to the Virgins) says thus: peform spiritually come
prosperously, and be mindful of us. Eusebius Caes. (who lived the year 326. in
his 13. book de Evang. Praep. c. 7.) says, we ^ouldiers of true pie^y do daily
practice these thing, honoring the friend*s of God -- and praying to them --
by whose intercession to God we do freely acknowledge to be much favored. S.
Athansius (w^o lived in the same Century in his ser. in Evangelium, speaking of
the blessed Virgin Mary) says the following words: incline they hearing to our
prayers, and do not forget they people --, we cry to thee, be mindful of us
most holy Virgin, who also after your delivery cont^nu'd a Virgin -- Lady and
Mistress, and Queen and Mother of God intercede for us. St Hilarious (who lived
the year 355. in psalm ^ 9) says that the nature of God dose not want the
intercession of Angels -- God being ignorant of nothing that we do but our own
weakness wants it: he has such another Authority speaking of the Apostles, and
Prophets intercession expounding the 124. Psalm. St. Basil (who lived in the
same age, in his Oration of the 40. Marty^es) says thus: whosoever is
oppress'^ with trouble, let him sly for refuge t^ these martyrs, that he may
be ridd o^ his troubles: and whosoever rejoices let him Pray to them that he
^ay continue in his prosperityes. And in his 205. Epist. which is to Julian,
after specifying several points of faith which himself beliv'd, he says the
following words: and I do embrace the holy Apostles, Prophets and invocate them
in my supplication to God, that by their intercession he might be merciful to
me. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem (who lived about the same time, Catech. 5.) says
thus: when we offer this sacrifice we also make mention of those who d^'d
before us, first of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, that God
may receive our prayer by their intercession. S. Ephraem (who also lived in the
same Century in his ser. de Laudibus Martyrum) says the following words: we
beseech ye most holy Martyrs, who for the sake of the Lord readily and
willingly suffered torments for which ye are all now most fa^^liar with God,
that ye may be pleased to intercede to the Lord for us poor sinners, that the
grace of Christ might light upon us. St. Gregory Nazianzen (who lived the year
370, in his Oration speaking to S. Athanasius after his (death) says thus and
look upon us favorably from alove and govern this holy people, nu^ish and feed
us in peace, direct and take us up in the battle, and place us with your self
and with those, who are in the same cond^tion with you; he implores also St.
Cyprian and St. Basil's assistance, in his Orations of them (after their
death.) St. Ambrose (who lived the same time) says the following words: the
Ange^s who are employed to asist us ought to be prayed to, and the Mar^yres --
they can interced^ for our sins, who with their proper blood washed a way if
they had any sins -- let ^s not be ashamed to apply them a intercessors of our
weakness. More of this holy Doctors Authority may be seen in his 2. book de
Virg. in his 10, book in Lucam, expounding the 21. ^, and in his Preparation
before mass, where he begs the assistance and intercession of the Apostles,
Martyrs and Co^fessors, S. Gregory Nysen (who lived the year 380 in his
Oration of St. Theod^r M^r^yer) says thus: we stand i^ ^^ed o^ great favors,
int^rc^de and p^ay ea^n^stly to the ^niversal Ki^^ (...) Lord for the Coun^ey
-- for we (...), ^e ex^^ct dangers, the wicked S^ithio^s are ^t far o^
d^clari^g war against ^s, (...) for us as a Sou^dier* as a mar^yer ^se the
liberty of (...) for your fellow ^rvant: although you have ^e^s the world (...)
you kn^w the disposition, interest ^^d (...) of (...) nature; beg (...), that
these ^ublick assemblyes ^ay not give over (...) the ^urious, wi^^ed and
^orb^rous (...) wo^'d ^aise against us and ass^^ls our Church^^ and Altars --
but if it be requisite ^^ have more assistance and prayers gather your consorts
the Martyrs, and pray along with them, for the prayers o^ many righteous does
wash away the (...) of many: admonish Peter, move Paul and John that beloved
Disciple, tha^ they may take care of those Churches, for whose sake they
endured chains, suffered dangers and death. S. Hierome (who lived the year 390,
in his Oration on Paula says thus: ^earwel O Paula and help with your prayers
thy worshipper in his old age -- for you who is present will more easily
obtain, what you demand. S. Chrysostom (who also lived the same time, in his
45. homily, speaking of St. Meletuis) says thus: therefore let us all together
men and women both young and old pray to holy Miletius etc. In his ser.
speaking of the blessed Lady, he says the followi^g words: ^t us recurr to the
most holy Virgin Mary Mother of God, that by her inter^^ssion ^e may obtain our
request -- we beseech ^^ee to intercede for us daily to our Lord Jesus Christ
thy own son, that ^y thee through his grace and benignity ^e may be pardoned. and
in his 66. hom. to the people of Antioch he says thus: he who gose in his
purple ^d royal crown laying by his pride ^raws near the Saints sepulchers,
humbly beseeching them to intercede for him ^ God etc. More of St. Chrysostoms
Authorityes may be seen in his 5th. hom. in Matt. in his ser. de Juventio, and
Maximio and in his first hom. on St. Paul's first Epist. ^o the Thessalonians,
where he Numbers several benefit^ granted by the Saints intercession and through
their merits S. Augustine (who lived the year 4^0 in his 7 book against the
Dona^^sts (...), speaking of St. Cyprian) says the ^ollowing words we beseech
him to a^^^^^ us with his prayers etc. in his 84. Treatise in John, he says,
that it was therefore they did not pray for the Martyrs as they did for other
people who died, because they knew that they did not want their payers; but
they wanted the Martyrs ^rayers: and in his 29. Ser: of the Saints (speaking
of St Peter's Miracles) he says thus: If then the shadow of his body coul'd
relieve, how much more now the plenitude of his virtue? If then a certain noise
of him passing ^prevaic'd to these who beseech'd him, ^^ much (...) ^his (...)
gra^s? ^f the (...), he may see ^ore of St (...) A^thorities, (...) V^rbis
Apos^oli: ^^ his (...) Q^^^ (...) his book (...) c. 4. and in ^^ (...) ^n the
19. ^. of (...) (...) pro^^, (...) with the Auth^^ (...) General Council of
(...) Fa^ers (...) ^^ ^^. and earnest^ (...) Fl^^ianus (then (...) themselves
as (...) ^^ by the ^^. Action: we ^^re^d in the Bishop^ of Eu^^ps (...) to ^^eo
the Emp^^^r (...) in the ^ater end of this Council that they declared
themselves to acknowledge, that holy Pro^erius was registered in the Cathologue
of Marty res, and that they begged God Almighty to be favorable and merciful
to themselves through his intercession all which Authorityes do evide^tly make
out that the Catholics of the Primitive Church where accustomed to invocate
Saints.

Chap. 10 Proving that Purgatory, was believed by those of the Primitive.
Church.
For the better intelligence of this point let the reader know, that although the
sinners crime is forgive^, yet the sinner under gose some temporal punishment:
as is manifest Numb: c. 12. v: 1. 2 10, 14; where we read that when the sin of
murmuring was forgiven to Mary, by Moses intercession; yet in punishment
thereof she had the leprofie for the speace of seven days, and was obliged to
lev^ the whole camp during that time. When the Israelites sinned against God,
and offered to rebel against Moses though their sins ^e^e forgiven through the
Lord's infinite mercy, and by the intercession of Moses yet in punishment of
their crime several of them died in the wilderness and never ^as admited to
come to the land of promise Number ^ 14, v. 19. 20, ^^. ^. 24* 3 7. and also when
David sinned against the Lord his crime was forgiven but in punishment thereof;
his son died the ^ book of Kings ^, 12 v 13 14 18* finally we read in St Paul's
first Epist: to the Cormthians, ^ 11 v: 30 that several of the Cormthians were
mortified by the Lord and also that some of them died; because they received
unworthily the holy Sacrament, but then their sins has been forgiven: as is
evident by the 32, v, where St. Paul says the following words: but when we are
judged we (...) chastized, by the Lord, that we should not be condemned. ^hereby
the reader may plainly (...) that God dose not (...) the punishment, as (...)
forgiven the (...) ^emency and infinite mercy changes that eternal punishment
into some temporal affliction, (...) if the sinner dose not undergo in this
world* he must suffe^ for it after his death, before ever he shall enter into
the Ki^gdom of ^eaven, for non^ is received there until he is even as clean
from all manner of sin, and fault as he was immediately after his Baptism, as
witnesses that of John (...): c 21. v 27,

This presupposed I may lawfully infer that ther^ must be some place of
tempor^l punishment ^^ order to purify and cleanse nos^ ^ouls who do not
perform (...) world, and (...) sins, to which ^ternal punishment is not due;
for it would be a most u^reasonable thig of us to believe that he who
immediately has been in the state of grace and dies suddenly after speaking an
idle word, or committing some other small offense should be obliged to
everlasting torments, even as he who suddenly dies without any kind of
repentance after committing murder, adultry, or some other great crime:
therefore being he cannot inter the into heaven by reason of that small offense
he must go to some other place until he is pur^^i'd which I shall prove by the
following argument. what ever the old and new Testament, the holy Fathers and
Doctors of the Primitive Church, several Councils, true and wonderful
revelations, affirms; ought to be believed by all Christians: but the old and
new Testament, the holy Fathers, and Doctors of the Primitive Church, several
Councils, true and wonderful revelation affirms that which the Church of Rome
calls Purgatory; to be a place of temporal punishment wherein some souls are
chastised and purified after le^ving this world: therefore Purgatory ought to
be believed by all Christians: the consequence is evident; ^s we shall see
hereafter: and the major cannot be denied by any true Christian: as for the
minnor, I will prove it after the same order, w^erei^ ^^'s f^^^'d: therefore I
^ill beg^n (...) the Au^^o^^es of the old Testament. We fin^ in the 6^ Ps^^^
which is the (...) ^n the (...) English ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ (...) 3. (...) in (...)
^18 (...). O ^, ^ s^^ c. (...) ^8. ^t. (...) his ^ ^ ^ perpetual^y, and ^o
c^as^en one in his (...), is ^o punish hi^ seve^ly (...) this ^ite i^ order
(...), and so concluds w^^^ the following words: O Lord (...) p^eas'd to, (...)
in this wo^ld -- th^^ I (...) ^ot w^nt tha^ correcti^g ^ire. And it shall (...)
to p^sse, that he that is le^t i^ z^^^ and ^e that remains in Jer^salem,
shall be called ^o^y. when the Lord that have washed away the (...) of the
da^g^^ers of zion, and shall have pu^g'd the blo^d of Jerusalem from the ^id^t
the ^o by the spirit of jugedment, and by the spirit of burning. Isaih c. 4. v
3. and 4. which text (according to St. Augustine in his 20th. book of the City
of God c. 25.) m^^ns the releasment, which souls do get from the burning fire
of Purgatory. Micah. c. 7. v. 7. 8. and 9 ^ will look unto the Lord. I will
wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me, rejoice not against me
O! mine enemy when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in darkness the Lord shall
be light onto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, until he plead my case, and execute judgment for me he
will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness. Which
words (as St. Hierome affirms in his commentary on the last c. of I saiah)
means the releasment of those souls who do suffer in Purgatory fire. Zechariah
c. 9. v, 11. you also by the blood of they covenant have brought forth your
prisoners out of the p^t wherein there is no water. S^. Pete^ speakig of those
Prisone^s (in his (...) Ep. c. 3. v. 18. 19 and 20,) says thus. for christ
also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust (that he might bring
us to God) being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit: by
which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometimes
were disobed^ent when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of
Noah, while the arc was a prepari^g, M^lachi. c. 3 v. 3, and he shall sit is a
refiner and a puri^^er of silver: and ^e shall purify the sons of Levi, and
^urge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offeri^g in
righteousness. Which text signifies the punishment of Purgatory; as the
following Fathers do testifies Origines hom. 6. in Exodus S. Ambrose in his
commentary on the 36. psalm. St Hier^me in the exposition of this text, and St.
Augustine in his 20th. book of the city of God c. 25. we find in the 2, book of
Machabees, c. 12. v. ^3. that Judas Machabeus had sent to Jerusalem twelve
thousand pieces of silver to be offered for the souls of his souldi^rs, here
are the very words of the scripture: and making a ^athering he sent twelve
thousand dracmes of f^^ver to ^erusalem for sacr^fice to be offered for ^^nne
well and religiously thinking of the Resurection for unless he ^^p'd that they
that were slai^e should raise again, it should seem superflous and vain^ ^^
prayfor the dead and because he con^ider'd tha^ they, which had taken their
sleep with Godliness, had very Good grace laid up for them. It is therefore a
holy and healthful cogita^ion to pray for the dead, that they may ^e loose
from sins. perhaps you may Answer, saying that this book is not the word of
God, or canonical, and consequently that it is Authority is of no force. but in
case it would not be canonical it self, it ought to be sooner belier'd then
either Calvin or Luthers and consequently preferred before their Authorityes;
being Ju^as was always esteemed to have ^een a most faithful servant to God
Almighty, and then has ^een a high Priest of the true Church. Moreover it is
false that this book is not Canonical, for Tradition and the Authority of the
holy Catholic Church, (which is all the testimony we can produce to prove that
any book of the whole Bible is canonical or the true word of God) expressly
affirms, that this book is Canonical, and cons^quently the word of God: as may
^e seen in Innocent the first's letter to Exuperius, in St Cyprian's first book
c. 3. in his book de Ex^or^atio^ Martyry; c. 11. in St. Gregory Nazianzens
Oration de Machabaeis, in St, Ambrose's 2. book de Jacob c, 10. 11. 12. in St.
Augusti^s 2. book against Gaudent^us Epistles, c. 23 in his 2 book de Doc.
Christ. c. 8. and in his 18. book of the City of God c. 36. and also in the 47
Chap. of the 3. Council of Carthage, celebrated the year 397* whose very words
are these: Item placuit, ut praeter scripturas Canonicas nihil in Ecclesia
legatur, sub nomine divinarum scripturarum. Sunt autem canonicae Scripturae,
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numeri, Deuteronomium, Jesus nave, Judicum Ruth
Reg^um libriquatuor, Paralip^menon libri duo, Job, psalterium, Davidicum,
Salomonis libri quinque, libri duodecim Prophetarum, Isaias, Jeremia, Ezechiel,
Daniel, Tobias, Judith, Ester, Esdrae libri, duo, Machaba^rum libri duo, Novi
autem Testamenti, Evangeliorum libri quatuor, Actuum Apostolorum liber vnus,
Pauli Apostoli Epistolae tredecim, ejusd^m ad Hebraeos una, Petri Apostoli
duae, Joa^nis Apostoli tres, Judae Apostoli una, et Jacobi una, Apocalipsis
Joannis ^iber unus. Whereby the reader may plainly see that my adversary can
have no kind of tolerable reason to reject the books of M^chabees, more than
any other book of the whole Bible; Now let us hear those texts of the new
Testament which speaks of Purgatory Mat. c, 5. v. 2^ But I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of
judgment and whosoever shall say to his brother Racha, shall be in danger of
Cou^cil: but whosoever shall say thou fool shall be in danger of hell fire.
Which text expressly declares the soul to be punished after leavi^g this world.
for three several sins; and that only for the last of them he shall suffer
Eternal fire: so that I may lawfully infer, that there must be some other place
wherein the souls are punished for the two other sins: but that other place
cannot be heaven: as is evident; neither is it hell, as the text makes-out:
therefore it must be that place of temporal Punishment, which the holy
Catholic Church commonly call's Purgatory; Which may be confirmed by the 2^
and ^6. v. of the same Chap. where we read thus: agree with your adversar^
quickly whil^s you are in the way with him, lest the adversary would deliver
thee to the judge and the judge deliver thee to the officer. and thou be cast
in pr^son. ver^ly I say unto thee, thou shall by n^ means come ou^ thence till
thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Whereby the reader may see, that the
word of God confirms the prem^sses, by bidding us to make penance in this
world, lest we should be sent to that prison, out of which ^^ cannot go till we
pay the last farthing: that is to sa^, until our souls will be purified from
all manner of ^innes: as the following Fathers do expressly declare. ^ertullian
in his book de Anima. c 17. S. Cyprian in his 4th. book Epist. 2 Origines hom
35 in Luca^ Eusebius Emi^senus hom^ de ^piph^ia. St Ambrose expoundi^g the 12.
c of Luke and St. Hierome on thee aforesaid text* where he says the following
words: this is what St. Matthew declares you shall not go out of the prison,
till also the small sin^ be punished Matt. c. 12 v. 32. and whosoever speake^h
a word against the son of man i^ shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks
against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world
nei^her^n the world. to come. Which words S Matthew would ^ot have said, If he
ha^ not supposed, that some si^^ will be fo^given in the world to come. We fi^d
also the following words in St. Paul's first Epist. to the Corinthians c, 3 v.
15. ^f any man^ w^r^e shall be burnt, he shall suffer cosse; but himself shall
be saved yet so, as by fire. By which words* S. Paul clearly firms that some
souls after leaving this world shall be purg^d, and purified by a temporal
fire; as the following Fathers do testify: St. Ambrose in his co^mentary on
this text, and in his 20. ser. on the ^18. psalm: S^ Hierome on the 4. Chap. of
Amos, St. Augustine on the 37. Psalm. and S, Gregory in his 4. book of Dialogues
c. 39.

Now let us bear the holy Fathers very words. S. Denis (who has been St.
Paul's Disciple* in his book de Ecc^es. Hier, c. 7.) says thus: Then the
Venerable Bishops do draw near* and perform the ho^y prayers over the dead,
beseech^ng the divine clemency, to forgive the dead all the sins, which he
commit^d by his human weakness, and to place h^^* in light, and in the region
of the living, Ter^ullian (who lived in the year 230. in his book de Monogamia)
bids ac^rtain wom^n, to pray and give offerings for the soul of her de^^ased
husband. Origenes (who lived in the year 220. ho^. 6 on Exodus speaking of the
soul's progress, when it comes to Purgatory) says the following words: and
when it is ar^^sl^d there (...) willbri^g many good wor^s and al^^tle iniquity,
that (...) is purged and disolv'd even as lead is by ^^re St. Athanasius (who
lived in the 4 age, in his 34. Question to Ant^^chus, speaking of the Prayer^
and obla^ions offered for the dead) says thus: If they wou^d ^ot receive some
benefit by this, certainly there would be ^^no commemorat* on made in grief,
^orr^^ and ^nerals -- we know the ^o^ls ^ sinners to receive some b^^efit by
the ^^ bloody sacri^i^e and by the gra^ific ^i^^ offered for them ^s our Lord
who h^^ the dominion of both the qu^ck a^^ the dead ^rde^'d and commanded. S^
Cyrill of Ierusa^em (who lived i^ the same age, Catech. Mist: ^.) says the
following wor^is: we ^^ pray f^r all those, who died among^^ us, believing the
obl^tion of the holy and terrible sacrifice to be a great help to those souls,
for whom it is offered St. Ephrem (who liv*d the ^ame time in his la^t will:
earnestly be ^eches the people to be always mindful of himself in their
Prayers St. Ba^il (who also the^ lived) instituted an Oration in his Liturgy,
in order to ^e said for the dead; and on the 9. ^^p of Isaiah, he says thus:
there ^^ if we w^^l discover the sin by ^infession, we shall dr^^, even a^
the ^^y which is ea^e^, and it is ^^t that ^urrasory fire so^uld make an^ e^d
of (...) ^dose not treaten pe^p^tua^ death, ^^d exile, but it grants purgin^: a
cor^ng to that of the Apostle, bu^ h^m^elf shall be saved, ye^ so as b^ f^re.
Gregory NaZ^anz^n (who liv^d the year ^70. in his Funeral Ora^tion of
Caes^rius most humbly beseeche^ the C^ristians to pray for the sou^s of the
dead and himself prays: for the soul of Cae^arius, in the same Oration. St.
^p^phanius (who as been con^emporary to St Gregory, in the end of his ^ork
against Heresis ^ numbers the prayers for the dead amongst the doctrine of the
holy Catholic^ Church; and Heresy 75. he call^ Aerius an heretic, for denying
it to be ^awfull to pray for the de^ ad. St. Ambrose (who also lived about the
same time, in his 2 boo^ Epist. 8. which is to Faustus concerning his sisters
death) saye^ thus: therefore I do judge that she i^ not as much to be moan'd,
as she i^ to be obliged b^ prayers, neither is s^^ to he grieved by your tears;
but rath^ her soul is to be recommended to G^^ by ^blations and in his Orati^s
of The odosius, Vale^tinianus and Satyrus death, he prays most fervently ^o
their souls, and promises to offer sacrifices for them; And expound^ the 3,
Chap. of St. Paul's Epist. ^ ^orinthians, he says the follo^ing words: but
when ^aul says, ^so, as by f^re indeed ^e dec^ares it he shall be saved, but
he will suf^r the punishment of fire, that he may ^purg'd b^ ^ire and ma^e
sound, and mus^ not be tortured perpetually by ^nal fire, a^ the traitou^s ^re.
he has ^ch a another passage in his 20th ^^ in psalm ^^8. St. Gregory Nys^n (who
lived the year 380 in is Oration of the dead) says ^us: wherefore, that both
the digni^^ of human nature and free will mi^ht left, and that the evil might
cease, ^ivine w^sdom invented this means -- ^t either in this pesent life one
must ^ purged by prayers, and exercise of ^rtue, or after his death to be
clea^s'd the for^ace of purging fire -- he cannot be cap^ble to enjoye C^d,
unle^^ Pu^gatory fire will take away the spi^^ dispe^s'd on the soul. St
Hierom^ (who lived in the year 390. in hi^ ^pist. to Pammachus concerning ^ the
death of Paulina) says thus* other husbands dospread violets rose^ lilyes, and
flowers upon the to^bs (...) their wifes; but our Po^machus ^^ uses the bal^om
of alms^: knowing (...) to be written, that as water quenchet^ fire, even so
alms quenches the sinn^s; and expounding the 4. chap. of Amos, he also says
thus: according to tha^, which we read in St Paul; he^ shall be saved, yet so
as by fire: therefore he ^ho is saved by f^re, is hurried away as if ^^ were a
firebrand out of the bu^ni^g slame. St Chrisosto^e (who lived in the year 398
hom 41 on St ^uls first Epist. to the Corinthi^s speaking of the dead) says ^e
following words: let us ass^st ^um, not with tears, but with prayers ^^
supplica^ions, alms and oblations; ^ these things has not been rashly v^nted;
neither is it in vain that we ^^ember those w^ody'd, in the divi^^ Mysteries,
and that we pray for ^^m, bese^ehing the exposed lamb, ^ho takes away the
sins of the world ^at thence forth they might have some ^^solation --
therefore let us help ^^m and let us per^orm their comme^nation; for if ^obs
sacr^fice made sa^sfaction for his ^ons! what do you ^^ubt? if those who dy^
ha^ some ^^solation we effe^ing sacrifice for ^^m More of St. Chris^stom 's
Authority may be seen, in my answer to the first point? and in his ^ hom in
Ioann and 2^ in act a Apos^ St Augustine (who lived in the year 426. in his 21.
book of the C^ty of God c. 27) says, that the^^ are some Saints, who after
their death gose straight to heaven an^ afterward can help others: an^ that
there are others of such a bad life, who after their death are no^ saved,
neither can they help others and finally that there are others, who after their
death cannot go^ straight to heaven by the virtue of their own proper merits;
but that they can be relieved, by the merits and good works of their friends;
and in the 16th chap of the same book, (speaking of the infants, who immediately
dye after ^^eir Baptism) he says thus: It is ^^t only that Eternal punishment
is ^^ prepared for them; but neither shall ^^ey suffer Purgatory torments; and
^^ the 24 Chap. he puts a question ^quiri^g, why dose not the Church pray for
those who dye without repentance; and answers sayi^g ^hus: It Is because they
are computed be of the devils party -- but the church and faithfull's prayers
are heard ^^ the behal^ of others, who did not ^have themselves so ill in this
life, ^ither did they deserve to go directly ^heaven; In his book^ of Homil yes
^om. 16. he says, that those who ^^s sins deserving temporal ^unishments,
shall go through pur^^tory fire according to that of ^^ul. he shall be saved, as
by fire. And expounding the 37. psalm. he says thus: that ^ire is slighted
because it is said he shall be saved; it is sure* but although he shall be saved by
fire; yet that fire is more grievous than any thing, that a man can suffer in
this life. In his 2. book de Genesi c. 20 (speaking of him who makes not good
use of his life) he says thus: after this life, he shall either suffer the
purging fire, or eternal punishment; and in his book de Cura pro Mortuis e. 1.
he says the ^ollowing words: we read in the Machabees that sacrifice has been
offered for the dead but although it would never be read in the old Testament,
yet the Authority of the who^e Church which is manifest in this custom, is not
weaks, where in the priests prayers, which are offered to God at his Altar, the
commemoration for the dead has also it is one place. and in the 4 c of the same
book he says thus: supplications for the souls of the dead ought not to be
omttted, which are to be made for all those who died in the Ch^istia^ and
Catholic society, though their names be not specified the Church receives it
under a General^ ^mmemoration, that it might be offered by the holy public
mother for them, even as for those who has not parents oy children, relation or
friends to remember them; and in the 18. c. ^speaking of the sacrifices,
prayers, and alms which are offered for the dead) he says the follo^ing words:
they do not avai^ to all those for whom they are offered, but only to those who
deserved it when they lived, but because we can not discern who are those, it
must needs be offered for all Christians; in his 9th. book of Confession c. 13.
he earnestly beseeches others to pray for the soul of his mother Monica; and in
his book of heresy c. 53. he calls Aerius a heretic for not allowing
sacrifice to be offered for the dead; more of his Authority may be seen in my
answer to the first point.

Now let us hear the Council^ decrees. It was enacted in the 29 Chap. of the
3. Council of Carthage the year 397. that the holy sacrament should not be
received by any, but by those who would be fasting, and in case that there
would be any office to be performed in the afternoon, for the dead, that it
should be only performed in prayers without offering the holy sacrifice. It was
also decreed in the 47. ^hap. of the 4. Council of Carthage celebrated the year
398 that in prayers and oblations there should be a commemoration made of those
who accidentally would dye in their Journey or by sea, Jf they executed
attentively the law of penance. Likewise it was enacted in the 34 chap of the
first Council of Bracara (now called Braga a City in Portugal the year 412.)
not to pray for the souls of those who would kill themselves; and in the 39
chap. of the same Council the clergy where commanded to divide the ablations
which would be offered amongh themselves, that equaly they might be obliged to
pray for the dead. It was also decreed in the Council of Cavaillon (a town in
France the year 4^0) that they should pray in their solemn Masses for the souls
of the dead c. 16. which may be seen de Consee Did 1. Can. Visum est; and the
same was practiced before in France: as is evident by the 6. Canon of the
Council of Vasens produced in my answer to the first point.

But that I may not be too tedious in proving the minor, I shall conclude with
the following revelations. St. Gregory relates (in his 4th. book of Dialogues
^. 40) that the soul of Paschasius appeared to the holy Bishop St, Germa^^^s,
and ^ould him that God was pleased to release himself ou^ of Purgatory by his
prayers; he also relates (c. 55) that the soul of a certain monk appeared to
himself, and ^ould him that it ^as released by the virtue of thirty mas^es
which he ordered to be said for him. St. Gregory the bishop of Tours (in his
book de Gloria Confes^orum c 5.) affirms that the soul of Vitulina appeared to
St Martin, and ^ould him that it suffered the punishment of Purgatory by reason
of a small si^ne which she committed ted in this life. Venerable Bede (in his 5.
book of the History of England, c 13) relates that terrible vision of
Driethelme, who after his death revived and told wonderful things concerning
hell, Purgatory, and Paradise. Petrus Damianus (in his ^pist to Desiderius)
relates that the soul of Severinus the Bishop of Coliein appeared to a certain
Priest and told that he sufferd in purgatory, because when he was a live he
did not use to say his canonical hours in distinct times, but said all in the
morning, that he might spend the whole day attending temporal affairs and also
St. Bernard (writing the life of St. Malachias) relates that his Sisters soul
appeared to St. Malachias, and told him that it suffered the pains of
Purgatory. and Gul^^^^us Abbas (w^i^i^g the life of St. Bernard in his first
book c. 10 says that one of St. Bernards monks (^ho died) appeared to St
Bernard, and told him that he was rel^ast out of purgatory by his prayers. It
is also to be seen in the life of St Anselmus that he was for a ^^ole
twelve-mou^th offering sacrifices for the releasment of a certain friends soul,
who was punished in Purgatory, but was releast through the merits of God and by
his continual prayers. several other revelations might be produced, which for
brevity sake ^ omit to inse^^ here: for I suppose what I have already produc*d
to have evidently made out the verity, of my minor, and also to have fully
satisfied the reader.

Chap 11 Proving that all those of the Primitive Church had not the word of God
in their Mother tongue, and that the reading thereof is not profitable (or
genera^ly allowed) to all people.
There were several nations in the first five centuryes who did not generally
understand either the Syriack, Hebrew, Greeck, or Latin Tongue: therefore there
were several nations in the first five centuryes, who had not the word of God
in their own tongue* the antecedent is evident Acts Cap 2. as may be seen in my
answer to the adversary's 3. point. And ^ prove the consequence thus: the word
of God was neither written, or translated into any other language in the first
five C^nturyes, but only in the aforesaid? as all ancient writters do
unanimously affirm; therefore there were several nat^ons in the first five
Centuryes, who had not the word of God in their own tongue, who conseqently
could not rea^ the Scripture: nav those who could understand some of these
languages, had no General access to the reading thereof; for in those times
there were but few exampl^s ^^ of it, which were only in Manu-script (for the
art of Printing was not then foundout, nor in a long t^me after) and researv'd
by the Church: as St Denis the Are^pagite declares (in his book de Eccles.
Hier.) saying, that the ^acred mysteries were ke^pt secred from the
commonality; whereby it appears that it was then needless to prohibit them to
read the scrpture; whereas they were otherwise ^^nder'd by the aforsaid
impediments; It also appears that the reading thereof in the Mother tongue is
not necessary for all nations; for if it were; certainly those of the Primitive
Church would translate it into several other languages; and the Apostles, who
had the gift of all tongues (Acts c. 2.) would not only write the new Testament
in Greek, Hebrew, and ^atin, (as they have done) but also in other languages in
which they preached the gospel through out the universal world, according ^o
that of St. Paul to the Romans ^. 10 v. 18. neither would S. Paul write in
Greeck, but in Latin to the Romans, whose v^lgar language was not the Greeck,
but the Latin tongue; and St. Peter and St. James would not write in Greeck
their Epistles to the Jews, bu^ in the languages of those countries wherein
they were dispersed, which then have been the Jews maternal languages, and not
the Greeck: neither finally would St. John write his first Epist in Greeck to
the Parthians, whose, maternal Language was not the Greeck but another distinct
Language; whereby it plainly appears that neither the Apostles or the Primitive
Church ever believed that it was necessary for all nations to have the word of
God in their own tongue.

Now let us see, who are those, that are obliged to, expound read, and
interpret the word of God, to thew which I will produce the followin^
Authorityes. St. Basil (in his 25 Qvestion) says, that it is the superiors
obligation (that is to say the pastors) to know and ^earn those things, which
afterward they ought to teach others, but of others not (...) know more then
behooves them; and S. Augustine (in his first book de moribus Ecclefie c. 1.)
puts the Question inquiring, what man if judgment does not understand that the
exposiition of the scripture is to be asked of them who by their profession are
Doctors of the Church. which may be further confirmed by the Eun^ch's example
(Acts c. 8. v. 30. 31 and 35) for when Philip asked him did he understand what
he ^as reading out of Isaiah he* answered saying, how ^an I understand it,
except some man should guide me wherefore he desired Philip to sit with him, in
order to expound it to him, which Philip willingly performed (knowing that it
was his obligation) whereby it appears, that the Eun^ch, though a man of great
Authority (with Qeen Candace) yet did not presume to interpret the scripture
himself; but asked the meaning thereof from one of those, who were appointed by
God in order to instruct and teach others; according to that of St. Paul to the
Ephesians c. 4. v. 11 12* and 14 saying t^us: and he gave some Apostles and
some prophets, and some Evangelists and some pastors, and teachers for the
pe^fecti^g o^ the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the bo^^ o^ Christ; that we hence forth may be no more children tossed to and
fr^, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the slight of men and
cuning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. to prevent which danger
St. Paul himsel^^^ his Epist. to the Hebrew^^. 13 v. 17) expressly commands us
to obey the pastors, and to submit our selves to their judgments whom God
employed to rule us, and watch over our souls, for which they must give an
account for the want of which submission, and due obedience to the lawful
Pastors, and Doctors of the true Church it is a^^^st lamentable prospect to
behold the miserable condition, wherein those of Ireland, England, Scotland,
Holland etc are, ever since they unfortunatly (by the apos^acy of Luther, and
Calvin in the 16 age) have deserted their true and lawful mother, the Chu^^at
^Rome, which is (as St. August^^ affirms in his first book of Symbol to the
Cateched c. 6) the holy Church, the only Church the true Church, the Catholic
Church, that fights against all hereitc^s, yet cannot be convine'd, all
here^ies deserts he^, even as usless twigs, that are cut from the vine, but she
still remains in her root, in her vine and in her charity. which character the
pretended reformers cannot give to any of their own new Conventicles; who are
always in a continual confusion, never agreeing among themselves, for every
different sect of them supports the tenets of it is own doctrine by some
misinterpreted text of scripture (even as those heretics of the Primitive
Church which is so inculeated in their brains, that each of them is ready to
sacrifice his life for the defense of his own particular Doctrine: the
Lutherans condemning the Calvinists, the modern Prebyterians condemning the
reformed Church of England, the Ana^aptists, and Quakers despising all others,
in repect of their own purity; some of them admiting all the books of scripture
to be canonical, others affirming part of it to be apocriphall; some adding to
their Bibles, that which they suppose the Apostles either neglected, or forgot;
others diminishing, and taking away what in their opinion were first put-in
overplus, which now a days they fi^d disagreable to their own principles; by
reason of which alteration, several of their Bibles do differ in many places;
which is to be admired, for how durst they be so presump^ious? as ^e alter or
corrupt it, being he is cursed, who adds to, or diminishes the word of God.
Revelation, c. 22. v. 18. 19. for since we are all certain that the first
Bible, which the holy Catholic Church received from the Apostles, (and used it
for the space of 14. hundred and od^ years, after Christ's birth) was written by
the inspiration of the holy Ghost* what kind of any tolerable pretense can they
have now after so many ages to alter and corrupt it, whereas very often the
alteri^g of one letter changes the sense of a whole sentence; much more when
they alter words, ^ay whole sentence! as if what God ordained in the beginig,
had now need to be corrected by their wisdom; to such presumptious people might
be we applied the following words of Christ Matt. c, 7. v. 6. give not that
which is holy unto the dogs; neither ca^^ye ^our pearl^s before swine, l^st
they trample them under their feet, and turn again, and rent you. So that it
appears if those corrupters could c^oake ^y any pretention their ungodly
design, that they would not leave one text in the who^e scripture, which they
find disagreable to their own principles, but what they would a teror corrupt;
and if in case any zealous Christian should offer to diswade their followers from
perusing it after that corruption, they would imprudently answer, (as they do
now) that if they should be hindered from reading the word of God in their own
tongue; that they would be ke^pt in ignorance and darkness, as the Papists are;
so that as the serpent deceived Eve persuading her to eat of the forbidden
fruit, that she might come to the knowledge of good and evil (Genesis c. 3) even
so the devil by his sub^ility and ambuss^ deludes the poor ignorant people
persuading them to read expound and interpret their corrupted Bibles, and not
to be beholding to the Church or pastrors, who might deceive them, in teaching
that which would be contrary to the word of God, to prevent which, now their
very tinkers, cobblers, butchers, tailers, and all sort of curious, and ignor^nt
mecha^icks do take the liberty of interpreting and expounding the whole Bible
to their own ruin and destruction, 2. Petri c. 3. v. 16. for how can such
ignorant people understand, or expound either ^o themselves, or to others the
prophecy of Ezekiel, of Daniel the Revela^ions of St. John? where a^ S.
H^erome affirms, every sentence is a misttery: which of them can expound the
Canticles, or what Solomon mea^t by those similitudes of Gods Church? or the
following texts? I am the Lord they God visiting the iniquit of ^he Fathers
upon the children unto the 3. and 4. Generation Exodus c. 20. v. 5. which seems
to be contradicted by that of Fzekiel c. 18. v. 20 saying thus: the soul that
sins it shall die, the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, we are
expressly commanded by the 20 c. v. ^2. of Exodus to honor our Fathers, and
mothers. But it is said in the 14. Chap. of Luke v. 26 that he (...) heats not
his Father and mother -- cannot be the disciple of Christ. Moreover
Deuteronomie c. 6. v. 13. it is written, that thou shall fear the Lord thy G^d
and serve him, and ^w^ar by his Name. Which seems to be con^rad^cted by that of
St. Mat. c. 5. v. 34. where we read thus. I sa unt^ yo^ swear not at all. these
and several other texts (which ^ight seem to the unlearned to contradict each
others, and also the mister^es of the holy scripture) do excee^ the poor
ignorant people's understanding and weak capacity, nay the very Disciples of
Christ* cu'd not understand the prop esi^s of the old Testament, until their
understanding were opened, whereby they came to their true knowledge: as
evidently appears Luke c 24. v. 27. and 45 where we read the following words.
and beginning at Moses and all the prophets he exp^u^ded unto them that things
concerning himself; then he opened their understanding that they might
understand the scriptures. For want of which understanding in the law of God,
the pretended reformers, and also the ancient here^^^ks of the Primitive
Church, deserted their true Mother, the holy Catholic Church; by
misinterpre^ing the word of God; as for example: the Aerians den^ing the 2.
person of the Bl^ssed T^in^t^ to be God, and alle^ging for their ground, that
of St. John c. 17. v. ^^ saying thus: holy Father keep through thine own Name,
those who^ ^^ou have given me, that they may be one as we are* the Eunomians
asserting the holy Ghost not to be God, and producing for their Authority that
of Christ Matt. c. 11. v 27. where he says thus: all things are delivered unto
me by my Father, neiher knows any man the Father, save the son' and he to
whomsoever the son will reveal him the Eutychians affirming, the divine nature
in Christ to have been converted into his human nature, and alleging for their
ground that of St John c. 1. v, 14. where we read the following words. and the
word was made ^lesh, and dowleth among us. The Berengarians, Wicklefians,
Husites, Lutherans, and Caluinists erred so grossly and in so many texts of
scripture, by reason of the great liberty they took in interpreting, and
expounding it to the advantage of their own design that their errors (i^ they
were all related) would require a whole book to themselves; so that it plainly
appears, that the reading, and interpreting of the ser^pture is not profitable
to all people, and specially to those, who do not ^ecur for the interpretation
thereof to the holy Catholic Church, which has a* promise of the infallible
asistance of the holy Ghost to the consumation of the world Matt c. 2^ v. 2^.
so that the Church of Rome had great reason to hunder the ignorant sort of
people, (who might easily be deceived) from perusing it, without having
license from their respective Bishops, and especially in those countries where
heresy abounds and where Bibles are corrupted; fearing lest that instead of
acquiring more knowledge thereby, they might peradventure fall into greater
ignorance, or some heresy as the aforsaid sectaries have done; and in so
prohibiting she imitate^ the example of fond parents, who keeps all sort
dangerous weapons from the hands of their children and forbids them all kind of
diea^, which might occasion, or creat any ill distemper.

Chap. 12 Proving that the pretended reformers Doctrines are but a heap of
several old heresies lawfully condemned by the Primitive Church
Having sufficiently made-out by the same Authorityes (which my adversa^y in
his Challenge defies to be produced) that the old and present Church of Rome is
still the same in pri^ciples; it is now fit that I should let my adversary know
what principles himself, and the rest of the new reformers do embrace; I will
only produce the following point.

1 The Aerians demolished, and threwdown the Altars where upon the holy
sacrifice were wont to be offered; as the following Fathers do relate: St.
Athanasius in his Epist. de fuga sua, Theodoretus in his 4th. book of History
c. 19. and 2^. and Ruffinus in his 11. book c. ^,

Martin Luther, who apostated from the Church of Rome the year 1517. and John
Calvin who did the same the year 1538. caused al^o the Altars of those
Churches, which ere under their jurisdictions, to be throwdown and demo^ish'd:
as may be seen in Luther's boo^ de Formula Missa pro Ecclesia Witt^mbergen^i.
and in Calvin's 4th. book of Institutions c. 18.

2 The A^rians rejected all traditions, which were not written in the word of
God: as St. Augustine in his first book against Maximi^us c. 2. and last,
testifies; which heresy the Nestorians, and ^utychians held afther-wards: as
appears by the first Action of the 2 General Council of Nice, the N^itorians
errors were condemned by the General Council of Ephese the year 4^1. as may be
seen Tomo 3 Co^ciliorum.

Luther in his commentary on St. Paul's ^pist. to the Gala^^ans c 2. and Calvin
in his 4. book of Institutions ^. 8. held also the same heresy

3 The Aerians and Eunomians denied that Images ought to be venerated: as the
Father^ of the 2 Council of Nice, do relate in the 6. Action

John Calvin in his first book Chap. 11. and in his ^ 4 book c. 9. and now all
the reformers do teach the same

4 The Aerians held that there is no difference between Bishops and Priests,
but that they are of equal dignity and jurisdiction: As St. Epiphanius heresy
75. and St: Augustine heresy ^3. do write.

Luther in his book of the Captivity of Babylon cap. de Ordinis Sacramento, and
adversus falso nominatum ordinem Episcoporum and Calvin in his 4. book of
Instutions c. 3 held likewise the same here^ie, which now the presbyterians,
and several others do embrace

5 The Aerians did not judge it lawful to pray for the dead, or to offer any
sacrifice or alms for their releasment, and did not believe that there was any
place of temporal punishments after this life; as St, Augustine heresy 33 and
St. Epiphanius heresy ^5 do relate; the Cerinthians held the same as, St.
Epiphanius writes heresy ^8. the Cerinthians errors were comdemn'd by the
General Council of Ephese the year 431. as may be seen tomo 3. Conciliorum; as
for the A^rians errors they have been condemned by all the following Councils
(viz) by the Council of Alexandria the year 3 5. tomo 1. Conciliorum, by the
Councils of Rome which sat the year ^37. and the year 369. by the first
General Council of Nice the year 325. the first General Council of
Constantinople the year 381. and by the Council of A reminium which sat the
year 359. all which Councils are to be seen tomo 2. Conciliorum, their errors
were also condemned by the General Council of Ephese the year 431 tom. 3.
Conciliorum^ by the Council of Calcedon, that sat the year 451 tom. 4.
Counciliorum, and by the Fathers of the 2. Council of Constantinople the year
536. which may be seen tomo 5. Conciliorum.

Luther in his Epist. to the Valdinians and Calvin in his and book of
Institutions c. 5. taught also this last point of the Aerian heresy about
Purgatory, which now all their followers do firmly believe;

6 The Novatians believed that confirmation was no sacrament as Theodoretus in
his 3 book de Haere. Fab. writes; and the Donatists believed the same: as
Optatus, in his 2 book against Perminian relates:

Luther in his book of the Captivity of Babylon cap. d^ Confirmatione, and
Calvin in his 4th, book of Institutions c. 19 did embrace, and teach the same
heresy

7 The Novatians held that the Church had no power to forgive sins committed
after Baptism, and consequently they did not allow auricular confession, or
that the Church cu'd grant Indulgence as all the following Fathers do write St,
Cyprian in his 57. Epist. to Pope Cornelius St. Epiphanius heresy 59 St
Augustine heresy 38 and Theodoretus in his 3 book de haereticis fabulis; the
Novations errors have been condemned by the Council of Carthage the year 252.
by the Council of Rome the year 253. by the Council of Italy the same year and
by the Council of Arles the year 452. as may be seen ^omo 1. and 4. Conciliorum.

Luther in his book of the Capitivity of Babylon Cap. de extrema unctione, and
Calvin in his 4. book of Institutions c. 19 held also this point of the
Novatian heresy.

8 The Donatists gave out that the Catholic Church fell from the true faith of
Jesus Christ, and that themselves were renewing it again in Africa: as Optatus
in his 1. 2. and 6. book against the Donatists, and St. Augustine heresy 69.
and in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae c. 12. do relate.

Luther in his discourse tomo 2. cap. de partibus and Calvin in his 4th. book
c. 2. likewise gave-out that the holy Catholic Church fell visibly from the
true faith, and that themselves were reviving it again: (...) therefore they
and their followers are called reformers*

9 The Donatists held that the holy Eucharist ought not to be adored, they
brake-down the Altars, and gave the blessed sacrament to their dogs: as Optatus
in his 2. and 6 book against Perminian, and St. Augustine in his 2. book against
Petilian c. 51. 60. in his 3 ^^. book c. 40. and also in his 163 Epist. do
relate.

Luther in his book de Eucharistia ad Waldenses, and Calvin de vitand is
supersti^ionibus, held likewise that the holy Eucharist ought not to be adored:

10 The Dona^ists denied the Pope of Romes s^premacy: ^s Opatus and St.
Augustine do declare in the aforsaid books.

Luther in his book de potestate Papae and assertione articuli 25. and Calvin
in his 4th book of Institutions c. 6. denied the same.

11 The Donatists reproved the life and vows of monks and religious people: as
also Optatus and St. Augustine write in the aforesaid books; Vigilantius and
Petilianus reproved the same; as St. Hierome in his book against Vigilantius,
and St. Augustine in his 3. book c: 40 against Petilianus do affirm^ but the
Donatists errors were declared to be false and erroneous Doctrines by the
Council of Rome the year 313. by the Councils which sat in Africa in the time
of J^nocentius the first being the beginning of the 5. Century and by several
other Councils

Marti^ Luther writing of the monastical vows held also this last point of the
Donatists here^e, that he might have some kind of pretense to dispense with
himself in his three religious ^ows and merry Cathrine the Nun, whom he
deluded out of her monastery; our Savior Jesus Christ most strictly commands
us to be ware of the doctrine of such false Prophets, and he tells us, that we
shall know them by their fruits; here are his very words. Beware of false
prophets, which come to you in she^ps clothing, but in wardly they are ruvening
wolves. ye shall know them, by their ^ruits: do men ^ather grapes of thorns, or
^igs of thistles? even so every good tree bring^th forth good fruit, but a bad
^ree b^^ngeth for^h evil fruit. Matt c. 7. v. 15. 16. and 17.

12 The Eustachians endeavored to demolish and extirpate the Ecclesiastical
convents: as socrates in his 2 book c. ^3 and sozomenus in his 3. book c. 13,
do relate; the Eustachians errors have been condemned by the Fathers of the
Council of Gangris, which sa^e the year 324.

Luther an^ Calvin's Disciples did embrace this Eustachian error, for they
threw-down all the convents and monastarves of those Countries and Provinces,
wherein they made any conquest.

13 All the following here^icks rejected matrimony and den^'d it to be a
Sacrament, as these Fathers do write of their heresy; Simon Magus: as St
Augustine in his book ^e here^ibus c, 1. Nicolaites as ^t. Epiphanius heresy 25
Titia^us as St. Irenaeus in his first book. ^^. 31* Ad^miani, as St. Augustine
^eresie 31 the Manicheans as St. Augustine heresy 46 the ^usta^hians as
socrates in his 2. book ^. 33. Marcian as St Hierome in ^is first book against
Jovinianus, and the Prisillanists: as St Leos ^^ Epist d^clares; the
Prisillanists errors were condemned by all the following Councils (viz) by the
Council of Caesaragust the year ^8^. by the Council of Toleto the year 400 the
Council ^f Bordeaux the ^ear 385. and by the Council of Spain in the year 447
which Cou^cils are to be seen ^omo 2 and ^ Conci^^orum Luther in his book de
captivitate cap de matrimoni^ and Calvin in his 4 book of Institutions c, 19.
held also that matrimony is no sacrament

14 Iovinianus held that there are no venial sins, but that all sins are
mortal, as St. Hierome relates in his 2 book c, 15 and 16. against Jovinianus,
and also St. Augustine heresy 28; the Pelagians were of the same opinion as St.
Hierome writes in his 2 book against them Jovinianus's errors were condemned by
the Fathers of the Council of Milan, which ^ate the year 390 tomo secundo
Conciliorum; and so were the Pelagians errors by the following Councils (viz)
by the Milevian Council the year 416 by the A^ican Council the year 4^8, as ^y
be seen tomo (...) Conciliorum ^and also b^ (...) ^ral Council of (...) which
^^e the year 43^ (...) Conci^orum

Luther assertione articuli 32 and ^alvin in his 2 book of Ins^^u^ons c. 18 and
in his 3 book c 4 ^eld likewise that all sins are mor^l.

15 Simon Magus and Menander ^eld that Christ's true flesh is not ^^lly present
in the holy Eu^harist: as St. Ignatius declares ^^ his Epist. to those of
Smyrna, ^f which Theodoretus makes ^ention in his 3. dialogue, other ^^reticks
of the Primitive Church held the same, as S^ Cyrill writes in his Epist. to
Calosirius,

Though Luther never expre^sl^ affirmed this point of the old he re^^e; yet all
his Disciples do endeavou^ to defend it; and so di^ Calvin in his book de Caena
Domini, (where he reprehends Luther for not holding it,) and als^ in his 4 book
c. 17.

16 Simon Magus held that fait^ alone is su^^icient for salvation and
consequently that good wo^kes are needless in order to savation: as St.
Irenaeus in his fir^ book c. 20. and Theodoret^ de heretic is fabulis, do write
Eunomius held the same erro^ as St. Augustine in his book d^ ^eresibus declares,
c. 54

Luther in his book de liberate ^hristiana, and Calvin in his 3. ^ook of
Institutions c. 19. held ^o the same error, that thereby ^ey might provoke
others to be ^ven to all kind of vices as them^lves were.

17. The Eunomians held that ^e relics of Saints ought not ^ be ve^erated, as
Magnes in ^s 4 book against Theostines ^firms* and Vigilantius held the ^e
error: as St. Hierome writes ^ his book against Vigilant^us ^ut the Eunomians
errors have ^een condemned by the ^. Coun^il of Rome the year 369. by the
^eneral Council of Constantino^e the year 381 tomo secundo by the Council of
Calcedon which sat the year 451 tomo 4. Cou^ciliorum and also by the Council
of Constantinople the year 553. tomo 5 Conciliorum

Luther in his (...) de cruce and in his book de missa abroganda, held the same
and so did Calvin admonitione de reliquiis

18 Vigilancius affirmed that it is unlawful to invocate Saints, as St.
Hierome writes in his book against Vigilantius's errors.

Luther in his book de Eucharistia ad Waldenses, and Calvin in his 3 book of
Institutions c. 20. believed and held the same error.

19 The Massalians rejected the fast commanded by the Church as St. Epiphani^s
heresy 8. and Theodoretus in his 4. book c. 11. do relate; the Aerians did the
same: as St. Augustine declares in his book of heresy c. 33. and so did the
Eustachians as St. Epiphanius heresy 75. and Socrates in his 2. book c. 33. do
write.

Calvin in his 4th. book of Institutions c. 12 rejected the same: which error
both his and Luthers Disciples do willingly embrace, that they might indulge
their own bodies, whilst they are in this world.

20 The Massalia^s held that holy order is no sacrament: as St. Damascenus
relates in his first book of haeresie. the Massa^ians errors were condemned by
^he Fathers of the Council of Syda, who sat the year 383. as may be seen Tomo*
2. Conciliorum, and by a another Council in the Orient the year 417 Tomo 3.
Conciliorum

Luther in his book of the Captivity of Babylon cap. de ordine, held also that
holy order is no Sacrament, which error his Disciples do now firmly believe.

21 Helvidius raught that the Blesled Virgin Mary bore children to Joseph, who
were brothers to Jesus Christ; as St. Hierome relates in his book against
Helvidius's errors, which were condemned in the Council of Milan the year 390.
as may be seen Tomo 2. Conciliorum.

Calvin ad Caput 1. Lucae affirmed the same error, which several of his
followers do now certainly believe.

22 Eusebius in his 3. book of history c. 25. and St. Hierome in his book de
viris illustribus, do make mention of certain heretics, who denied the Epist.
of St. James, o^ Juda, the 2. Epist. of St Peter, and also the 2. and 3. of St.
John to be canonical

Luther in his prologue on these Epist. rejects St James and Juda's Epistles;
and he doubts of the rest to be canonical.

23 The Marcionites denied the revelations of St. John to be canonical, as
Tertullian relates in his 3. and 4. book against Marcion the Theodotians denied
the same as St. Epiphanius wri^es here^ie 51. and 54. the aforesaid Martion^tes
did also deny St. Paul's ^pist. ^o the Hebrews to be canonical, as St. Hierome
declares in his preface on St. Paul's Epist. to Ti^us, and so did Arius, as
Theod^retus relates in his preface on St. Paul's Epist. to the H^brews.

Luther in his preface on the old Testament affirms the ^evelation not to be
canonical, and in his prolog^e on that to the Hebrews he says likewise that it
is not canonical

24 The Marcionites, and Basilidians held that all the old Testament was
apocryphal; as St. Irenaeus relates in his book c. 20. 22. and 29. the
Manicheans held the same as St Epiphanius affirms heresy 66. but the
Mani^heans errors were conde^n'd by the General Ephesian Council, the year 431.
To^o ^. Concilioru^, and also by the Council of Rome the year 444. which is to
be (...) in the sa^e Tom^. as for the M^^^i^ni-te^^^^ors, they (...) b^^n
c^demn'd by the Ge^^ral Co^n^il o^ Cal^^^o^ the (...) 51. ^o^o 4. Conciliorum,
and by the (...) Council of Constan^in^^le the year 553. where also the (...)
errors were condemned, as may be seen Tomo 5. Conciliorum.

Lu^^^r and Calvin's Disciples are something milder than the aforesaid
heretics, for they do no^ (...) tha^ all the old T^stament is apocriphal, yet
they deny several books of it, to be canonical, and chiefly those books, which
^vidently do falsify their own principles.

If I had not supposed that the premises might sufficiently demonstrate, what
Doctrines my adversary and the reformers do maintain; I would produce several
other points of ^old heresies, which also they maintain, but lest I should be
too troublesome to the reader, I will only conclude with the following passage.

Whosoever maintains or has for his principles the aforesaid points, is
lawfully accused, for maintaining old heresies, false and erroneous Doctrines
confuted by the holy Fathers, and lawfully condemned by several Cou^cils of the
Primitive Church: but the pretended reformers do maintain and have for their
principles the aforesaid points: therefore the pretented reformers are lawfully
accused for maintaining old heresies false and erroneous Doctrines confuted by
the holy Fathers, and lawfully condemned by several Councils of the primitive
Church. the minor is manifest, as for the major it is proved, by what I have
already produced: for certai^ly all those holy Fathers and Doctors, would not
make it their business to reprehend, and confut^ the chief promoters of the
said points, if they had not understood, and firmly believed. that they taught
false and erroneous Doctrines: neither would all the aforesaid Councils of the
Primitive Church, (which my adversary in his challenge acknowledges to have
then retained the true faith of Jesus Christ) condemn their Doctrines if they
were not also Hethrodox, and contrary to the true faith, which they and their
forefathers received from Jesus Christ and his Disciples: therefore whosoever
desires to find and embrace a Church, wherein the old incorrupted principles of
Christianity are ^aught, and such Doctrines only as were maintained by the
ancient and p^r^ Church even of Ro^e for up-wards of 500 years after Christ,
let him embrace the present Church of Rome, wherein the said principles are
duly profess^d, the old, and the present Church of Rome being still the same
in pri^ciples, whereas the Doctrines of those who now call themselves
reformers, the Church of England, Presbyteria^s, Quakers etc. and wherein the
said convin^icles do now di^^er from the present Church of Rome, (...) never
maintained by the ancient Church of Rome; but (...) ^^piously brought in by a
ser^es of Heretics, who for these very Doctrines, were from time to (...)
condemned by many (...), national, and Provincial Councils; and ^ also by the
most eminent (...) and Doctors of the primitive Church; as the premises do
evidently make-out, so that the reader may take no^^ce of my adversarys
ignorance and presumption for censuring, and contradicting a religion so
ancient, which lawful mission, acknowledgment of antiquity, holy Fathers,
several Councils, divine miracles, and the word of God, do plainly demo^strate
to be the only true and Apostolical line, which leads Souls to the true way of
everlasting glory and happiness: therefore reader if you have been heretofore
of my adversarys opinion, I beseech you for the love of Jesus Christ, to
compare seriously his principles, and those of the Church of Rome together,
and then to consider ^ttentively the state and circumstances, wherein you are
out of ^he holy Catholic Church; out of which there is no salvation to be
expected, as the following holy Fathers do openly declare. St. Cy^rian in his
book de vnitate Ecclesiae (speaking of those who are out of the Church) says
thus: do they think Christ is amongst them? ^^^ though they were drawn to
torments, and ^xecution for the confession of the name of Christ, yet this
pollutio^ is not washed away, no^ not with blood this inexpiable, and
inexcusable crime, of schis^^ is not purged away, even by death itself. St.
Chrysostom (in his 11. ho^. on St. Paul's Epist. to the Ephesia^s) ^ayes also
thus: there is nothing so provokes the wr^th of God, a^ the division of the
Church, i^ so ^uch that though we should have performed all other sort of good
things, yet we shall in^urr ap^^is^ment ^^ l^ss cr^^^, for dividing the unity
of the Church, than those who have do^^, who (...) and divided Christ's (...).
St. Augustine in his 4. book of ^ymbole Cap: 10. says ^^e following words. If
any man be so^^^ s^par^ted from her, he shall be (...) from ^he number of the
child^^n* ^^ither shall ^e have God for his Father, (...) wou^d not have the
Church for (...) ^^ther, and it will nothing (...) him to have rightly
beli^v'd, o^ to (...) so many good works, with^^t the ^^^clusion of the
so^eraign good, (...) s^p^r g^^^a Emar. he say^ also the following ^ords: out
of the Church a^ heretic ^ay have all things, but salvation, ^^ may have the
sacraments, he may ^ave faith, and preach it -- only salva^ion he cannot have;
which may be ^urther confirmed by the words of ^t. James c. 2. v. 10. sayi^g
thus: who^i^ver shall keep the whole law and ^^t offends in one point, he is
guilty of ^ll* therefore being the salvation ^f your soul does wholly depend ^f
the true belief, and entire ob^ervation of all those points of ^ith, which the
holy Catholic Church sufficiently proposes, and ^^iversaly teaches: I do
earnestly ^eseech you, to open the eyes of ^our understanding (for I know that
you have no invincible ignorance whereby yo^ might be excused) to embrace the
principles and Doctrines of that pure and anc^ent Church against which the
gates of hell cannot prevail Matt. c. 16. v. 1^. assure your self that I do not
invite you to any old heresy (as my adversary does) no^ (the Lord forbid) but
to the religion preached and taught by Jesus Christ and his Disciples; to that
I say where with your fore^ fathers, and anteceslors have been still contented,
since eve^ they left Paganism, until in the 16. age they were deceived by the
erroneous Doctrines of those false prophets; Luther, and Calvin* hold fast the
form of sound words, which thou have hard from me in faith and live which is in
Christ Jesus 2. Timothy c. 1 v. 13, neither give heed to fables, and endless
genelogies, which minister questions, rather than Godly ^^ifying in the faith:
from which some having sweru'd have turned aside unto vain ja^gling, desiring
to be teachers if the law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof
they affirm. 1. Timothy c. 1. v. 4. 6. 7. let not villfull or gross ignorance,
the temporal riches and vanity of this transitory world, or comply^nce to the
request of your friends deceive and mislead you, but consider seriously the
very words of your Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ Matt: c. 16. v. 26. saying
thus: for what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and loose
his own soul^ or what shall a man give in exchang^ for his own soul? what will
it then a ^^il you (after this life) to be now for few years, or days in great
honor, favor and request in this deceitful world? and afterward to be
perpetually tormented in pain, grief, and miseryes, with out any hopes of
mercy, or redemption, where neither frieds pomp, nor riches can prevail in
order to give you the lest dram of consolation: from which punishment the Lord
Jesus Christ of his infinite mercy defend both you and me and all Christians,
Amen.

FINIS.
An Answer to what o^e W^ealy ^lleages (in his Almanac) against St. Peter's
Supremacy.
AFter having composed this little work Whea^y's Almanac (for the year 1^99)
came accidentally into my hands, wherein he (or some other malicious person in
his name) labors to infect the whole Kingdom, with false and pernicious
Doctrine, which he pretends to ground on some non^ensical arguments, that he
forms against St. Peter and the Pope of Rome's Supremacy; and though it is hardly
worth any man's while to confute them; yet because it concerns what I have said
in my Answer to mr lennings fourth poit; ^ think it fit to let him know his
own ignorance and the errors of his pretended Doctrine.

First he offers to infer (by a new invented consequence of his own) that Peter
was neither Bishop of Antioch, or Rome, because (as he falsely alleages) the
Papists have not as yet agreed among themselves about the time he first removed
from Antioch to Rome.

But in case this had been true which I will show hereafter to be false his
illegal consequence does not follow: for though the Authors do not agree about
the beginning of the w^^cks of Daniel (c. 9. v. 24.) prophesyi^g the com^i^g of
Christ or how many years Saul did reign in Isr^el, or how many years there are
since the creation of the world, shall we infer that Daniels prophecy never
began, that Saul never reigned in Israel, and that the world was never created?
no, we leave such illegitimate conseque^ces to Whealy, who as it seems cannot
infer better.

His second argument is. he that suffers ^ebu^e is not superior to him that
gi^es it: but Peter suffered rebuke from his ^^llow Apostle Paul (Gal. c. 2. v.
11. 12. ^ therefore Peter was not superior to Paul. This ma^or is evide^^ly
false: as ap^ears in the first book of Ki^gs, c. 13 ^here we read that Saul tho
King of Israel, suffered to be rebuked by Samuel; and in the second book of
Kings c. 12. that David suffered to be rebuked by Natha^; and finally we read
in the 6th Chap. of St. John that our ^aviour suffered not only the Jews, but
also the very Disciples to repr^hend his words, ^hen he told them that he wou^d
g^ve them his flesh to eat and his blood to drink; we see also by d^^ly
experience, that Kings Magistrates, and superiors are reprehended by their
inferiors, not only privately, but in public Sermons, when they preach against
the ^ices of the said superiors: and indeed we see that the Prince of Orange
has been often rebuked these six or seven year^ past by Whealy in his yearly
Almanacks, wherein he reflects with the v^lest expressions imaginable on their
^acred Majesty's, King ^ames, his Queen, and the Prince of Wales; whereby the
Prince of Orange, himself is consequently rebuked, yet never ordered the Author
to be punished.

As for that action of Peter not eating meat with the Gentiles, for which he
was rebuked by Paul; let the adversary know that if Peter had (...) then eaten
with the Gentiles, he would ^^ ^harply reprehended by (...) the Jews and
Phar^si^s, who thought it to be unlawful by any means to keep company, eat, or
drink with the Gen^^^; an^ so Peter being between these ^wo extremes, he
thought it be^^ to eat with the Gentiles and in so doing, he is not only
excused, but highly commended by all the Eastern, and Gre^ian Fa^he^s in their
commentary on the aforsaid text; and St. Chrysostom in his commentary on the
10. Chap. of the Acts affirms that it was done by divine dispensation, which
evidently appears Act^ c. 1* v. 7. 8. and 9. where we read that Peter was (...)
commanded to eat with the Gentiles. And the motive that moved St. Paul to
reprehend him, was fearing le^t that others, who would not be in the same
circumstances wherein Peter then has been or dispensed with, as he was should
be lead by his example; for inferiors are commonly led by the examples of their
superiors, which to prevent in that point St. Paul thought it convenient to
reprehend him whose humility, for not contradicting Paul (his inferior) is most
highly praised by the following Fathers (viz) St. Cyp^ian in his Epist. to
Quintus St, Augustine in his ^9: Epist. St. Gregory hom. 18: o^ Ezeki^el,
saying thus: behold St. Peter reprehended by his own inferior, and does not
fe^^ (...) reprehension.

As for these texts which the adversary brings out of St. Paul's second Epist.
to the Cor. (c. 11. 5. and c. 12. v. 11.) they prove nothing against Pe^er's
supremacy, for Paul's inte^tion was to s^op ^^e mouths of some adversaryes he
had among the C^rinthians, that opposed his Doctrine, alleging it to be
grounded ^n some subtle and sophistical arguments and not thought by Christ:
as that of Peter, John, and Jame^ was and consequently ought not to be of any
great Authority; which suspicion occasioned him to declare (in the aforesaid
text) that he was not in^erior to an^ ^f the Apost^es; that is to say, that his
Doctrine was as true, and of as much Authority (being written by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost ^ as any of the Apostles Doctrine, which is true
but nothing to the present purpose

Whealy's third argument. he that is accused by other, and plead^ his cause
before them, is not supe^^or ^^ those that acc^ses him, or before whom he
plead* but St, Peter was ac^us'd before the rest of the Apostles, and ^lended
his cause before them at Hieru^alem (Acts. c. 11. v. 1. etc.) therefore Peter
was not superior to ^he rest of the Apostles. The major is false for though a
King is accused by some of his own subjects, and pleads his cause before the
Pa^l^ment, or a Prince before a Council, ^ superior before his community; It
does not argue that the King has no superemmency over the Pa^^ment; the Prince
over his Council, the superior over his c^^munity; otherwise it might be
lawfully in^er'd, that our Savior had no superemme^cy over his own Disciples,
before ^ho^ he was often accused by the Jews: as appears Matt. c. 21 Ma^ke c.
15 L^ke c. ^3 John ^ ^ 7 and 8. As for that which Wh^aly brings out of Peter's
second ^pist c. 3. v. ^. it is not to hi^ pu^pose, though he decei^fully wrests it
in order to inf^r a^ u^atural consequence; for it was Pe^er^ i^^cut in that
Chap. to assure certain people of Christ's coming to judgment etc. and to think
the pa^^ence of God to conduce to their salvation, as Paul write to them in his
Epistles; so that it was necessary for Peter to speak in the plural number:
but perhaps Whealy by some new f^und Ari^me^ick, may make two into one: ^^ for
I acknowledge that Peter ought to speak in the singular number: but it is too
late for W^ealy, after so many ages, to pretend to teach him how ought to
express himself in matters of such great consequences. Whealy's fourth
argument he that is sent is not superior to him that sends him, but when the
Apostles at Jerusalem hea^d that Samaria received the word of God they sent to
them Peter and John Acts. c. 8. v. 14. therefore Peter was not superior to the
rest of the Apostles. this major is false, for one may undergo such a mission
by his i^feriors advise of his own accord. with out any subjection to those
that send^ him; as is evident in the second book of Kings c 15 where we read
that S^muel sent Saul (though King) to destroy Amal^^k and the children of Israel
sent Phine* has their high Priest and superior to the chi^dren of Ruben and G^d
(then in the land G^lead) as may be seen in the 2^, Chap of Joshua v. 13 and
finally H^rod sent the wisemen over whom ^e had no^ power to Be^helem to searge
dilig^^tly for the child Matt: c 2. v 8. so that Whealy can make no advantage
of Peter's missio^ to Samaria, which favors not his design in the ^es^; but
rather confirms the contrary: whereas he denis Peter to have been bishop, for
it was resolved by those that were in that ^ss^mbly that it would be expe^ient
to send Bishop to the Samarians who then received the faith in order to confirm
them in the same; so that it was agreed that John and the chifest Bishop (viz,)
Peter shoud go thither to perform the same, which they did to the Samarians
great satisfact^on

After this Whealy produces an argument which he sound in a manuel of
co^trove^sie (pri^ted at Doway the ^ear 654) provi^g that to be the only Church
of God, which has had a continued succession of Bishops and pastors from the
time of Christ and the Apostles to this present da^; which he denis with out
giving any Authority, or reason; but promises in the following page to confute
it; I will be silent in the matter until I see what he can allege against it.

He afterward ^ites out of the same manuel the following texts Isa. c. 59. v.
^. c. 60. v 1. 3. 1. c. 62 v. ^* Ez^^^i^l c. 37 v. 26 and Daniel c. 7 v. 13. 14
proving the infallibility of the Church which in Whealy's opinion can have no
relation ^o ^^, they being write long before the Apostles days; but if this
should ta^e place, it would as well prove that all the prophesies of the old
Testament concerning Christ's passion, resurection, and assention could have no
relation to the said Mysteries they being prophesied long before any ^f him
came to pass, all Whealy's wit can show noe tolerable reason for denying the
one and admitting the other; as for the texts which he brings out of Matt c. 28
v. 20 John c 14 v. 16. Ephe c. 4 v. 11. and 12 it is but some of Whealy's
calumnyes to allege that the Author of the said Manuel ever Produced them in
order to prove St Peter supremacy; whereas he only ^akes use of them to prove
the visibility and infallibility of the true Church, and its conti^nued
succession of Bishops and Pastors from the time of the Apostles till now as
appears in the 2. 37 and 45 page of the same Manuel

After this Whealy denies Peter to have been Bishop of Antioch or Rome for six
several reasons, and says in the first that he cannot grant it because the
scriptures are wholly silent in the matt^r But if he can grant nothing wherein
the scr^ptures are silent he is no true Christian for he does not believe or
grant the Apostles creed or that the present Bible of which he makes use
himself to be the u^corrupted word ^f God, or the baptism of children before
they come to the years of discrection to be lawful and sufficien^ for
salvation seeing the scriptures are ^ holly silent in these matters beside, he
Possitively swears to several poi^ts that are not mentioned therein, and
consequently contradicts his own assertion, this is too evident to require a
proof for he wickedly swears and believes that the true flesh and blood of
Christ are not really present in the blessed Sacrament, that the Virgin Mary
Mother of God has no more power than a another Woman, that the Bishop of Rome
has no spiritual or temporal jurisdiction over England, Ireland, or Scotland;
and several other points proposed by the present government: therefore he
believes and wickedly swears to several points (as articles of faith) wherein
he himself pretends the Scripture to be wholly silent: but let Whealy deny or
own what he pleases its evident to us by the testimonies of all ancient
writers, and the following holy Fathers and Doctors that Peter was Bishop of
Rome, (viz) St. Irenaeus in his 3. book c. 36. Tertullian in his book de
Prescrip. adversus hereticos St. Cyprian in his first book Epist:. 3. and in
his 4. book Epist. 2. Eusebius in his chronicle of the 44. year S. Epiphanius
heresy 27. S. Athanasius in his Epist. to those who lead a solitary life.
Dorotheus in his Inventory. Sozomenus in his 4. book c. 4. Optatus in his 2.
book against Permini^an, S. Ambrose in his book of the Sacraments c. 1. St.
Hierome de Viris Illustribus and in his first Epist. to Damas St. Augustine in
his 2. book against Petilian c. 51. and in his 165 Epist. Theodoret in his
Epist to Leo. Isidorus writing the life of Peter, and all other ancient writers
till the year 1400. before which time I defy Whealy to produce any Author that
ever write of Peter's not being Bishop of Rome.

Whealy's second reason for denying this matter. the office of an Apostle was
derived immediately from Christ, and by consequence more honorable and supreme
than that of Bishop, which was ordained by men only. it were therefore no less
than madness to think Peter so weak of judgment to quitt the more honorable
for the lesser, or the superior for an inferior. But in this Answer Whealy
makes two false suppositions; first he supposes that Peter was ordained Bishop
by men and not by Christ as Aron was formerly ordained by God chief Priest over
the Isralites secondly he supposes that there is an incomp^^^bility between the
office of an Apostle and that of Bishop, which ^s also (...) though they be two
(...) they do not tend to incompa^ible effects; for they both tend to the glory
of God propagating the Doctrine of Christ, and establishing the holy Catholic
Church, which no man of sense can deny.

As to Whealy's third reason wherein he says, that the commission of an
Apostle, go ye forth and teach all nations etc. was then more universal than
that of Bishopric etc. If this would prove any thing against Peter's being
Bishop, it would also prove that James was not Bishop of Jerusalen, or John
Bishop of Ephese, because their commission, was also, to go forth and teach all
nations etc. which hindered them not from being Bishops of the aforesaid seas
as all ancient writers do unanimously testify; as to that which he adds saying
that it is epressly against the special command of Christ to accept of
bishopric at all; it is but some of his presbyterian Doctrine, where with he
not only attakes the Church of Rome; but also the present Church of England: as
manifestly appears by what he produces in his last argument out of Luke c. 12.
v 25 and 26.

His fourth reason against Peter being Bishop is, that Peter was Apostle of the
circumcision and such as write his Epistles from Babylon not to Rome but to the
scatered ^e^es etc. which reason co^tradicts Whealys third Answer, where in he
says that it was against Christ's command that Peter should accept of
bishopric at all, because (as he alleages) he was obliged to go f^^th and
teach all nations; but if Peter was obliged to teach all nations, he was not
only an Apostle of the circumcision for the word all nations comprehe^ds both
the Jews and Gentiles; by which it appears that Whealy in his own discourse
co^tradicts himself; as for Peter's being Apostle only of the circumcision, and
Paul only of the Gentiles, it is false as is manifest by that of the Acts c. 15.
v, 7, where we find the followi^g words when there had been much disputing
Peter rose up and said to them men and brethren ye know that a good while ago
God made choice among us that the Gentiles by my mouth should he are the word
of the Gospel and believe etc. as for that which Whealy adds that Peter writ
his Epistles from Babylon and not to Rome etc. it proves his ignorance, and
co^firms what he would feign deny: for in Peter first Epist c. 5. v: 1^. by the
word Babylon Rome is meant* as Papias the Apostles Disciple (cited by Eusebius
in his 2. book of History c. 15. St. Hierome in his book de Viris Illustribus
in Marco, Eunomius, Venerable Bed^ and all the Fathers that ever writ a
commentary on that Epist. do unanimously declare; and it is evident out of the
17. c. of revelations, where John says that Babylon was builded on seven
hills and that i'ts Impire did extend over the Kings of the earth: which
notwithstandig should fall down and be destroyed; all which has bee^ verified
of the City of Rome and of no other City in the whole world, for it was fo^erly
and is at present builded on seven hills and it is Impire only did then reach
all parts of the world, yet what John fore see came to pass for the Roman
Impire was reduced almost to nothing, the City wholly run'd, by the Goths,
Wandals, Hunns, and Longobards: but what occasioned people in them times to
call Rome Babylon, was a certain similitude that was between the City of Rome
and that of Babylon, when in the time of Nabuchodo^o^or Babylon was an Imperial
City, whose King Nabuchodono^or crully persecuted the people of God duri^g
their captivity there; eve^ so in the time of the Apostles Rome was an Jmperial
City, whose Improur was Nero, who persecuted most cruelly the people of God
during his reign it is therefore the City of Rome was called another Babylon
Whealy's fifth reason is grounded on the audience given to Paul in the Apostles
assembly Acts c. 15. v. 12. by which it seems that Peter till then was wholly a
stranger to the wonders Paul told them he had performed among the Gentiles.
this consequence is false, for though General Ginkle related in a Council of war
before the Prince of Orange how he behaved himself at the breach of Agherim
against the Irish, it cannot be inferred that the Prince of Orange himself was
till then wholly a stranger to the Irish affairs, and that he never fought at
the breach of the Boyne, or elsewhere against them. and though Peter gave audience
to Paul telling the Miracles and wonders, which God had wrought among the
Gentiles by him and Barnabas; it does not follow that Peter never preached the
Gospel to any of the Gentiles before that time. as for Whealy's 6th reason that
it was after Paul's said relation that the Apostles and Elders sent Barsabas and
Silos with him to Antioch to assist in the ministry; I allow that to be true
but what Whealy would infer out of it is false; for it does not at all follow
out of this, that the Gospel was never preached before in any of those
Countries; but what might be lawfully inferred, is that Barsabas and Silos were
not commanded to go with Paul to Antioch, till after the said relation but
before this time (being the 18. year after our Saviors Passion) the Gospel was
preached not only in Antioch. but also in Rome by Peter, as I will show
hereafter. as for Whealy's new comme^tary on the words of our Savior Matthew c.
16. v. 18. 19. John c. 21. v. 15. 16 17. I believe no man of sense will prefer
it before the exposi^ion of all the holy Fathers and Doctors which is contrary
to that of Whealy's: as may be see^ in my An^wer to Mr. Je^ni^gs 4 poi^t; as
for that word only which our Savior would have added if he meant Peter in
particular as Whealy pretends I would willingly know by what reason can he or
any other show that the word only would be requisite here to prove Peter's
supremacy and not in that of John. c, 6. v. 50. where he and the present Church
of England do wrest the words of Christ to a figurative sense without the lest
me^tio^ of the word only or siguratively; by which it appears how incoherently
Whealy argues; and pretends to expound the wor^s of Christ in the said t^xts,
'its apparent that it would be superfluous for Christ to express the word only
in either of these texts (viz) Matt c. 16. and John, c. 21 it was enough that
he spoake to Peter personaly in the singular number, and in these words Blessed
art t^ou Simon B^rjona for flesh and blood have not revealed it unto thee but
my Father who is in heaven, and I say also unto thee that thou art Peter and
upon this r^ck I will build my Church and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it and I will give unto thee the Keys of the Ki^gdom of Heaven and
what soever thou shall bi^d on earth shall he bound in heaven whatsoever thou
shall loose on ear^h shall be loosed in heaven Mat. c. 16 v. 1718. 19 so when
they had di^ed Jesus said to Simon Peter Simon son of Jonas love thou me
more than these he said unto him yea Lord thou know that I love thee, he
says unto him feed my lambs, he says unto him again the second time Simon
son of Jonas love thou me? he says unto him yea Lord thou know that I
love thee, he says unto him feed my sheep, he said unto him the third time
Simon son of Jonas love thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him
the third time, love thou me, and he said unto him, Lord thou know that I
love thee, Jesus said unto him feed my sheep. John c* 21. v. 15. 16 17. which
words do plainly prove that our Savior then meant Peter and none else of the
Apostles, for he excluded them by the words Simon Peter son of Jonas levest
thou me, which as the reader may observe our Savior thrice co^seque^tly
repeated and after Peter answered each time, he gave him in charge his lambs
and sheep commanding him to feed them; which he would not have done if he had
then meant equally all the rest of the Apostles (as Whealy falsely alleages) but
would speak to them Generally in the plural number, as he did in that of Matt.
c. 18. v. 19, when he commanded them to go and teach all nations; as for that
new explication which Whealy gives, saying that our Savior speak particularly
to Peter more than to the other Apostles because they were not in the danger
that Peter was of swearing cu^sing and denying his blessed Master as Peter
afterward did (Matt c. 26. v. 7^.) theref^re wanted not the consolation which
the Savior of the world judged n^edfull for the support of a fa^lin^ Pe^er and
therefore it was he prayed that his faith should not fai^e Luke c. ^2. v. ^^.
Whealy expressly contr^dicts himself in this matter, for in his very last point
he sla^ly denies that our Savior com^itted any particular charge to Peter more
than to any other of the ^p^stles for want of the word only and here he owns
that our Saviors words were particularly applied to Peter more than to any
other of the Apostle which is a manifest contradiction for things signified by
words must of necessity be applied to him to whom the words are applied: as
Philosophers commonly teach as for Whealy's explication saying that it was
particularly applied to Peter because he was in danger of sweari^g cursing etc.
it is nonsense, at lest if he pretends to be a Christian, for our Savior spoake
these words of John (c. 21.) to Peter after he denied him, and after his
resurrection: so that there was no danger of Peter's cursing, swearing, and
denying Christ the second time, if our Savior was not to suffer again after
his resurection, which would be an abominable Doctrine to think of, that his
first Passion and sufferings was not suficient to redeem all manki^d; If it was
in order to give Peter some consolation our Savior spoake to him and also
prayed to his heavenly Father that his faith should not fail (according to
that of Luke c. 22 v. 31. a^ Whealy alleages) why did he exclude St. Thomas?
who by noe persuasion would believe our Saviors resurrection, until he saw
the wounds in his hands, and put his finger into the same, and trust his hand
into his side, John c. 20. v. 25* for really Peter's error was of less co^se
que^ce, than that of Thomas, for he only denied that he knew Christ personally,
and that out of human fear, for which act he immediately repented and wept
betterly; as appears Mat c. 26. v. 75. but we find nothing of Thomas's
repentance, though he would not believe one of the chiefest Misteryes of faith;
nor do we find in Scripture that our Savior spoake so favorably to him, or
prayed his heavenly Father that his faith should not fail; so that there must
needs be some other thing u^derstood by the said texts, which Whealy ought not
to deny since he cannot show scripture, Authority, or reason but impiously
strives to misinterpret the plain words of our Savior, to favor his own
wicked design. I see he passes over slightly one of the convincing arguments
that he* found in that manuel of controversy, which he pretends to confute;
and denies the major, minor, and consequence without giving any manner of
reason, only alleging that the r^st of the Apostles are named before Peter in
several places of Scripture; but because he could not poi^t any of those places
he was forced to leave the wh^le argument in it is vigor, and run to an other of
his own (as commonly all sectaryes do when they find themselves at a stand)
saying that if Christ had invested Peter with any such dominion, either Peter
or ^ome of the Evangelists would upon some occasion or other mentioned it: but
Peter is no where in scripture said to be invested therefore Peter had no such
dominion, as they pretend he had. the major passes yet it may be absolutely
denied, for all the actions of Christ are not individually mentioned in
scripture; as evidently appears by the following words of John C. ^1, v. 25
there are also many other things, which Jesus did, which if they should be
written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not contain the
books that should be written. So that it appears that if the scriptur^s were
silent in this matter (as they are not) that it would not follow that no such
thing has been, as I have showed by several other examples before now; the
minor also is false: as evidently appears by what I have produced on^ ^f St.
Matthew c. 16. and S. John c. ^^, and the consequence cannot be true, for out of
false premises there cannot follow but a false consequence.

As for that frivolus argument wherewith the adversary falsely accuses the
Catholics, alleging that they conclude Peter to have been bishop of Rome,
because he removed his sea from Antioch; let the reader be pleased to observe
that consequence, to be only some of his calumnies, and not that consequence
which the Catholics do infer, but this which follows: Peter removed his sea
from Antioch to Rome: therefore Peter was bishop of Rome; so that the other is
but some of his ill inferred consequences. As for these two reasons which he
alleages, first saying, that it would be more reasonable to conclude* that in
case Peter had been Bishop of Antioch and would from thence remove, that it was
to Jerusalem he removed, because his following calculation proves S. Peter to
have been often there* secondly because he was Apostle of the circumcision I
retort his first reason thus.

It were more reasonable to conclude that all shoe-makers would apply
themselves in making of shoes, tha^ to impeach themselves in matters of
divinity and contraversye: therefore it were more reaso^able to conclude that
Whealy, who is a shoemaker would apply himself in making of shoes tha^ to
impeach himself in matters of divinity and controversy, this consequence does
not happen: as is manifest by what Whealy publishes in his Almanac; so that it
appears, that that which is more reasonable to conclude does not always
happen; for if it thou would indeed we would never wrong our neighbors, or commit
any sin against our creator and redeemer; for it would be more reasonable to
conclude that we ought to obey his comma^dme^ts, than to be come rebels
against him, yet we see by daily experience that this happens, and no^ that
which is more reasonable to conclude. As to that removing of Peter, let Whealy
know that it was convenient that the chiefest sea of Christianity shoud be
fixd, and flourish in that City of Rome, which formerly was the chiefest City
and head of Idolatry; and it is the General opinion of ^everal holy Fathers,
that Peter was commanded by a special revelation to fix his sea there; but if
in case he had fix^d it in Jerusalem his successors the Bishops of Jerusalem
would in hae^i* St Peter's supr^macy, and have the same jurisdiction, that now
those of Rome have* as to the adversary's second reason, I say tha^ there was
no such compact between Peter and Paul (viz) that o^^ should only preach to the
Jews, and the o^ner to the Gentiles; otherwise Peter would not have declared
in the assembly that the Apostle^ and (...) is had at Jerusalem, that God (...)
among them that the Gentiles by his mouth should h^are the word of God and
bel^eve Acts c. 15. v. 7. neither would Paul preach to the Je^^s when he came
to Rome. Acts c. 28. v. 2. 3 etc. So that the agreement between them was, that
Peter shoud preach where ever he pleased, but principally to the Jews, and
that also Paul would do the same, but pri^cipally to the Gentiles* as for
Peter's being at Jerusalem several times, it argues not that he removed his sea
thither, when he quitted Antioch: as for example Mr. Boil the Bishop of Down
(in Ireland) removed his sea from thence, and sat in the three last Parlements
in Dublin: shall you therefore infer that it was to Dublin he removed his sea?
this consequence would not follow: for he removed his sea to Clougher, and so
might Peter remove his from Autioch to Rome; though he was present at these
assemblies of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem* as for Peter's creation, I
say that he was created Bishop by Christ, after hi^ Resurrection (even as Aron
was instituted high Priest by God over the Israelites) when he gave him in
charge the whole Church, as all the proofs which I have produced in my Answer
to Mr Jenni^gs 4th. point do plainly make-out; and if in case he had been made
Bishop by the Apostles it would not prove that he was not their superior: as
appears in the case of our Savior, who was superior to S. John Baptist, and
the Jews, yet was Baptized by the one, and circumcised by the others: as in
manifest Luke c. 2* and ^. Now to come to Whealys preposterous sort of
calculation, the reader will be pleased to take notice of the followi^g
discou^se, whereby he may plainly see how S. Peter came to be Bishop of Antioch
and Rome before the 19th. year after our Savior's Passion; he stayed about
four years after in Judea, he ^as at Jerusal^m beholding Christ's asecution
according to that of the Acts c. 1. v. ^ and Paul gave him a visit the third
year after his own conversion Gala, c. 1: v. 18. in the beginning or the 5th.
year after our Savior's Passion, Peter went to S^r^^a and fix^t his sea in
Antioch, where he remained seven years, but did not continue in the City all
that time for he went now and then to the ajacent provinces, and preached the
Gospel there (viz) in Pontos, Asia, Capodocia etc. about the end of the 7th
year he returned to Jerusalem (being 11 years after our Savior's Passion) and
was immediately imprisoned by Herod Acts c. 12. v. 4. but was soon enlarged by
an Angel: as appears by the 7. 8. and 9. v. of the same chap. the same year,
which was the second of the Impire of Claudius: he came to Rome and fixed his
sea there, and preached the Gospel to them for the space of seven years, after
which time he was expelled out of the City by Claudius, and so were all the
Jews then in Italy Acts. c. 18. v. 2. after this expulsion (which happened in
the be giving of the 19th, year after our Lords Passion (Peter went to
Jerusalem, and when those of Antioch heard of his coming thither they sent Paul
and Barnabas to him in order to decide a controversy risen among them about
the circumcision, which he did before the whole assembly; as appears Acts. c.
15 v, 10. he could not afterward return to Rom,e for the space of four years,
by which time Claudius the Improur died; so that the advers party's foolish
demo^stratio^ is grou^dless and appare^tly false, wherein he prete^ds to prove,
that Peter could not be Bishop of Rome dureing the first 19. years after
Christ's Passion, because the scripture makes mention of his being in Jerusalem
four several times duri^g that time as also his preaching the Gospel in Judea
Siria etc. But if this had hindered Peter's being Bishop of Rome until that
19th. year Whealy may as well conclude that the Prince of Orange was not
Crowned in England from the year 1688. until 1699. because that durei^g this
time he was seen every year in Ireland, Holla^d, or Flanders as for his saying
that the Second year of Nero's Impire is the 19th. of the years assigned of
Peter's being Bishop of Rome. it is manifestly false; for it is but the 1^th.
year, for as I have showed before, Peter came first to Rome the second year of
Claudius Impire, who reigned 13 years, nine mounths and 20, days so that
eleave^ years of Cl^u^iu's Impire with those (...) and two years of Nero's, do
not make up fully 14 years: before which time Paul never came to Rome, as is
evident Act, c. 28. v. 14 but he write before then his Epist. to the Romans in
his Journey to Jerusalem, and in the 16. c. he salutes many of the Romans, and
Jews, who were then Christians, and converted by Peter before he was expelled
by Claudius: where by it appears that Whealy is wholly a strenger not only to
ancient Historyes, but also to the very scripture, by which he pre tends to
prove his false Doctrine* as for Paul's two years imprisonment in Rome under
Nero, and not making mention of Peter in his Epistles to the Golossians,
Timothy etc. It proves not that Peter could not be then in Rome, as for
example: it cannot be inferred that Christ was not circumcised, because S.
Matthew makes noe mention of it; that the star did not appear to the wisemen,
because Luke is silent in the matter: that Christ was not born of a Virgin,
because Mark makes no mention of it; so that it is to be admired, how any man
of sense can offer to infer such an illegal consequence: as if St. Paul had
been obliged to specify all Christians then in Rome, or as if he had
possitively affirmed that not Christian had bee^ at Rome that time, but only
those that he names* to explain these texts Colo: c. 4. v. ^1 12. 2. Timoth. c.
4 v. 10. 11. etc. on which Whealy insists; the reader may observe, that Paul's
intent, was to give an account of his own domestic family to those, to whom
then he write, who knew them before, which is a most usual thing, for commonly
when people write to their well-wishers, they salute them in their
acquaintences name, and if they go from one place to an other they give them
an account of their removeal. so that from first to last Whealy cannot make out
that Peter was not Bishop of Rome from the second year of Claudius reign, till
he was crucified in the same City (with his head down wards) by Nero the
Emp^our's orders 25 year after, which Whealy might easily understand (without
any manner of confusion, or incongruity) out of the following Fathers and
ancient writers, (viz) S. Ignatius in his Epist. to the Romans; Eusebius in his
2 book c. 25. Egesippus in his 3. book c. 2. Origenes in his 3. on Geneses St.
Athanasius in his Apology de fuga sua. S. Chrysostom in his 32 hom. on S.
Paul's Epist to the Romans* Tertullian in his book de Praescrip. Lactantius in
his ^. book Divinarum Institutionum c. 21. St. Ambrose in his Oration against
Auxen^i^s St. Hierome de Viris Illustribus. St. Augustine in his first book de
Consensu Evangelist. c. 10. St: Maximus in his 5. ser de Natali Apostolorum.
Sulpitius in his 2 book of History Orosius in his 7th. Eutropius also in his
7th. book writing the life of Nero. Isidorus writing the life of St. Peter. S.
Leo in his first ser. de Natali Apostolorum and several other Fathers do
testify the same: by which it manifestly appears that the Papists do ag^ee
among themselves about the time that St. Peter came to be Bishop of Rome; for
of all the Catholic writers there are only two, who do not agree in this point
(viz) Marianus Scotus* who says that St. Peter came first to Rome in the
fourth year of Claudius's reign, and On^^phrius Panonius, who says that he
first fixed his sea in Rome before he came to Antioch, and removed again from
Antioch to Rome

Whealy 's last argument* when there was a dispute among the Apostles which of
them should be counted greatest (Luke c. 22. v. 24.) our Savior told them (v.
25. and 26.) the King of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, (but says
he) ye shall not be so, but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the
younger, and he that is chief, as him that does serve; so that it seems Christ
himself denied them any such supremacy, and if Christ was in the right, the
Church now in communion with the sea of Rome, is much in the wrong, to exercise
a jurisdiction which Christ himself Prohibited

This argument proves what Whealy would willingly deny; for these words
greatest and chief do plai^ly show that there was one chief among the Apostles,
whom Christ commanded to be as their minister, not obeying and serveing them,
as servants do; but ruling and governing them in humility and Charity,
according to that of the Acts c. 20. v. 24. and also to that of St. Paul's first
Epist. to the Corinth. c. 11. v. 22. and 23. and this is the same title that
the Popes of Rome give themselves in their bulls and patents, for every one of
them styles himself thus* serva^t to the servants of God; and truly if these
words would mean what Whealy pretends to prove they would plainly make-out that
it is not only the Church of Rome; but also the present Church of England
exercises such a jurisdiction, as he pretends to be prohibited by Christ, for
the Church of England allows of primates, Bishops, and several other
Ecclesiastical dignitaryes; and perhaps this is what he would feign prove, in
order to run them down, and make them all Presbyterians, who do not allow of
such dignitaryes, not withstanding that St. Paul in his Epist to Timothy c. 3
v. 1. recomends the office of a Bishop. as for that which Whealy adds, saying
that there was no such thing, as suprematy heard of, till about the year of
Christ 196. it is but some of his inventions, as may be seen in my Answer to Mr.
Jennings fourth poi^t, wherein I have showed that St. Denis the Apostles
Disciple calls S* Peter the Supreme; etc. and indeed if Whealy will not give
better reasons and grounds, for what he promises to prove in his followi^g
Almanacks, than he has given in what he pretends to prove in this years
Almanac, he will show, but his own ignorance and presumption as he has done
in what he write this year

FINIS
INDEX
MAsses were said in the first five ages after Christ's birth p. 20. The
communion was given under one kind to the la^ty in the first five ages p. 38
Common prayers were said in a language not vulgarly understood by all the
hearers in the first five ages p, 55 The Pope of Romes supremacy was
acknowledged in the first five ages, p. 68. The real presence was believed in
the first five ages p. 98. The holy Eucharist was adored in the first five ages
p 125. Transu^statiation was believed in the first five ages p. 133. Images has
been venerated in the first five ages p. 142. Saints were prayed too, in the
first five ages p. 164. Purgatory was believed in the first five ages p. 188.
All these of the first five ages had not the word of God in their maternal
language p. 224. The reformers Doctrines are but a heap of old heresies
lawfully condemned in the first five ages p 243 An Answer to what Whealy
alleages against St, Peter's Supremacy at the later end p. 1.
Errata.
PAge. 8. 1. 13. r. prayers p. 13. l. 13. r. peaceable. p. 16 l. 11. r.
espoused p. 30, l. 13 r. 64. p. 39. l, 12. r. Luke. p. 66. l. 5. r. Queen. p.
85. l. 8 r. says. p. 86. l. 16. r. relieve. p. 109 l. 8. r. Number. l. 17. r,
life p. 1^0. l. 4. r. the p. 118. l. 10. 151. l. 9. 172. l. 5. 173. l. 20. 174.
l. 6. 175. l. 1^. 79. l. 12. 190. l. 16. 191 l. 4. and 209. l, 7. r. does p.
148. l. 3 r. things p. 76. l, 18. r. a before prejudice p. 78. l. 14. r.
soldiers p. 220. l. ^. r. were p. 232. l. 4. r, catechesed p. 237. l. 13. r.
ruin. these with ^ome other oversights which ^appen'd in the correction, the
^ourteus reader is most humbly ^esir'd charitably to mend with ^is penn.


