AN ORDINANCE Ordained, Devised, and Made BY THE Master, and Keepers or
Wardens, and Commonalty of the MYSTERY or ART of STATIONERS OF THE CITY OF
LONDON, For the Well Governing of that SOCIETY.

LONDON: Printed for the Company of Stationers. 16^^

TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, We the Right
Honorable, Sir Francis North Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
Sir Edmund Saunders Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Kings
Bench, and Sir Francis Pemberton Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, send Greeting. Whereas in a Statute made
in the Parliament holden at Westminster in the Nineteenth Year of the Reign of
the late King of Famous Memory, Henry the Seventh, for the Weal and Profit of
his Subjects, It was (amongst other things) Ordained, Established, and Enacted,
That no Master, Wardens and Fellowships of Crafts or Mysteries, or any of them,
or any Rulers of Guilds and Fraternities, should take upon them to make any
Acts or Ordinances, nor to execute any Acts or Ordinances then aforemade, in
Disinheritance or Diminution of the Prerogative of the King, nor of any other,
nor against the Common Profit of the People, Except the same Acts or Ordinances
be Examined and Approved by the Chancellor or Treasurer of England, or Chief
Justices of either Benches, or Three of them, or before both the Justices of
Assize in their Circuit or Progress in the Shire where such Acts or Ordinances
be made, upon pain of Forfeiture of Forty Pounds for every time that they do
contrary, (as by the said Statute more plainly does and may appear.) Now know
ye, That the Master, and Keepers or Wardens, and Commonalty of the Mystery or
Art of Stationers of the City of London, Willing and desiring that the said Act
of Parliament be in all things duly observed and kept, The Tenth day of
February, in the Five and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Dom. One Thousand Six
Hundred Eighty Two, for the better Regulating and Ordering of the Corporation
of them the said Master, and Keepers or Wardens, and Commonalty of the Mystery
or Art of Stationers of the City of London, and for the preventing of Abuses
and Misdemeanors in and about Printing, Have Presented unto us this
underwritten Ordinance by them Ordained, Devised, and Made for the
well-governing of their Corporation and Society, and every Member thereof, and
have made their Humble Suit and Request to us to Examine, Correct, Amend, and
to Approve thereof in such manner and form, as by the said Act of Parliament
made in the said Nineteenth Year of King Henry the Seventh, is required. We
therefore well considering and approving the said Supplication to be good and
reasonable, according to their desire, and by the Authority of the said Act of
Parliament to us given, the same Ordinance underwritten, so to us exhibited,
have seen, read, and examined; The Tenor whereof hereafter follows in these
Words, (Viz.)

At an Assembly of the Master, and Keepers or Wardens, and Commonalty of (...)
Mystery or Art of STATIONERS of the City of LONDON, held at their Common Hall
in the Parish of St. Martin Ludgate, in the Ward of Farringdon within London,
on Wednesday the Sixth day of December, Anno Dom. One Thousand Six Hundred
Eighty and Two, For the well-governing of the Members of this Company, the Law
and Ordinance hereafter mentioned, was then made, enacted, and ordained by the
Master, and Keepers or Wardens, and Commonalty of the Mystery or Art of
STATIONERS of the City of LONDON, in manner and form following, viz.
WHereas, It has been the Ancient Usage of the Members of this Company, for
the Printer or Printers, Publisher or Publishers of all Books, Pamphlets,
Ballads, and Papers (except what are granted by Letters Pattents under the
Great Seal of England) to Enter into the Public Register-Book of this Company,
remaining with the Clerk of this Company for the time being, in his or their
own Name or Names, All Books, Pamphlets, Ballads, and Papers whatsoever, by him
or them to be Printed or Published, before the same Book, Pamphlet, Ballad, or
Paper is begun to be Printed, To the end that the Printer or Publisher thereof
may be known, to justify whatsoever shall be therein contained, and have no
Excuse for the Printing or Publishing thereof; which Usage this Company now
taking into their Consisideration, do think that the due Observation thereof
may be a means to prevent the Printing and Publishing of Treasonable,
Seditious, and Scandalous Books, Pamphlets, Libels, and Papers, or Discover the
Printers or Publishers thereof.

IT is therefore Ordained, That all and every Member or Members of this Company
shall before the Printing or reprinting of any Book, Pamphlet, Ballad, or Paper
(except what are granted under the Great Seal of England as aforesaid) in his
own Person cause to be Entered into the Register-Book of this Company (remaining
in the Custody of the Clerk of this Company, paying the usual Fees for the
Entering thereof) in his and their own Name and Names in words at length, the
Title of all and every Book, Pamphlet, and Paper, that he or they shall
hereafter Print or Publish, or cause to be Printed or Published. And to which
Entry he or they shall set and subscribe his and their respective Name and
Names, upon pain of forfeiting to the Master and Keepers or Wardens, and
Commonalty of the Mystery or Art of Stationers of the City of London, Twenty
pounds; to be by them Recovered by Action of Debt, to their own Use.

Which said Ordinance in manner and form aforesaid, made at the Request of the
said Master and Keepers or Wardens, and Commonalty of the Mystery or Art of
Stationers of the City of London, by the Authority and Virtue of the said Act
of Parliament made in the Nineteenth Year of the said King Henry the Seventh,
and for the preventing of the Penalty inflicted by the aforesaid Statute upon
the Execution of Ordinances not approved, as by the said Act is directed (as
far forth as by Law we may) We the said Lord Keeper, and Lords Chief Justices
of either Benches, do Approve, Ratify, and Confirm. In Witness whereof, We the
said Lord Keeper, and Lords Chief Justices of either Benches, have hereunto
subscribed our Names, and set our Seals the said Tenth day of February, in the
Five and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc. Annoque Dom. 1682.

F. North, C S. Edm. Saunders. Fr. Pemberton.


