Errata in the Appeal.

PAge 8. l. 10. for no Child read nor Child. p. 27. l. 31. for disper'd read
dispersed. p. 39. l. 33. for I thing read I think. In the Observations, p. 7.
agitur, paries cum proximus, p. 12. l. 20. 80000. p. 20. l. 21. Ostende.

OBSERVATIONS Upon the ACTS for ANNUITIES.
THE Acts for Annuities are Four, whereby two considerable Supplies for the War
have been granted upon one Fund. The two first Acts raised a Million as
speedily as could be imagined, the two last for 618000 l. have not yet raised
that Sum: The Reasons will be endeavored to be observed by this Paper, and the
Remora's will be attempted to be removed with regard to, and also preservation
of His Majesty's Interest and Prerogative, with the Honor and Methods of
Parliament; and also the public and private Property of very many Subjects.

Which, with Submission to better Judgments, the first rub or difficulty that
seems to be in the way for hindering the raising the last Sum, is a Clause in
the first Act, Fol. 221. which says, That no Contributers to the Million shall
advance any further Sum upon the Terms or Advantages. This Clause may be said
to be Superceded or Repealed by the two last Acts, which yet is only
consequentially; for neither of the two last Acts take notice of that Clause
expressly.

Secondly, Both the first Acts for the Million seem to take especial Care that
His Majesty shall not raise any Sum upon that Fund exceeding the Million; and
there seems to be a labor to prevent the King's disposal of any Sum that shall
rise upon this Fund, in case it shall raise in any Year or Years, any Sum or
Sums over and above the Security or Compensation for the Million. And if it
shall happen to raise more, it is called a Surplus, which has a Ba^ over it not
agreeable with the Title of a Gift, and may be f^rther taken notice of
hereafter.

The Third Observation of these Acts is, that in case the Sum shall full short
of what is intended to be raised, then there is allowed a borrowing Clause,
which is but 5 l. per Cent which being less than the King allows in other
Cases, and by other Acts, is the reason why the Sum of 618000 l. intended for
the War, is not raised by borrowing, though the Fund should come up to the full
expectation, and a Surplusage, which is feared by many; and therefore unwilling
to venture the Purchasing the remaining years after the Life they have already.
But that Jealousy may be removed if we get over this last Observation: which
is,

Fourthly, That none of the Four Acts take particular notice of Nominees dying,
which will make the most material part of this Discourse.

In the first place some are of Opinion, that all such Annuities by the first
Acts as cease by the Death of the Nominee or Nominees, shall come within the
Acceptance of a Surplusage, and that they are the King's and his Heirs; which,
with submission to better Judgments, I cannot comprehend by these Acts to be a
Surplusage; but rather a Gift of Providence than a Gift of the Parliament: But
whether it be determined a Surplusage or not, the Limitation lessens the Grant,
and appears to be a clipping the Wings of the Gift, if not of the Prerogative.

But to stick close to the business of these Acts for Supplies to the War; at
present the 618000 l. cannot be raised by these last Acts, because none of them
take notice directly of the Nominees deceased, which ought to be in being, as a
foundation for a Sale of further Term or Years: And it is natural to conclude,
that had the Parliament taken notice of Nominees deceasing, they would have set
more Years than Five for the Purchases; and yet on the other hand it would have
sounded harsh to Debate or Vote the Sale of what was fallen to the King; yet that
waved, the King is supposed to have a greater Sum for the War than is really
raised. It is confessed the Crown may have the Sum in Reversion, if the Fund
answers expectation: But that does not keep up the Met^^ds of Parhament for
raising the express Sum to carry on the War, unless the King borrows upon it,
which at 5 per Cent. he is not like to do for the Reasons above.

Moreover it is the Discourse of many Nominees in being, that the Fund falls
short of satisfying the Survivorships and Nominees in being at 14 l. per Ann.
(which is another Discouragement of purchasing the Years over) and therefore
hope and expect, that what shall fall by Deaths shall be employed to their
satisfa^^ions; which being allowed, the King has neither the Five Years (...)
p^esent for the War, ^^cording to the Intent of the Acts, no^ (...) the Fund to
borrow upon; the consequence whereof will ad^^^ o^ a longer Discourse than I
shall presume upon

My business at present being only to take off Jealousies, and clear the
Mistakes that seemingly appear: Which to do effectually, I must first be
assisted by a Me^^^ out of my Compass, that is, The Examination of the Accounts
as the A^ts appoint; for those will demonstrate what the Fund affor^s, and also
the number of the Nominees dead; whereby will appear the defect of the Sum
expressed and relied upon, and then the Ways and Means to supply the deficiency
will be the easier undertaken. To which I shall humbly offer this further.

In case the Fund shall fall short for raising the 618000 l. according to the
Intention of the Acts, then the Parliament will see the Difficulties the King
has been under, and consequently for their Honor will find a Supply.

In case the Fund answers the Intention, by Publishing the same all Jealousies
are taken off from the Nominees in being, and those that have not purchased the
Term over, ought to declare whether they will purchase or not; for many may be
willing to purchase that are not willing to break the civil Methods, that is,
to purchase over another Man's head. It is confessed the two last Acts have
given time for Persons in possession to come in, and after the limitation,
freedom to others; but the Reasons above have caused a slackness.

And moreover some living have been fearful that if the Fund shall hold up to
the expectation, many Nominees being dead, the Reversion unpurchased, the
Parliament ta^ing notice thereof, may in the end of a Session wanting a little
Sum, (...) f^rth^r Charge upon it, which will continue a (...) ^bject, and take
off all prospect of Advantage to the King

Therefore taking all the Premis^^ together they raise a determination that
it is requisite or necess^^^ (...) the ^o^r Acts b^ reviewed, and if what ha^
been obse^ved (...) true, then a Fifth may ensue, which may bring all to
Accom^^^ati^n; for which every Paragraph hitherto is but as so many (...)
Wheels or Movements in Clock-work, wanting the most material part or principal
Spring to set all agoing rightly, according to my undertaking in the beginning.

Which when I explain, if the Reader, be not Courteous, he will suddenly
conclude all this is but as a Windmil puffed about with Self-Interest: I will
confess there is something of that in the bottom, and I hope I may be pardoned
if I say I see few move in the World that have not something tending that way,
and if I should stand as a mark at Charing Cross to be flung at by any one that
comes that way, without some Selfishness I might come off without a Broken
Head. And if my Endeavors for the preservation of the Laws established, the
undertakings and sufferings for preventing Arbitrary Power and Popery, without
Designs in those points for Self-Interest were as well known, as these Acts are
of concern, perhaps I should not be deeply censured for putting my self into a
public concern for some recompense; which I hope the Reader will allow to be
modest; for I do refer my self to the King and Parliament to give me what
proportion or scantling of time they shall think fit, if I live to the
enjoyment of what I aim at, after the Government has moved according to its own
steps, for I ask no profit till the King and his People have reaped their hoped
for Satisfaction; in case they allow or approve the Hinge all this former
discourse hangs upon, which in conclusion is thus:

That his Majesty nominate a Nominee or Nominees to supply the places of those
dead as a Foundation to Purchase upon, at five Years, that is paying Seventy
Pounds into the Exchequer for each Fourteen Pound per Annum, and so
proportionably for greater Sums; for which his Majesty to allow so many years
for Principal and Interest, and also to me as Conduit Pipe or Nominee such time
as his Majesty with the Parliament shall think fit: during which time Tallies
to be given, and Payments equivalent with the original Purchasers according to
the methods of the Acts. And after the Expiration of the time limited, to
revert to the King and Crown clear and not chargeable by Parliament; nor to be
disposed of so as to lessen the security of others in case the Fund shall fall
short; Nor shall any allowances be made to any person whatsoever, till the
Seventy Pounds and so upwards be first paid into the Exchequer for a Tally or
Tallies; which with submission to Persons of better Experience in Affairs,
comprehends the Intentions of all the Acts with Honor and Interest to all in
general and particular. In which if I mistake I ask pardon, and shall for the
future endeavor to spend the short time I have left in absolute Obscurity.

FINIS.

