Admiral Russel's LETTER TO THE Earl of Nottingham: Containing an Exact and
Particular Relation of the Late Happy Victory and Success AGAINST The French
Fleet.
Published by Authority
Portsmouth, June 2. 1692. My LORD,
SINCE your Lordship seems to think, that an Account in general of the Fleet's
good Success is not so satisfactory as one setting forth the Particulars, I
here send it with as much Brevity as the Matter will admit of. I must confess I
was not much inclined to trouble you in this nature, not being ambitious to see
my Name in Print on any occasion; but since it is your Lordships Commands, I am
the more inclined to give you the best Information I am able of the Action,
having seen several Printed Relations not very sincere.

Wednesday in the Evening, being the Eighteenth of May, standing over for Cape
de Hague, I ordered Captain Gillam in the Chester, and the Charles Galley, to
lie at such a distance to the Westward of the Fleet, that they might discover
any Signals made from me.

Thursday the Nineteenth, standing with a small Gale S. S. W. the Wind at W.
and W. and by S. hazey Weather, Cape Barsleur beating then S. W. and by S. from
me distant about Seven Leagues, between three and four in the morning, we heard
several Guns to the Westward, and in a short time I saw the two Frigates making
the Signal of seeing the Enemy, with their Heads lying to the Northward, which
gave me reason to think the Enemy lay with their Heads that way; upon which I
ordered the Signal to be made for the Fleet's drawing into a Line of Battle;
after which I made the Signal for the Rear of the Fleet to Tack, that if the
Enemy stood to the Northward, we might the sooner come to engage; But soon
after four a Clock, the Sun had a little cleared the VVeather, and I saw the
French Fleet standing to the Southward, forming their Line on the same Tack
that I was upon; I then ordered that Signal for the Rear to Tack to be taken
in, and at the same time bore-away with my own Ship so far to Leeward, as I
judge each Ship in the Fleet might fetch any Wake or Grains; then brought to
again, lying by with my Fore-top-Sail to the Mast, to give the Ships in the
Fleet the better opportunity of placing themselves, as they had been before
directed. By eight a Clock, we had formed an indifferent Line, stretching from
the S. S. VV. to the N. N E. the Dutch in the Van, the Red in the Center, and
the Blue in the Rear. By Nine a Clock the Enemies Vanguard had almost
stretched almost as far to the Southward as ours, their Admiral and
Rear-Admiral of the Blue that were in the Rear, closing the Line, and their
Vice Admiral of the same Division stretching to the Rear of our Fleet, but
never coming within Gunshot of them. About ten they bore down upon us, I still
lying with my Fore-top-sail to the Mast. I then observed Monsieur Tourville,
the French Admiral, put out his Signal for Battle; I gave order that mine
should not be hoisted till the Fleets began to engage, that he might have the
fairer opportunity of coming as near me as he thought convenient, and at the
same time, I sent Orders to Admiral Almende, that as soon as any of his
Squadron could VVeather the Enemies Fleet, they should Tack, and get to the
VVestward of them; as also to the Blue, to make sail and close the Line, they
being at some distance a-stern; but as soon as the Fleet began to Engage it
fell calm, which prevented their so doing. About half an Hour after eleven,
Monsieur Tourville in the Royal-Sun (being within Three Quarters Musket Shot,)
brought to, lying by me at that distance about an Hour and an half, plying his
Guns very warmly; though I must observe to you, that our Men fired their Guns
faster; after which time I did not find his Guns were fired with that vigor as
before, and I could see him in great Disorder, his Rigging, Sails, Top-sail
Yards being shot, and no body endeavoring to make them serviceable, and his
Boats towing of him to VVindward, gave me reason to think he was much gaul'd.
About two the VVind shifted to the N. VV. and by VV. and some little time after
that five fresh Ships of the Enemies blue Squadron came and posted themselves,
three ahead of Monsieur Tourville, and two a-stern of him, and fired with
great Fury, which continued till after three. About four in the Evening there
came so thick a Fog, that we could not see a Ship of the Enemies, which
occasioned our leaving off firing for a little time, and then it cleared up,
and we could see Monsieur Tourville towing away with his Boats to the Northward
from us; upon which I did the same, and ordered all my Division to do the like;
and about half an Hour after Five, we had a small breeze of VVind Easterly. I
then made the Signal for the Fleet to Chase, sending Notice to all the Ships
about me, that the Enemy were running. About this time I heard several
Broad-sides to the Westward, and though I could not see the Ships that fired, I
concluded them to be our Blue, that by the shift of Wind had weathered the
Enemy; but it proved to be the Reer-Admiral of the Red, who had weathered
Tourville's Squadron, and got between them and their Admiral of the Blue, where
they lay firing some time, and then Tourville Anchored with some. Ships of his
own Division, as aso the Reer-Admiral of the Red with some of his. This was the
time that Captain Histings in the Sandwich was killed, he driving through those
Ships, by reason of his Anchors not being clear. I could not see this part,
because of the great smoke and Fog, but have received this Information from Sir
Cloudesly Shouel since. I sent to all the Ships that were near me, to Chase to
the Westward all night; telling them, I designed to follow the Enemy to the
Breast; and sometimes we could see a French Ship, two, or three, standing away
with all the Sail they could make to the Westward, which lasted about half an
hour, it being some of our Blue falling in with some of the Ships of the
Enemies in the Fog. It was Foggy, and very little wind all night.

Friday the 20th, 'twas so thick in the morning, that I could see none of the
Enemies Ships, and but very few of our own. About Eight it began to clear up;
the Dutch, who were to the Southward of me, made the Signal of seeing the
Enemy; and, as it cleared, I saw about 32 or 34 Sail, distant from us, between
two and three Leagues, the Wind at E. N. E. and they bearing from us W. S. W.
our Fleet chasing with all the Sail they could make, having taken in the Signal
for the line of Battle, that each Ship might make the best of her way after the
Enemy. Between Eleven and Twelve, the wind came to the S. W. The French plied
to the Westward with all the Sail they could, and we after them. About Four the
Tide of Ebb being done, the French anchored, as also we in 43 Fathom water,
Cape Barsleur bearing S. and by W. About Ten in the Evening we weighed with the
Tide of Ebb, the wind at S. W. and plied to the Westward. About Twelve my
Fore-Topmast came by the Board, having received several Shot,

Saturday the 21st, we continued still plying after the Enemy, till Four in the
Morning. The tide of Ebb being done, I anchored in 46 Fathom Water. Cape de
Hague bearing S. and by W. and the Island of Alderney S. S. W By my Topmast's
going away, the Dutch Squadron, and the Admiral of the Blue, with several of
his Squadron, had got a great way to windward of me. About seven in the Morning
several of the Enemies Ships, being far advanced toward the Race, I perceived
driving to the Eastward with the Tide of Flood, between Eight and Nine, when
they were driven so far to the Eastward that I could fetch them, I made the
Signal for the Fleet to cut and follow the Enemy; which they all did, except
the aforementioned weathermost Ships, which rid fast, to observe the motion of
the rest of the Enemies Ships that continued in the Race of Alderney. About
Eleven, I saw three great Ships fair under the Shore Tack and stand to the
westward: but making two or three short Boards, the biggest of them run ashore,
who presently cut his Masts away; the other two being to leward of him, plied
up to him: The reason, as I judge, of their doing this was, that they could not
weather our sternmost Ships to the westward, nor get out ahead of Us to the
Eastward. I observing that many of our Ships hovered about those, I sent to Sir
Ralph Delaval, Vice Admiral of the Red, who was in the Rear of our Fleet, to
keep such a number of Ships and Fireships with him, as might be sufficient to
destroy those of the Enemies and to order the others to follow me, I being then
in pursuit of the rest of the Enemy. An account of the performing that service
I don't trouble your Lordship with, He having given it you already. About Four
in the afternoon 18 Sail of the Enemies Ships got to the Eastward of Cape
Barsleur; after which, I observed they hawled in for Le Hogue; The Reer-Admiral
of she Red, Vice Admiral of the Blew, and some of the Ships were ahead of me.
About ten at night, I anchored in the Bay of Le Hogue, and lay till Four the
next Morning, being.

Sunday the 22d; and then I weighed, and stood in near the Land of Le Hogue:
but when we found the Flood came, we anchored in good sandy Ground. At two in
the afternoon we weighed again, and plied close in with Le Hogue, where we saw
13 Sail of the Enemies Men of War hawled close in with the shore: The
Rear-Admiral of the Red tells me, That the night before he saw the other five,
which made up the 18 I first chased, stand to the Eastward.

Monday the 23d, I sent in Vice Admiral Rook, with several Men of War and
Fireships, as also the Boats of the Fleet, to destroy those Ships: but the
Enemy had gotten them so near the Shore, that not any of our Men of War, except
the small Frigates could do any Service; but that Night Vice Admiral Rook with
the Boats burnt six of them.

Tuesday, 24th. About eight in the morning he went in again with the Boats, and
Burnt the other seven, together with some several Transport Ships, and some
Vessels with Ammunition, the Names of which Ships I am not yet able to give
your Lordship any other Account of than what you have as follows.

Soell Royal Count de Tourville Guns 104 L' Ambiteux, Chevalier de la Vilette
Guns 104 L' Ambiteux, Vice Admiral of the Guns 104 L' Ambiteux, White. Guns 104
L' Admirable, Monsieur Beaujeu, Guns 90 La Magnifique, Mons. Cottologon,
Rere-Admiral of the Blue. Guns 76 Le St. Phillipp, Monsieur Inferville, Guns 76
Le Conquerant, Du Magnon, Guns 76 Le Triumphant, Monsieur Bellemont, Guns 74 L'
Etonant Monsieur de Septime, Guns 80 Le Terrible, Monsieur Septvilla, Guns 80
L' Amiable, Monsieur de Raal, Guns 68 L' Fire, Monsieur Larsethoir, Guns 68 Le
Glorieux, Le Chapter de Chateaumoorant, Guns 60 Le Serieux, Monsieur Bernier Guns
60 Le Trident, Monsieur Monteaud, Guns 56
As the Prisoners report, a Three Deck Ship burnt by accident, and the two
following sunk; how true I don't know.

Le Prince, Monsiur Bagnetz, 60 Le St. Paril, Monsieur Ferille. 60
Though these be all the Names that I have been able to learn, yet I am sure
there are sixteen Ships of consequence Burnt.

Wednesday the 25th. I sailed from Le Hogue, ordering the Admiral of the Blue,
with a Squadron of English and Dutch Ships under his command, to run along the
Enemies coast as far as Havre de grace, in hopes that some of the
beforementioned five ships that stood to the Eastward, might have been got
thither, but he informs me, that upon his appearing before that place, he could
perceive but one or two small Vessels. The number of the Enemies ships did not
exceed Fifty men of War, by the best information, from fifty six to one Hundred
and four Guns; and though it must be confessed that our number was superior to
theirs (which probably at first might startle them) yet by their coming down
with that Resolution, I cannot think it had any great effect upon them; And
this I may affirm for a Truth, not with any Intention to value our own Action,
or to lessen the Bravery of the Enemy, That they were beaten by a Number
considerably less than theirs; the Calmness and Thickness of the Weather giving
very few of the Dutch or Blue the Opportunity of Engaging, which I am sure they
look upon as a great Misfortune; and had the Weather proved otherwise, I do not
see how 'twas possible for any of them to have escaped us.

This is the exactest Account that I am able to give You, which I hope will
prove to Your Lordship's Satisfaction. Vice Admiral Rook has given me a very
good Character of several Men employed in the Boats, and I have ordered him to
give me a List of the Names of such persons whose Behavior was Remarkable, in
order to their Reward I am,

My LORD, Your Lordships most Faithsful Humble Servant; E. Russel.


A Copy of a Letter from Portsmouth, Dated May 29th 1692.
The Troops that are in and about this Town, under the Command of the Duke of
Leinster, etc. designed for a Descent upon France, consists of 17000 effective
Men besides three Scotch Regiments, and five Regiments that are Arrived from
Ireland, so that they will Compose in the whole an Army of 22000 Men.

The main Design for this Expedition consists of 30 Mortars, 20 whole
Culverins, 20 24 Pounders, 18 Field Pieces, 9000 Booms, 7000 Carcasses, and a
vast quantity of other Warlike Ammunition; Sir Martin Beckman, goes Chief
Engineer, Lievt. Colonel George Brown, Lievt. Coll. of the Train, Capt. Thomas
Brown, Master of the Bombardoes, and Capt. Leak Master Gunner of England, is
also Ordered to attend this Train, with Forty Gunners, Eighty Montrosses,
Twenty Fire-Mortars, and Thirty Boombardoes, and they Expect orders every hour
to Embarque, Transport ships being already taken up for that purpose. God
Almighty give Their Majesty's as good Success by Land as by Sea.

The same Letter adds, that they are hard at Work, in Repairing the Damage our
ships received in the Fight, and would in 14 days be able to put to Sea, in
Order to relieve Sir John Ashby, and the Dutch, who were then Cruising on the
French Coast.

And that the Seamen, who were on Board the Royal Sun of France, tells them,
that, that Ship, cost the French King, Three Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling.
And that on the Poop, the Effigies of Lewis the 14th. was Curiously Carved,
holding all the Confederate Princes in Chains, and by all they could learn from
the Seamen, there is not killed in the English Fleet, not above 500 and above
1500 wounded. Oh that the Almighty God may have the Glory of this his so great
appearance for us.

Monday 23d. of May, About 3 this afternoon our Admiral made the Signal for the
Long-Boats and Barges, to go a Cruising, we believe there was 150 Long-Boats
and Barges, Manned and Armed, every Longboat having on Board between 20 and 30
Men, with Muskets, Pistols and other Fire Arms, as Blunderbusses, and
Cutlashes, thus armed we went to Le Hogue and burnt Six Sail of ships that
Night, and returned by the light, about six the next Morning we went and burnt
the other 7 Sail, with about sixteen Sail of Merchantmen and Privateers. The
Fort playing upon us very smartly all the time, and small shot playing from the
shore the French having a Camp. During all this action, we have Lost none but
Fireships, but the French has Lost in this Engagement Twenty Three Sail.

Tuesday, June 7th. 1692.

This very day brings News, That the Town of Marmur, but not the Castle have
Surrendered to the French sooner then it needed to have done, but at so dear a
rate, as it is hoped will cost the French King his Kingdom; for the Armies were
within a mile of each other, our King laboring to Attack them. The French King
was there, but he shuffled back to Paris, being excused as sick of the Gout,
Five Hundred Deserters came over a Sunday and Monday was seven-night, and some
come away almost every day, as they can get away. It Is concluded, there has
been Action ere now, and we are bigg with hopes, to receive a most glorious
Account from Flanders, as we have had from the Fleet, which were the words our
King used to encourage his Army.

Our Armado and Transport Ships are very busy in taken in men, and Meterials at
Portsmouth, to make a speedy Descent into France.

The English Fleet Consists of Ships sixty Three. Seamen, Twenty seven
Thousand, seven hundred Twenty five. Cannons Four Thousand Five Hundred.
Fireships and Frigates, Twenty Three.

The Dutch Fleet Consists of Ships Thirtty six. Seamen, Twelve Thousand Nine
Hundred and Fifty. Cannons, Two Thousand four hundred Ninety Four. Fireships
and Frigates, Fourteen.

In all Ninety Nine Ships, Forty Thousand six hundred seventy five Seamen, six
Thousand nine Hundred ninety four Cannons, eighty seven Fireships and Frigates

THe Happy News of this Success and Victory, obtained by Their Majesty's Royal
Navy, over the French Fleet, was Received by Their Majesty's Loyal Subjects of
their Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, with all Hearty
Expressions and Demonstrations of Joy; His Excellency the Governor, being
absent upon an Expedition against the Common Enemy. The Lieutenant Governor,
accompanied with the Gentlemen of the Council; Principal Gentlemen, Military
Officers and Merchants of the Town of Boston, Repairing unto the Fort, the
great Ordnance at the Fort, and other Fortifications in and about the said
Town, and at Their Majesty's Castle, were Discharged and Loud Acclamations of
God Save King William and Queen Mary, and grant them a Long and Prosperous
Reign, made by the whole Concourse of People there Assembled.

FINIS.

Boston Printed, and Sold by Benjamin Harris, at the London-Coffee-House. 1692.


