THE Best Guide IN THE WORST OF TIMES, Delivered in a SERMON AT THE GVILD-HALL
Chapel, ON March 27. 1681. Before the Honorable THE ALDERMEN And several
Eminent Citizens Of the CITY of LONDON.

By WILLIAM ORME, Vicar of S. Bartholomews the Less, London.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Carr, at the Sign of the Kings Head, near the West
End of S. Paul's, 1681.

To the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD, Knight Lord Mayor Of the City of
LONDON, And to the Honorable Court of Aldermen.
MY LORD,
THe Honor and Obedience, which is justly due, and ought to be given to
Magistratical Authority, does many times influence Men to do that, which the
sense of their own Unworthiness and Imperfections does reasonably dissuade them
from: Upon which Account, this Sermon is Presented to Public View, with making
its First and Humble Approaches to Your Honor.

For where should it properly go for Maintenance and Protection, but to that
Mansion House, from whence issued forth the Order, which caused it to appear
thus habited from the Press.

This Discourse indeed ^a^l not the Honor of Your Lordships Presence, that
being prevented by Your Lordships much condoled Sickness: But now it lies under
and before Your Lordships eye, not only to be read and examined, but to be
taken care of and Defended.

MY LORD,

The Times are Dark and Slippery, wherein a Wise man can hardly find his way;
and a Strong Man walk without fear of stumbles and falls: how much more the
Ignorant and the Weak?

In compassion therefore to such, I endeavored all I could to furnish them
with the Best Guide, and Surest Rule for their Conduct and Support.

And if Men would be but as ready and earnest to follow this Advice, which St.
Paul gives for their outward Carriage and Conversation, as they are to observe
what the Learned gives them, for their Healths and Estates; I am confident Our
Clouds of Fears and Jealousies would quickly Vanish: Our Storms of Strifes and
Contentions would gather into a Calm; And Our God would defend us from all
sorts of Enemies, or else force them to be at Peace with Us.

In short, I have only this to crave, that my Readers will perufe this Sermon,
with the like Good meaning and Honest mind, as it was Preached and seemed to be
Heard. And be so kind to me, as to cover its faults with Charity, and so kind
to themselves, as to put the rest in practice with Diligence and Perseverance.

To the zealous prosecuting of which, we (of this City especially) have a
double Encouragement and Obligation; The First is the Direction of one that was
an Infallible Apostle; The other is the Exemplary Pattern of Your Lordships
Piety, Prudence and Peaceable Conduct: To whose Fame and Merit, I Offer this as
my First Fruits, with Hearty Prayers for Your Lordships Perfect Recovery, and
all Possible Assurances, that I Am

Your Lordship's, And the Honorable Court of Aldermen's Most Humble and
Obedient Servant, WILL. ORME.
St. Bartholomews the less, April. 18. 1681.
A SERMON PREACHED AT Guild Hall Chapel, March 27. 1681.
PHILIPPIANS I. 27. The former part of the Verse. Only let your Conversation be
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.


THE constancy and reality of a Friend is never so visible and known as in the
time of straits and necessities. The skill and courage of a Pilot is never so
much tried and proved as when the Vessel is engaged with a Tempest.

In such like seasons as these S. Paul took the opportunity of showing his
admirable prudence and hearty love for and to his Philippians, who were in a
distressed and deplorable condition, when he sent them this Epistle.

For first, they were miserably rent and divided by the artifices of some
ill-minded men, who partly out of ambition of setting up themselves, and partly
out of envy to S. Paul's flourishing same and Ministry; did all they could (and
that under the profession of Christianity too) to allenate the Peoples minds
and affections from S. Paul, and to crumble them into parties. Of these you
read Verses 15, 16: some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some
also of good will. The one preach Christ of contention, the other of love.

Secondly, They lay under the fearful apprehensions of being assaulted and
persecuted by an Enemy from abroad. For there were some at Nero's Court, who
(out of inveterate malice to Christianity) had represented to him the many
mischiefs and dangers that would attend his Government, if he suffered
Christians to increase and multiply.

Upon which suggestion Nero might possibly give orders to fall upon the
Philippians with Sword and Violence. And of these sort of Enemies, S. Paul (who
was then a Prisoner at Rome, and so might probably hear what was done at Court)
gave the Philippians notice, with this annexed Exhortation; But in nothing be
terrified or affrighted at the adversaries; for though they may think to root
up Christianity by destroying your lives, yet you shall be saved, the Gospel
shall flourish, and they shall come to naught: For this persecution is an
evident sign or token of perdition to them, but to you of Salvation, and that
of God, Verse 28.

And now if we consider these Philippians tortured with Intestine broils and
convulsions, and threatened to be set upon with Sword and Persecution: we may
reasonably conjecture, that they knew not well what to do, nor what course to
take to save and defend themselves and their newly espoused Religion.

S. Paul therefore like an affectionate constant Friend, and a most skilful
Pilate, took their condition so far into his pity and consideration, as to give
them the best advice and assistance, and which none but an Apostle could give
the like.

For if a Church or People are shaken and divided at home, or menaced with
ruin from abroad, there is no such way for their safety and defense, as
retreating to the diligent practice of the Apostolical advice given in the
Text: Only to let their conversations be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

In the Opening of which words I shall propose these Four things to be
considered.

First, That in evil and dangerous Times men ought to be very careful and
prudent in the management of themselves and their conversations. Secondly, That
the best and most prudent course we can take in the ordering of our
Conversations is to guide and govern them by the rules and laws contained in
the Gospel of Christ. Thirdly, We shall consider wherein the Agreeableness of a
man's Life and Conversation to the Gospel of Christ does principally consist.
Fourthly, I shall give some Reasons, why in evil and perilous Times we ought
then more especially to be most prudent and careful in governing our
Conversations according to the Gospel of Christ, and then conclude with
Application.
I begin with the First:
That in Evil and Perilous Times men ought to be very careful and prudent in
the management of themselves and their Conversations. It was in such a like
case as this that S. Paul proposed this advice in the Text to his Philippians
observance; and therefore we may reasonably conclude, that the following of it
is both seasonable and proper for all persons when surrounded and oppressed with
troubles and distresses.

What Conversation (of which we ought to be careful) does mean, I suppose every
one understands. It being the outward carriage and government of a man's self
in this World, or the common and usual course and way of a man's Life and
Actions. In the ordering and managing of which, we ought to use our utmost care
and discretion: And that upon these following Reasons:

First, Because there is nothing of us falls so much under Humane Cognizance
and Observation as this: For how we live, and what we do is exposed to every
Eye, and we cannot demean our selves, or be concerned in any worldly Affairs,
but many, both Friends and Enemies, will take notice of them and make remarks
upon them.

And therefore since we lie open and naked to the sight of as Rational and
Intelligent persons as our selves, and who will be as curious and Critical to
observe our way of living, as we are of theirs, certainly it will become us to
be very careful and circumspect how we walk and act in this present World.

Secondly, We ought to do it, because that it is from this outward Conversation
and visible course of a Man's life, that we all censure and judge one another.

We know that they are not a few who are puffed up with the Pride and Ambition of
sitting in the Chair, and upon the Bench of Judgment: nor are they less
numerous, who make it their business and delight to sift and censure their
Neighbors and Brethren.

But if Men will judge as they ought to do, they have no way left them to do it
by, but the visible Actions, and the constant course of a Man's dealings and
conversation.

And if Men will venture to pass sentence upon humor and hearsay, fancy and
opinion, jealousy and suspicion; I am afraid the Judgment they give, will be
found to be as often false, as it is malicious.

To know a Man's heart, or to understand the frame and temper of a Man's mind
and constitution, is a Prerogative that belongs to God alone; and therefore
there can be no way left for us to know one another by, but the apparent
actions and habitual course of a Man's life.

Now then seeing that it is by this alone that we judge and censure one another,
and that upon this our worldly Reputation stands or falls, it will be our
interest and prudence to be cautions in what we speak and do.

And though it be impossible to live so warily and without offense, but that
some ill natured, and wicked minded men, will maliciously turn all we say to
the worst sense, and traduce the most Honest and generous Actions; yet if we
can satisfy our Consciences in the Truth of what we speak, and the
Righteousness and Justice of what we do, we need not dread the sting and poison
of calumny and slander. For it is found True upon Trial, that a good Honest
mind, and a clean life, is armor of proof against all the railings and
revilings of malicious Tongues.

Thirdly, We ought to be very careful of our outward Conversation: Because of
the good and bad Influences it may have upon others, especially if Providence
has seated us in any degrees of Place, Office, Riches, Parts and Qualities
above others.

For of such a spreading and diffusive nature is Conversation, that the next
standers-by are tinctured with it, if it be good: but most certainly infected
and corrupted by it, if it be bad. And if this be the effect of Conversation
among equals, how much more powerful will it be, in those, who are in the
highest forms of Dignity and Preferment. For as the Lives and Examples of such
Men are more visible and observed, so they carry along with them a kind of
License and Authority. For the mean and unthinking Vulgar, are apt to believe
that they never do ill or amiss, if they do no worse than what they see the
Great, Wealthy and Learned daily do.

Now if our Conversations have such an Influence and Operation upon others, we
ought then to have a special care in the government of them.

Because if they be Good and Virtuous, we may in time possibly stop the mouths
of our Gainsayers, and convert our Enemies from the Errors of their ways: But
if they are loose and vicious, we shall give our Adversaries just cause to
blaspheme, corrupt our Brethren and Friends, and increase our own Damnation, by
being the unhappy Instruments of destroying many Souls.

The Second Proposition.
That the most Prudent Course we can take with our Conversations, is to guide
and govern them by the Laws and Rules contained in the Gospel of Christ; and I
particularly mention Laws and Rules by way of Explication.

For though it be true, that this Phrase the Gospel of Christ does in
Scripture-sense comprehend,

First, All the Essential and Fundamental Articles of our Faith; Secondly, All
Good, Holy and Just Laws for our Practice; And, Thirdly, All the great and
precious promises for our encouragement here, and recompense hereafter:

Yet as these words the Gospel of Christ stand related to the word Conversation
in the Text, we cannot suppose them taken in that latitude before mentioned,
but are restrained to that particular part of the Gospel, called Laws and
Precepts.

For if Conversation does mean the outward visible actions, and usual course of
a Man's life, then the Gospel of Christ, with reference to them, must intend no
other, but that part of it which is their Guide and Director, and we all know
that the standard and measure of Men's lives and actions are Laws and Precepts.

And it is this, and this chiefly, and only, which we are to mind, and take
notice of, in the ordering and governing our selves and conversations.

It Is very possible that many Men do wish, that there might be found out some
other way for them to be Christians, and not to be thus strictly bound up to
guide their lives and actions by such strait and severe Laws which are
contained in the Gospel.

And it is as possible that there are others far worse than these, who will
presume to be their own Priests and Popes, and take the liberty and power of
dispensing with the Laws of Christ, and live by methods of their own invention
and making.

And to an observing eye these Libertines, who go under the name of Christians
and Protestants too, are very numerous; for we daily see, that Humor and
Passion, prejudice, and pretense of Conscience, zeal for a Party, and fondness
of some new Opinion, bias of Interest, Ambition after Honor and Popular
Applause, and the grateful relish of sinful pleasure to fleshly lusts, have in
a great measure supplanted the Rules and Precepts of our Blessed Lord. And
Christians for the most part choose to be under the bondage of several Tyrants,
rather than submit to the easy and gracious Monarchy of Jesus Christ.

But leave we these to guide their conversations by what they please, yet we
that intend to be such Christians as the Gospel requires, are obliged to make
the written Laws of God the chief and principal Rule of our Conversations, and
that upon these three Reasons.

First, Because of the undoubted perfection and infallible Truth that belongs
to them; for they are Laws and Rules without any flaws and errors, which cannot
possibly deceive or misguide us, because so true and perfect as to exclude the
most critical correction and addition.

Whereas the Laws of men, though never so exactly weighed at first in the
balance of the most considering judgments, and made with the greatest foresight
and circumspection, will in a few years appear so weak and imperfect, fallible
and erroneous, that no one can walk by them without fears, uncertainty and
danger.

But the Laws in the Gospel (because composed by a Divine Wisdom) are so sound
and perfect, and free from faults, that no one can live by them, but he walks
with all courage and safety. So that he, who governs his Conversation by the
Gospel of Christ, need not doubt or fear his doing ill or amiss. For in such
ways as the Laws of God, every man, says Solomon, walks safely; or as the
Original, confidently and securely, Prove. 3. 23.

Secondly, We have just reason to make the Laws in the Gospel the sole rule of
our Conversations, because of their Universal benefit and goodness.

For though Laws by some men may be counted evil and perjudicial, because they
lay rigours and restraints upon that beloved, darling thing called Liberty: Yet
the Laws of Christ contained in the Gospel are so easy and pleasant,
profitable and advantageous to men: that there is no discreet or prudent
person, but would have chosen and taken such a method to live by, could he have
had the wisdom and judgment to have found it out.

Nor does the goodness and benefit of these Laws give them a Reputation; but
the Universality of their Goodness swells their Character.

For let these Laws be put in use and practice in any corners of the Earth, and
by men of all Climates and Countries, and they will be continually found
beneficial to bodily Health, preservers of men's Credits and Reputations,
encouragers of Industry and Faithfulness, distributers of Justice, reconcilers
of Enemies, favorers of the Oppressed, promoters of Love and Peace, union and
agreement in all Societies, and the great Conservators of all our Temporal
felicities.

And what Nation is there, though Heathenish and Barbarous, that could possibly
complain of mischief and prejudice, should they govern themselves by these
revealed Statute Laws of Heavens?

Thirdly, We ought only to guide our Conversations by these; because of their
perpetual fitness and everlasting Equity.

The Laws, composed and enacted by men, are rightly called Temporary, because
they are but for certain times and seasons. For these, like all Humane
Governments and Lives, have their certain Stages and fixed Periods, And are
Born and Live, grow Old and Die. We our selves can observe and see, that those
Acts and Statutes which were good and useful, convenient and necessary for one
Age, become weak and foolish, and very fit to be Repealed and Abrogated in the
next: Nor have any the results and decrees of the gravest Councils in the
greatest Nations been of any long duration, but such as were either grounded
upon, or derived from the Laws of God and Christ.

For such is the Everlasting Justice and Righteousness of our Gospel Laws, that
they will never grow old or out of use as long as the world endures; for men in
all Ages and in all Countries will constantly find it fit, and just, and
reasonable to live by them.

And in this sense perhaps it is to be taken sometimes, when the Holy Ghost
says, That the Word of God abides for ever; that is, the Laws and Precepts
contained in it are so well ordered, tempered and prepared, that they will last
for ever, and be found fit and reasonable to be observed by all men, at all
times, and in all places of the World.

So that if we consider the truth and perfection, the Universal goodness, and
perpetual fitness of these Sacred Rules, we may reasonably conclude, there is
no such Guide for our Conversation as the Gospel of Christ.

And therefore S. Paul did wisely advise his Philippians and all Christians, to
be principally careful in letting their Conversations only be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ.

I come now to the Third Particular; which is to show wherein the Agreeableness
of a Man's Conversation to the Gospel of Christ does consist in these. Two
General Things.

First, In the constant practice of Purity and Holiness. Secondly, In the
exercise of Meekness and Moderation, and whatever promotes Unity, Peace and
Charity with all men.

First, In the constant practice of Purity and Holiness. And indeed we could
not well expect that the design of Christianity should tend to any thing else;
because the Author of that Religion was himself a person that knew no Sin, and
led a most Exemplary life in all the paths of Piety and Virtue: And because the
Holy Ghost who prepared all men's hearts to receive the Gospel by a lively
Faith, is a pure and undefiled Spirit.

And if we will also but consult what was partly spoken by Christ himself, and
partly dictated by this Holy Spirit, we shall easily see that a Good and Holy
life is most agreeable to the Contents of the Gospel.

For First of all, It commands us to abstain from all appearance of evil; to
withdraw from the first courtships of Sin. For it lays restraints upon our
Minds, Thoughts, and Lusts after any thing that is Vile and Wicked: And assures
us that we are defiled, if Sin be but conceived in the Heart, though it be not
brought forth into Act: As in the case of bare lusting after a Woman, and of
harboring Malice and Revenge but in the inward thoughts and intentions.

Secondly, It does positively prohibit, and that under severe penalties, all
and every action that renders a Man's Conversation vile and odious, base and
scandalous, mean and contemptible. Namely, all carnal uncleanness;
Surfeitings, Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Perjury, Bribery,
Oppression, Couzenage and Fraud, Sloth and Idleness, Irreligion and
Profaneness. And the reason why the Gospel would have us to abstain from all
these things is, That our God and Creator might not be dishonored, and that
his and our Enemies might not have occasion to blaspheme us and our most
Excellent Religion.

Thirdly, It presses upon us the conscientious practice of every Grace and
Virtue, and to adorn our Profession and outward Conversation with the flowers
and fruits of Good Works.

This is the will of God; says S. Paul, our Sanctification. And the Grace of
God, the Gospel of Christ, which has appeared, and brings Salvation to all
men; teaches us to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live
Righteously, Soberly, and Godly in this present world; looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Titus 2. 11, 12,
13, 14: And it was the charge of Christ to his followers, That they should let
their lights shine before men, that is, be Examples and Patterns of Piety and
Holiness to all the World.

In short: The Gospel of our Lord and Savior does strictly prohibit all Sins
and Vices, and every evil work which defiles a Man's mind, or weakens his Body,
or blemishes his Fame, and wastes his Estate.

And secondly, it does with great Authority enjoin the practice of all Goodness
and Virtue, and every thing else that is worthy of praise. And therefore that
Life and Conversation which becomes the Gospel, must in the first place be Pure
and Holy, clean and undefiled.

Secondly, The Conversation which becomes the Gospel of Christ, is that which
is managed with all meekness and moderation in the mind and spirit; and which
carefully promotes Union, Peace and Love in the World.

This is apparent from our Savior's command, Learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in mind; and from the Apostles direction, that we should be mean in our
own eyes, in honor preferring one another, and to condescend to men of low
degree, and to let our moderation be known unto all men; So that the frame and
temper of Mind and Spirit, with which we are to govern our selves, is to be
meek and humble, soft and gentle, calm and moderate to all we converse with.

Again, the Gospel of Christ directs us to further all the degrees of Love,
Amity and Quietness; Our Savior having called all Peacemakers the Children of
God, and pronounced them happy; and also declared who are the heavenly-born
Christians, even they that love one another.

And how frequently do all the Apostles command and order us to be of modest
and peaceable behavior, and to live in an unfeigned mutual love one with
another: As Romans 12. 9, 10, 17, 18. Let love be without dissimulation. Be
kindly affectioned one toward another, in brotherly love, in honor preserving
one another. Recompense to no man evil for evil, provide things honest in the
sight of all men: And if it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably
with all men. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things where with me may edify one another, Romans 14. 19.

And the most passionate and earnest request, that ever St. Paul made in his
life, was that to his Colossians. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, Holy
and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And
above all these things put on Charity, which is the bond of Perfection:
Colossians 3. 12, 13, 14.

And as the Gospel of Christ does commend to our study and practice, unity,
peace and love, and every thing that promotes their flourishing growth; so it
forbids whateyer may obstruct and hinder it.

As namely, all rash censuring and judging, talebearing and backbiting,
whispering of lies and scandals, publishing of Libels and defamations, charging
us not to give railing for railing, but to avoid all occasions of janglings and
quarrels, and to keep our selves from proud, peevish and passionate humors,
and sowing the seeds of strife and sedition. And what is the great end and
design of all these Evangelical Laws? but only, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: 1 Timothy 2. 2.

And thus very briefly, I have showed what that Conversation is, which becomes
the Gospel of Christ. All which is excellently comprised in those words of the
Apostle, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God, that is, the Gospel Dispensation does
not consist in meats and drinks, in controversies and disputes about things
Indifferent: but in solid Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

And the like character does St. James give of the Religion and Gospel of
Christ. For, says he, If you have bitter envying in your hearts, then the
Religion which you have and profess, is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish. But the
Religion which is from above, and came from God and Christ, teaches all Men,
first, to be Pure and Holy; and secondly, to be Peaceable and gentle, easy to
be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, without
hypocrisy: And the fruit of Righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make
peace: James 3. from Verse the 13. to the end of the Chapter.

And so much for the Third Particular.
I pass to the Fourth. To consider the Reasons, why in Evil and Perilous Times,
we should then more especially lead pure and peaceable Lives according to the
Gospel of Christ.

And the Reasons are these Three.

First, That we may, if possibly, prevail with God to be our favourer and
friend: And this is no small Argument to persuade us to be more Holy and
Religious in dangerous and evil Times than at any other.

Because then it is we stand most in need of having God our Assistant and
Defender. For it is he alone which has the ordering and managing of all Humane
Greatness and Wisdom, and worldly affairs, which generally have their Events
and Successes, according as God approves or dislikes the persons in whose hands
they are placed.

For you must know, that let the Cause or Design be what it will, that any
Nation or number of Men do take in hand, yet there is an Over-seeing Eye, and
an Overruling Hand, which turns and disposes all things to the advantage of
them that endeavor to please him, and to the destruction of them whom he is
justly provoked to hate.

And therefore in all Humane undertakings, and Public affairs, it will be the
prudence and interest of men, to gain, if possibly, the great God on their side.

For if men will coin Projects and Designs in their own inventions; If they
will use their own art and skill in the management of them; and rely upon
their own parts and power to bring them to pass, and all this without any
concern or care, whether God be their Friend or not: I think such persons have
no good grounds to hope, that any prosperous events will crown their enterprise
or endeavors.

The Royal Prophet, who had run through as many various stages of Humane
affairs, and Worldly changes, as ever any Man or Monarch did, and who had
observed that Providence did always interpose his Wisdom and power in the
ordering and disposing of all things here below, did at last conclude with this
Maxim;

That the Greatest worldly Power, and the deepest Policies of Statesmen were
weak and foolish, if God did not take the Actors under his Countenance and
Protection.

Hence it was that he attributed the Art and Abilities which Men use in the
building of an House, and the power of preserving and defending a City when
built, not unto the Men themselves, but unto the Great God, who is the Maker
and Upholder of all things: Except the Lord build the House, they labor in
vain that build it. Except the Lord keep 'the City, the watchman waketh but in
vain, Psalm. 127.1.

After the same manner, he attributes all Conquests and Victories, not to the
courage and conduct of Generals and their Armies, but unto the God that goes
along with them, and fights for them: Psalm. 108.11, 12. If thou, O Lord, go not
forth with our Hosts, we cannot be saved from trouble; for vain is the help of
Man.

Nay, though David was considerably assisted sometimes by Princes and Allies,
and though he had often seen the undaunted briskness and courage of his own
Soldiers in many Battles, yet he at last found it experimentally true, That it
was better to trust in the Lord, than to put any considence in Man: That it was
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any considence in Princes.

And at another time, when this Royal Prophet was in the greatest straits and
dangers; and few, would side with him or fight for him: yet even then he was
confident of Deliverance and Victory, and that because he sound God to be his
Friend. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear: For what can Man do unto me?
The Lord takes my part with them that help me, therefore shall I see my desire
upon mine Enemies, Psalm. 118.6, 7.

And as all the power and force of Armies without God's favor and assistance
is frail and weak, so the most subtle and deepest contrived designs of the
ablest Politicians, without Divine help and approbation, withers and proves
abortive.

With what wrath and malice did Sanballat and Tobiah, the Arabians, the
Ammonites, and the Ashdodites sit in Council, and secretly conspire to surprise
and fall upon Nehemiah and the Jews, just as they were employed and busy in
building the walls of Jerusalem? But God, says the Text, defeated this
stratagem; for God brought their Counsel to naught, Nehem. 4.7, 8, 15.

In all David's Kingdom there was not a greater Statesman than Achitophel, and
we find he proved a good Counselor as long as he was Loyal to his Prince: But
when he entered into a conspiracy with Absalom, to raise a War and Rebellion
against his King and Father, how soon was all his wisdom turned into
foolishness? And the Text tells us it was God himself that did it; 2 Samuel
17.14. For the Lord had appointed to defeat the good Counsel of Achitophel, to
the intent that the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom.

Now then if God's love to us, and helping of us be so absolutely necessary, as
that without it, we cannot either do what we design, nor finish what we are
doing, nor be released from what we suffer, nor be secured and saved from what
we fear, then it will be our highest wisdom, and greatest Interest to engage
God (if possibly) to espouse our Cause, and take our part.

For according to the measure of God's will revealed, and the usual proceedings
of Providence in this World, we shall find that Good and Holy Men have never
been forsaken of God, in any portion of their Lives.

For God is such a Lover of Goodness and Righteousness, and what is like
himself, that he has given us all possible Assurances of providing for the
Innocent, defending the Helpless, relieving the Oppressed, and of favoring the
Righteous dealings of Men.

Upon which account it is, that God is so often in Scripture called a Tower, a
Castle, a Fortress, a Rock of Defense, a Refuge in due time of Trouble, a
Savior and Mighty Deliverer.

And if we can but in any reasonable measure imitate David in his sincere Piety
and Holiness, we shall then have the same cause and occasion to say with him,
That the Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tent round about them that fear him.
That the Lord never fails them that put their trust in him. That he is a Sun
and a Shield, that he will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm 84.11. Suitable to which are
those words so confidently spoken by St. Paul: We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God, Romans 8. 28. To which may be adjoined
the assurance of Christ himself. If ye seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, all these things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6. 33.

Seeing then that a Holy Religious Life is so beneficially operative and
prevailing with God, we ought in evil and perilous days to be then most
carefully employed in it.

For then is the time, we stand most in need of God's Power, Love and
Protection, when we see our selves forsaken of all worldly helps and
assistances. And when there is nothing but Clouds and Darkness round about us,
then is the light of God's countenance most chearing and refreshing. Nor does
Divine wisdom and Power so much delight, and ravish our Souls, as when it
discovers the Snares that were laid for us, and saves us just upon the brink of
falling into them.

And that a good and holy Life is thus prevalent with God, to protect and
defend, save and deliver us in evil and dangerous times, we have the Testimony
of Men in all Ages, both of the Jewish and Christian Church, who by one signal
Demonstration have declared it to be an undoubted Truth, and the constant
matter of their Faith.

And this Demonstration was their usual exercise of one solemn Religious Duty
or Service, peculiarly appropriated to the particular time of worldly Adversity
and Temporal Judgments, called by the name of Fasting and Humiliation.

For we all very well know, that public or private Fasts are never appointed
or kept, but when a Kingdom or Person is under some heavy Pressures and
Afflictions, or the fear and apprehensions of some approaching danger and
misery, or for the commemorating some signal Judgment and Calamity that is
past, and we were mercifully saved and delivered from.

Now what is this Fasting or Humiliation, but a taking a Revenge on our Sins,
which caused God to be our Enemy: A putting our selves upon bettering our
lives, and to be for the Time to come more Godly, Righteous and Sober in this
present World.

And what is the end and design of exercising these Religious Duties upon such
particular Days; but only to seek and find (if possibly) God's favor, to
reconcile our selves to him, and to prevail with him to stand our Defense, and
become our Savior.

So that we can never religiously observe days of Fasting and Humiliation, but
it is with a belief, that if we do amend our ways, and better our lives, then
God will be favorable to us, and deliver us from all the Judgments we groan
under, and prevent the Sorrows and Calamities which we justly fear are coming
upon us.

But against what I have said, I know it will be Objected, That though it be
true, that God in his revealed will has given Promises and Assurances of
providing for, and protecting and defending the Good and Righteous, yet we see
frequently in the outward Dispensations of Providence, that God is not always
firm to his word.

For how often do we see the wicked flourish, and prevail and triumph over the
godly, and those that are far better than themselves? As at this Day, the Turks
trample upon the Christians, and the Papists upon the Protestants.

To this I Answer, First, In General, That the Proceedings of Providence, and
the Methods of God's dealings with Men in this World are very Mysterious: So
that we may justly subscribe to that saying of the Apostle, Romans 11. 33. How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out?

But Secondly, To be more particular in the Solution of this Objection: I shall
only desire you to observe, That though there are many Men, which, as to all
outward Appearance, and in our Esteem, are very Pious and Good, yet there are
none so Virtuous and Good as they should be, and as they might be. And
therefore God makes use of Prosperous wicked Men, as Rods to correct them, who
thorough their own Carelessness or Idleness might be much better than they are.

And not to meddle with the Reasons, which Statesmen give for the Growth of
Mahometism over Christians, and of Popery over Protestants; I shall only offer
one, which the most censorious Critic will allow, does belong to our office to
give. And the Reason is this: The Christians in General notoriously abusing
their most Excellent Religion; And Protestants in Particular not living in that
Measure of Piety and Virtue, which is suitable to the Purity of their Doctrines.

And it is very Probable, that God afflicts and chastises Christendom with the
Turks, because All sorts of Christians so much neglect the living answerably to
their Religion. And God does trouble and Correct the Protestants in Europe with
Papists; Because (though their Religion be best, as being Reformed from
Superstition, Heresy and Idolatry) yet the visible Conversations of
Protestants are notoriously Scandalous, and quite different from, and opposite
to that Purity and Godliness, which they Profess and Glory in.

And for ought any Man can yet see or know to the contrary, We may reasonably
Judge, that God will suffer the Turks and Papists to Prosper and Prevail, the
one over Christians in General, the other over Protestants in Particular, till
such time as both are more zealous and careful than they are now, to let their
Conversations be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

But Secondly, Another Reason why in Evil and Perilous Times we ought then to
be most Holy and Good, is this, That thereby we may stop the mouths of our
Gainsayers, and either convince our Enemies, or at least prevail with them, to
have a better Opinion of us, than now they have.

In a Kingdom or Nation crumbled into several Factions and Parties, we can
expect no less, than Violent Heats and Passions, and bitter Railings and
Revilings one against another. For we know, that different Persuasions and
Interests were ever upheld with fierce Controversies, zealous Debates, and
clamorous Janglings: All which things never tend to cement and heal Divisions,
but make the Rent much wider: For it is Rarely seen, that Controversies and
Disputes (especially in Religion) brought Enemies to be Friends.

No, the only way of silencing our Adversaries, and taking them off from
Slandering and Reviling of us, is to abstain from the evil things, which may
give them a just cause of doing it.

And though the World will still be pestered with such Critical and Malicious
Inquisitors, as will Censure and Condemn the most harmless and Inoffensive
Actions, (and which they would allow to be so, if done by themselves) yet the
man that goes on in the constant course of an Upright Honest Conversation, will
in Time convince his Gainsayers, and Proselyte his most spightful Enemies.

Was it not the Advice and Command of our Savior; That we should Bless them
that Curse us; And pray for them that Despightfully use us? And does not S.
Paul say, If thine Enemy hunger, feed him; If he thirst, give him Drink? And
what is the Fruit and the Benefit we shall reap by it? Why, In so doing Thou
heapest coals of fire upon his Head; that is, Thou will in time melt him down
into Brotherly Love and compliance.

And what was the Reason, that S. Peter charged his Converts to be Quiet and
Peaceable, Subject and Obedient to Magistrates and Governors? Only that thereby
They might stop the mouths of their Adversaries, who had Represented them at
Caesar's Court, to be men of Turbulent, Factious and Seditious Spirits: That so
with Well-doing, says S. Peter, ye may put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish
men, 1 Pet. 2. 15.

And in another place he Advises them to keep and preserve a Good Conscience,
for in time it will make them ashamed, that falsely accuse you, 1 Pet. 3. 16. I
shall conclude this Second Reason with the Caution of S. Paul, Ephesians. 5. 15,
16. See that you walk Circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise: And that you
walk in Wisdom toward them that are without, Redeeming the time, Colos. 4. 5.

Thirdly, We ought most especially to Guide our Conversations only by the
Gospel of Christ, in Evil and Dangerous Times; because we shall thereby be best
fitted and prepared to meet with, and endure the worst that may befall us.

When we are in the Prospect or foresight of any Calamity or Misery coming upon
us, we have but Two things to do, either Prudentially to prevent it, or else
prepare our selves to bear it.

First, Prudentially to Prevent it, especially, if it be capable of Prevention:
For the Gospel of Christ does not so Positively and Indispensably oblige us to
take up our Cross, as that we may not use all the Wisdom and means we can, to
save and defend our selves from suffering; No, in all Temptations and Trials,
it is lawful for us to make a way for an Escape.

But then We are to observe, that the Scripture allows of no means to be used
for the Preventing of an Approaching Evil and Danger, but what is Honest, and
Just, and Lawful.

For the Rules of the Apostle are Perpetually True, and of Everlasting Force,
That We must abstain from all Appearance of Evil: And that we must not do Evil
that Good may come thereby.

So that though my own Will and Reason biased by Self-love and Interest shall
put me upon Preventing a Misery that is coming, yet I must be cautious and
careful of using any ways and means for the Doing of it, which I cannot
justify to be Good and lawful by the Word of God, or which my own Conscience
shall tell me is Base and Dishonest, and unbecoming a Man and a Christian.

For first, I have no Divine Divine Warrant or License to do any Unjust Act,
though it be for my Temporal Safety and Worldly Advantage.

Secondly, I have no Promise or Assurance from God, that the Doing of an Unjust
thing for this End and Purpose shall ever Thrive and Prosper: For God has no
where told us in his Revealed Will, that he will bless a Man in any wicked
Design and Undertaking.

And therefore, if for my own Preservation I shall make use of such Means and
Methods, which I cannot, and dare not Pray God to bless and assist me in, and
wherein I cannot reasonably expect that God will bless me, then certainly it
will be a very Doubtful and Hazardous Case, whether the means I use, will ever
prevent that Evil or Misery, which I thought and concluded they would. And the
Reason is plain, because I take upon me, and that upon my own contrivance and
Design, to do that for my safety and Preservation, which my own Conscience (if
Guided by God's Will) will tell me, I cannot expect God's Blessing and
Assistance in, nor any happy Success from it.

But Secondly, If in the use of lawful means, our Approaching Misery and Ruin
cannot be Prevented; we have then nothing else to do, but to put our selves in
the best Posture we can to meet with it and endure it.

Now there is nothing so completely Arms and Qualifies a Man for all sorts of
Worldly Afflictions, as the constant inuring a Man's self to a holy
Gospel-conversation.

When St. Paul had been well trained up in the Spiritual Warfare, he did not
then fear to grapple with the worst of evils, nor dread to engage the Greatest
Perils.

Indeed to a Worldly covetous Man, the loss of Lands, Houses, and Riches, is a
very hard saying: To an Ambitious Spirit, that aims at Crowns, and the
Enlargement of Dominion; Imprisonment and parting with an Head, is an
intolerable Affliction: To one that spends his Time and Strength in Jollity and
Pleasures, the thoughts of Dying is Dreadful and Troublesome.

But to a Man that has got the Dominion over himself, who has tamed his Will,
Affections and Lusts; To one that scorns and despises the gilded Vanities, and
empty splendors of the World; To one that has his conversation in Heaven,
whilst upon Earth, and hopes for Rewards and Treasures above; there is nothing
comes to him Unlooked for or Unpleasant.

In short, The more like we are to Christ in the constant Course of a Good and
Virtuous Life, the more able shall we be to suffer with him, and like him: For,
let come what will to us, whether Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecutions, or
Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword, yet in all these things, we shall be
more than Conquerors, thorough him that loved us, Romans 8. 35, 37.

Application.
And First, If we shall judge (as reasonably we may) that we are under the
same, or like troubled and distressed circumstances with these Philippians,
Torn and Harrast with Unnatural Heats and Divisions amongst our selves, or
threatened with Ruin by Restless and Implacable Enemies from abroad; We have
then no better way or Course to take for our Safety and Defense, but closely
and earnestly to follow this Best Guide and Surest Rule: Only to take all care
and heed, that our Lives and Conversations be, becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Whatever Methods others in Distress and Danger may choose to take and follow,
yet let us show our selves the true Christians, by making the Laws of Christ,
and the Rules of the Gospel the sole Standard and only Measure of all Our
Actions.

For sure we are, that the Guidance and Directions of the Wisest Counselors
upon Earth are not so free from Errors and Defects, deceiveableness and
Dangers, as the Precepts of Christ: nor can they be of such certain and
Universal Goodness, nor so just and fit, and Reasonable for us in all
Circumstances of Time and Place: And none can or will dare to speak against
this, but Platonic Republicans, Hobbean Politicians, Atheistical Statesmen,
and those who dislike the Gospel, because they design to do, what they know the
Gospel condemns.

Secondly, To be more particular: Let us Exercise our selves in those
Essential, Indispensable Duties and Virtues of the Gospel, called Purity and
Peace.

First, In Purity: For never was there such a Necessity of Entering upon a
Religious Penance, and bettering our Lives as now: Heaven, and Earth, and Hell,
and all that are round about us seem to conspire our utter Ruin and
Destruction.

God himself by many Warnings, and some amazing Judgments, has evidently
discovered that he is our Enemy: And the Devil with Agents and Instruments as
Malicious and Cruel as himself, have plotted and contrived (as it were in Hell)
our Total overthrow and Desolation.

And now can there be a Better or surer way found out, by all the Art and
Wisdom of Man, for our Safety and Deliverance, than what S. Paul has proposed
to us in the Text?

Is there any other Course to Reconcile our Selves to God, or which will
prevail with him to take our Part, and to pity, help and preserve us in our low
Estate, but only laying down and parting with our Defying and Provoking sins,
and walking before God in all well-pleasing?

Is there any way for us to Repel the fiery darts of Satan, and to escape the
Traps and Snairs that he and his Confederates have laid for us, but the
constant Exercise of a Good and Holy Life, under the Shield of an Active Faith,
and the daily Exercise of Watchfulness and Prayer?

Is there any way to silence our Slanderers and Revilers, to convince our
Enemies, and turn them from the Errors of their ways; but our Studious and
Conscientious Guiding our Selves and Actions by the Laws of Christ, in a Pious
and Peaceable Conversation?

And if Providence, for Wise and Just Reasons (though Unintelligible to Us)
shall suffer Wicked and Unreasonable Men to ride over our Heads, and trample us
into picees; What is there can fit us for the endurance of such Sufferings? but
the applying our selves in time to the learning and practice of Self denial,
Contempt of the World, and serving our God in Holiness and Righteousness all
the Days of our Life.

It was a Miracle once to see the strange Assistances and Successes that
attended the Piety and Purity of the Primitive Christians, and it is a Miracle
now to see Men not believe it, or at least not believe it so far, as to
experiment it once again.

This indeed is the Customary, but Deplorable sin and folly of our Nation,
though Christian and Protestant too, to Repose all its Trust, Confidence and
Safety upon its own Councils, and upon its own Strength; and in the mean while
neglect all Gospel Righteousness and Holiness, without which it is impossible to
be Safe and Prosperous in this World, or Saved and Happy in the next.

Oh never never think that you shall be delivered out of all your Troubles, as
long as by your loose and profane lives you Provoke God to be your Enemy, Tempt
the Devil to do his worst, and give his Instruments the Papists any just cause
of Reproaching and Blaspheming.

There is nothing (next to Divine Wisdom and Power) which can preserve our
Kingdom and Religion, but that which nourished Christianity in its Infancy, and
gave It strength to Travel into all Countries, and that was God's Blessing upon
the faithful Endeavors and exemplary Holy lives of its Professors.

Secondly, Let us Seriously and Earnestly apply our selves to those other
Virtues called Meekness, Moderation and Peaceableness of Mind: Our blessed
Savior gloried in this Character, that He was meek and lowly in Heart, and
proposed it to all Men as worthy their Learning and Imitation.

And whatever the convenience and comforts are, which accrue to every
particular Person, by following and promoting Union, Brotherly Love, and things
that make for Peace: I am sure the Public will have the Greater share in it,
and flourish the better for it.

It was the saying of our Savior, That a Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand. And I heartily wish that our Popish Enemies do not believe it a
Greater Truth than We do: For upon this Maxim they make our Divisions, as
firmly believing they will certainly Ruin us: And we at this very Time keep up
our Divisions, as supposing they will do us no harm, or as if we believed that
Christ was a Good Divine, but no Statesman.

Oh Consider therefore, and Mournfully Pity the Distressed and Distracted State
of this our Protestant Jerusalem! And let us like men of Prudence and Valor
countermine this Popish Plot of ruining us by Divisions, with Resolutions of
Uniting to the Maintenance and Defense of our Established Government and
Religion.

REV. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.


HAd Man continued as he was made, Innocent without Sin, he might have been
what his Maker would have had him to be, Immortal without death; for God
created him to be Immortal, and to be an Image of his own Eternity; he made not
Death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living; but death
came into the world through the envy of the Devil, and the disobedience of man:
had it not been for this, we should have been like so many Enoch's, and have
passed from Earth to Heaven, not by death, but by a Translation; But because we
sinned, God sentenced us all to Die, and to return to the Dust, out of which we
were first taken. It was Sin that made the first gap whereby death entered into
the world; death entered by sin, and so death has passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned. The Noble, the Honorable, and the Rich, they sin like other
men, and therefore they die like other men; neither Riches, nor Honors,
neither Profit, nor Pleasure, neither Favor, nor Friends can exempt them from
it, Heavens decree is past, that all that sin must die, and there is no appeal;
hence death is called in Scripture, the way of all flesh, and the way of all
the earth: all must go this way, though not at the same time, nor after the
same manner; some go suddenly, others by degrees, not one half of the world
arrives to the natural age of man, threescore years and ten; and those that do,
their bodies become their burdens, and their years then but labor and sorrow:
Man that is born of a woman (says Job) is of few days, and full of trouble;
he comes forth as a flower and is cut down, he flees as a shadow, and
continues not; he dies, and wastes away, he gives up the Ghost, and where
is he? This is the startling and amazing question that troubles the greater
part of mankind, namely, what will become of them after death? Some are ready
to cry out with the Heathen, I have lived in doubt, I die in fear, and I know
not whither I am going: Others that are taken up with the profits and
pleasures, and other enjoyments of this world, dream of enjoying the like in
another; like the Mahometan's, who believe that after death they shall live
again to enjoy large estates, stately houses, curious gardens, beautiful women,
and the like: Others that live like Brutes, think they must die like them too,
perish and come to nothing. But we that have learned Christ better, are assured
that there shall be a life after death, unto which all shall rise, some to go
on the right hand into joy and happiness, others on the left into woe and
misery.

They that die in their sins shall be accursed; they that die in the Lord shall
be blessed: So the voice from Heaven bid St. John write, blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea says the Spirit, they may rest
from their labors, and their works do follow them.

That John should hear a Voice from Heaven, may be believed without any wonder,
if we do but remember that he was a special Favorite of Heaven: he is dignified
with the title of, The Disciple whom Jesus loved; he had the honor to be still
next his Master, and to lean on his bosom, a sign that he had greater favor
and familiarity with him than the rest; he was one of the three that were
admitted to Mount Tabor at the glorious Transfiguration of Christ, where he saw
his face shine as the Sun, and his raiment white as the light; and where he
heard a voice out of a bright cloud that over-shadowed him and the rest,
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him: he was
the person to whose care Christ commended his Mother the Blessed Virgin Mary,
for by his last Will and Testament made upon the Cross (where there were
witness enough by) he appointed him to be her Guardian, whereupon he took her
into his own house, and made her a principal part of his charge and care: He
being then so greatly beloved of Christ, it was no wonder that he had some
Heavenly Secrets revealed unto him; and so it was, for being in the Spirit, or
a spiritual rapture, ecstasy, or transportation, he heard a voice from Heaven,
of which voice I may truly say what the Jews out of flattery blasphemously said
of the Voice of Herod when he made an Oration unto them, It is the voice of a
God and not of a man: Or if it were the voice of a man, it was the voice of
Christ the Son of God as well as the Son of man; it was a voice from Heaven,
and therefore the more to be regarded, for when Heaven speaks, it is fit that
the Earth should hear; there never yet came any voice from Heaven but it
concerned the Earth to hear it: A voice from Heaven was heard by Moses on the
Mount, and it was to confirm the Law, and establish our Faith in God the
Creator. A voice from Heaven was heard by Peter, James, and John at the
Transfiguration, and it was to confirm the Gospel, and establish our Faith in
Christ the Redeemer. A voice or sound from Heaven was heard by all the Apostles
on the day of Pentecost, and it was to confirm our Faith in the Holy Ghost the
Comforter. A voice from Heaven was heard by Peter in his Vision, and it was to
confirm our Faith in the Holy Catholic Church. A voice from Heaven was heard
by John in this place, and it was to confirm our Faith concerning the life
everlasting, and the blessedness of those that die in the Lord; it was a sweet,
comfortable, reviving voice, it made amends for the sad cry of that voice we
hear of, Isai. 40. 6. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof as the
flower of the field; the grass withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit
of the Lord blows upon it, surely the people is grass: Whereas the voice
heard by Isaiah the Prophet struck all the living dead; the voice heard by John
the Evangelist makes all the dead in the Lord alive and blessed: This voice
confirms Christ's promise, and our assurance of blessedness in the Life to come.
He promises us, that if we will hear his voice, believe in him, and repent of
our sins, we shall have Life eternal, and never come into condemnation, but
pass from death to life; and to assure us he will be as good as his promise, he
sent this voice from Heaven to tell us, that they that die in the Lord shall
live again, and be Blessed for ever. This Heavenly truth is ever to be
remembered, and therefore the voice bid John commit it to writing; Write says
the voice, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; a sentence worthy to be
writ by an Angel in letters of Gold never to be Obliterated, but to remain
legible to all succeeding Generations, that all may read, understand, and
receive comfort. The voice from Heaven commanded John to Write: How then dare
any Papist say, that the Evangelists and Apostles had no command from God to
write their Gospels and Epistles, but that they wrote upon the entreaty of some
Friends, or some emergent occasions? when St. Paul says, All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God; and St. Peter, That Prophecy came not by the will
of man, but Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And St.
John, That the voice commanded him to Write, and telling him what he should
write, namely, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, etc. Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord.

Blessedness is a thing that every man naturally desires and seeks after; but
in determining what it is, and wherein it consists, there is a great dispute,
some placing it in pleasure, some in honor, some in riches, some in knowledge,
some in virtue. St. Austin's Observation out of Varro is well known, that there
are between two and three hundred several Opinions concerning the Sovereign
Good, in the enjoyment of which Blessedness consists. But among Christians it
is agreed upon as an unquestionable truth, that the supreme Good which alone
can make men blessed, is God, and that he may be enjoyed both in this life and
the life to come. The present enjoyment of him here in this life is termed the
blessedness of the way, the blessedness of expectation, the blessedness of
Grace: the Future enjoyment of him hereafter in the life to come is termed the
blessedness of the country, the blessedness of fruition, the blessedness of
glory. The blessedness of this life is so imperfect, that it is scarce to be
termed Blessedness, we being so compassed about with sin and temptation,
trouble and sorrow. No man is truly happy before death, for that is the passage
to a blessed life. Though death be called an enemy, and a terrible thing, yea
of all terrible things the most terrible, yet this is but in respect of Nature;
for to men in the state of Grace, it is but a rest from their Labors, and an
entrance into Blessedness. But if this be so, that the dead are the only
Blessed, Why say some, do we not die that we may be Blessed? like as Scipio
hearing his Father tell of these Glories the Soul enjoys in immortality, said,
why do I tarry thus long upon earth? why do not I hasten to die? No, death is
to be waited, not hasted: They that hasten their own death to avoid shame with
Achitophel, or to fly the terror of a guilty conscience with Judas, or to
prevent an intended villainy with Pelagia, or to be thought valorous with Rasis,
or to gain immortality with Cato Vlicensis, and some others, who hearing of the
immortality of the Soul, made-away themselves to go the sooner to that
Immortality; they that hasten their dissolution, and prevent Nature, are guilty
of self-murder, die in their sins, and are therefore Accursed. It is not said,
Blessed are all that die; no, it is far otherwise, for they that die in their
sins shall loose the vision and fruition of Almlghty God, the society of Angels
and Saints, the joys and pleasures of Heaven, and they shall be cast into Hell
the place of darkness, torment, and woe, there to suffer unquenchable flames, a
worm never dying, that is to say, the perpetual guilt of a tormenting
conscience, binding in chains of misery, conversing with Devils, weeping, and
howling, and gnashing of teeth to all Eternity, but blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord. And if the dead are Blessed, then it follows that they are in
being; Non entis nulla est affectio, that which has no being has no property,
but the dead have this property, that they are Blessed, therefore they must
needs be alive again, dead they may be to the world, but alive to God, for he
is not a God of the dead but of the living, for all live unto him, Luke 20. 38.
Hence we may likewise gather something to verify that saying of the Apostle,
Death is swallowed up in Victory, for being there can be no felicity where
death has a victory, the dead's being blessed shows they have got a conquest
and victory over death, and therefore thanks be given to God which gives us
the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. But here a doubt arises, What is
meant by dying in the Lord? Some render the Original (...), for the Lord: So
Beza, Domini causa vel propter Dominum, in the Lords cause, or for the Lord.
Mede renders it as Beza does, saying the Greek particle (...) denotes the cause
for which they died, namely for the Lord and his cause; but so Martyrs only are
blessed. That Martyrs are blessed is a truth sure and certain, for our Savior
himself says, He that loses his life for my sake, and the Gospels, shall find
it. But though Martyrs have a certain and a great share in this blessedness,
and though their Crowns may be decked with richer Jewels than other men's; yet
others may have Crowns, and a proportionable share of Glory as well as they.

And therefore others do fitly render it as we do, In the Lord, understanding
it not only of Martyrs, but likewise of all others that die in the Faith and
Fear of God. They may be said to die in the Lord that die willingly, cheerfully
resigning their Souls to God that gave them, and freely parting with the world,
and that die penitently in the act of contrition, as St. Austin is said to do,
breathing out his last gasp with a sigh for his sins; and that die devoutly,
calling upon the Lord for mercy and forgiveness; and that die charitably,
forgiving all the world, after the example of Christ, and his Proto-martyr St.
Stephen; and that die peaceably, having made peace with God, and the world, and
their own consciences; they that depart this life with a willing resignation of
themselves with repentance, faith, prayer, charity, and peace, may be said to
die in the Lord, and be concluded blessed. But if we desire to die in the Lord,
as all good Christians should do, we must resolve to live in the Lord, for they
that do not live in the Lord, are not likely to die in the Lord. We must not
live the life of the wicked, and then think to be saved with Balaam's wish, Let
me die the death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his: No, if we
will die the death of the righteous, we must live the life of the righteous. We
must live then in the Faith and Fear of God, in repentance and obedience, piety
and devotion, love and charity, and so shall we die in the Lord, and be
blessed; For blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth. And
this denotes the time when their blessedness begins, it is (...), from
henceforth. Some refer this to the time of the former Vision of John, as a
consolation to those that should suffer the persecution foretold therein, for
it was revealed to him in a Vision, that a great Trial should befall the
Christians in the time of Dioclesian the cruel Tyrant, and that their
persecutions should be so sore, that they were happiest who died soonest, that
within a while should be taken out of this life from doing their part in the
evil to come, that should die quickly, or within a short time, thereby to avoid
such cruel storms and persecutions, and to enjoy their reward of peace and
bliss. Others refer it to the Resurrection, and the day of Judgment, the time
when those that die in the Lord shall be raised to a blessed life, the time
spoken of, Rev. 11.18. when he shall give the reward unto his Servants the
Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear his Name, Small and Great.

Others refer it to the hour of death; as if the sense were this, that they
that die in the Lord, from the time of their death, from that very instant they
are blessed; they no sooner loose a temporal life, but they find an eternal
one: So soon as Lazarus died, his Soul was carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom. The same day that the Penitent Thief expired on the Cross, the same day
was he with Christ in Paradise. Pious Souls when once they are absent from the
body, they are quickly present with the Lord; when once they depart, they are
blessed from henceforth: And of this we are further assured, as by the voice
from Heaven, so by the Spirit of God it is so, Yea says the Spirit. Let
Heathens and Heretics deny or doubt the Immortality of the Soul, the
Resurrection of the Body, and the blessedness of the dead, because they know no
better; and let wicked and ungodly men deny these things because they live no
better, for they fancy them not to be because they would not have them to be,
their guilty consciences telling them that if such things be, it will be ill
with them: Let such I say think or speak what they will, still we are to
conclude that they are cursed who die in their sins, and that they are blessed
that die in the Lord, Yea says the Spirit, so it is; for the Spirit says so
in diverse places of Scripture, telling us that the death of good men that die
in the Lord is precious in his sight, that there is hope in their end, that all
tears shall be wiped from their eyes, that they shall enter into joy, that
there is a Crown of righteousness laid up for them, that they shall be with
Christ, that they shall rest from their Labors, and that their works shall
follow them. And herein their Blessedness consists, viz. in a relaxation of
their Labors, and a retribution of their Works; in that they have Rest and
Recompense; in that they are discharged of their Work, and for their Work; in
that they are freed from it, and paid well for it.

They rest from their Labors. We are all born in, and to Labor; we are born
by our Mothers Labor, and we live by our own. This Life is made up of care and
toil, pains and pain, trouble and sorrow. They that are Poor labor for
maintenance, and are fain in the sweat of their brow to eat their Bread all the
days of their life: And they that are Rich and have plenty, seldom say they
have enough, but still Labor for more; their endeavor to get, care to keep,
avarice to increase, fear to loose their Riches, these torment them and disturb
their happiness as well as repose. They that are under a Cloud labor to get
from it, and appear something in the World; and they on whom Fortune shines,
and Honors sparkles, they labor for greater Luster. They that are Low labor
to look up; and they that are High, labor to overlook one another. Some
labor for Honor, some for Wealth, some for Knowledge, and some for Health. The
best Christians they are, with Paul, In labors more abundant, exercised daily
in mortifying the flesh with its affections and lusts, in denying and even
crucifying themselves for those sins that crucified Christ; instriving against
temptations to sin, and their Spiritual enemies; in suffering affliction, and
bearing the Cross. Thus our Life is a succession of Labors as well as Sins,
our sins growing with our years, and sorrows with sins, and troubles with
sorrows, so that the comforts of this life are rather Solatia miserorum quam
gaudia beatorum, comforts of those that are miserable, rather than joys of
those that are happy; and therefore we have reason to conclude those happy that
die in the Lord, and so rest from their Labors, for such are discharged and
free, and that both from sin and the evil consequents thereof. The Papists
would have us believe that after death the Souls of men enter into Purgatory,
there to suffer sorrow and torment for a while, till they be purged and fitted
for the region of bliss; but they contradict themselves concerning the place,
the torments, the tormentors, the extremity of the torments, and the
continuance under them: The place some say is in the bottom of the Sea, it is a
hot fire surely that is not cooled with so much water. Others will have it in
Mount Aetna, Vesuvius, or some such burning Mongibels. Another is so ridiculous
as to fancy it in an hill of Ireland: the Torments, one will have them to be
only by fire, another by fire and water, a third neither by fire nor water, but
by the violent convulsions of hope and fear. The Tormentors some say they are
the Holy Angels, others say they are the very Devils.

The extremity of Pains according to some are as violent as Hell, according to
others they are more mild. Their continuance some will have it to be to the end
of the world; others about ten years; others during the Popes pleasure, so that
if he speak but the word they are free. They likewise contradict Scripture, for
that says, The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.
and if this be so, what need of purging by the fire of Purgatory? That says,
when the Righteous die they enter into peace, and they rest in their beds,
Isai. 57.2. And if this be so that they are at peace and rest, then they are
Liars who say they enter into Purgatory-Torments. That says, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, that they may rest from their
Labors, as it is in the Text; and if this be so, that they are Blessed from
the time of their death, and thenceforth rest from their Labors, then surely
they never feel the pains of that hot Region; for Blessedness cannot consist
with misery, nor rest with trouble, nor reward with punishment. This Text is so
clear against it, that (as we are told) a Famous Doctor of the Church of Rome,
and one of the Sorbon-Colledge, Picherellus by name, did ingeniously confess
St. John had in these few words put out the fire of Purgatory: They that die in
the Lord rest from their Labors, they suffer nothing, only they do something,
that is, cease not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come, Rev. 4.8. should serve our turn. True Faith
can no more be without Good Works, than the Sun without light, or the Fire
without heat; show we then our Faith by our Works, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, for our labor will not be in vain being our works will follow us.

So much of this Text of Scripture. Now of the Text of Nature, a Text dead
indeed in the Letter, but alive in the Spirit; and well may he become our Text
who was himself a Living Sermon, for his life was truly Doctrinal, he living in
the Lord, and his death a good Application, he dying in the Lord.

As for his life it was according to the design of the Gospel, and the
character of a true Christian, for it was sober, righteous, and godly.

His Sobriety appeared in all his deportment in his personal and private
capacity.

He was a man exceeding humble, notwithstanding the great temptations he had to
be Proud, both upon the account of Birth and Fortune; he was (it is well known)
of an Ancient and Honorable Family; and he had, Providence so ordering it, a
large and plentiful Estate, and to use the words of the Psalmist, his Lot fell
into a good ground, yea he had a goodly Heritage; notwithstanding he was so
Great in the eye of the world, that he was little in his own, he was so humble
and lowly. He was likewise very discreet and reserved, not apt to be familiar
with every one; and with whom he was so, it was not suddenly, but after he
understood them and their humor: He was a man of few words, but they were wise,
and to the purpose; He observed with Solomon, that in many words there wants
not sin and folly, and that he that refraineth his lips is wise: He knew how to
govern his Tongue and his Passion, for he kept both from all extravagancy: His
calmness and moderation of Affection was very remarkable, though he knew how to
be angry, yet he seldom practiced it, for he so ruled his passion that it was a
hard matter to discover any in him.

Chastity (a rare Virtue indeed in this Debauched Age, wherein many take a
pride in sin that they may be of the fashion, adventuring to take Crimes upon
Trust,and to perish by Credit) this rare virtue of Chastity was conspicuous in
him. And so was Temperance, his moderation in this Point is well known unto all
men, how free he was from all Excess.

His Righteousness appeared in his Dealing and Carriage toward man, giving
every one his due. He was a Loyal, Faithful, Obedient Subject to the King, whom
he served in the Office of a Magistrate, and a Soldier, as a Justice of Peace
and a Deputy-Lieutenant; he thought nothing too much either to do or give for
his Sovereign, being always ready to serve him in Person and Goods. And as he
served his King, so he served his Country willingly, truly, and faithfully: I
may say of him as a Roman Historian does of another, he was Vir bonus, and
Reipublicae necessarius, a good man and necessary in the Commonwealth. His
practice was according to his Office to do justice. The cause which he knew not
he searched out, and when it lay in darkness, his strict and Impartial
examination often brought it to light, and then did truth and justice meet. How
many were beholding to him for justice? how many for Counsel? how many for
peace? for partly by counsel, and partly by authority he reconciled many
differences, and prevented more: his deportment in his Office was grave and
something severe to discountenance and awe unruly people; but his carriage at
other times was sweet and affable. He was not like Nabal, that was so proud and
churlish, that a man could not speak unto him; no he despised no man, but would
speak to the meanest, and hear the meanest speak to him again. Access to his
person was easy, for though his condition were High, yet he was not apt to
overlook his Neighbors. He was a good Commonwealths man, improving his
Estate, and maintaining diverse other men's, by keeping them at constant work all
the year. As for his charity to the Poor, though some perhaps suspected it,
because he joined with others in putting the Law in execution against Vagabonds
and wandering Beggars, there was a mistake in it; he had charity for the Poor,
though not for Beggars. There is a difference put between these by the Law of
Moses, by the Gospel of Christ, and by the Laws of most Nations. God in the Law
ordered, that there should be no beggar among his people Israel, and yet he
said, that the poor should never cease out of the Land: The distinction between
them is this; Mendicus est qui Public stipem petit, Pauper qui non potest se
sustentare, etc. a Beggar is one that publicly seeks for Relief, wandering
about, betaking himself to no calling, when he is able to follow one, but
making a Trade and Profession of Begging. A Poor man is one that cannot
maintain himself and his Family, either because through some Infirmity he
cannot work, or else because his charge is greater than his Labor can
maintain: As for the first sort, vagrant Beggars, the Law says, there shall be
none among you; and the Gospel, that if they will not work, neither should they
eat; and the Law of the Land, that they are to be punished, and made to work.
As for the last, the Poor properly so called, both Law and Gospel, and all
civilized Nations require provision to be made; and for such as these the
Worthy person I am speaking of had charity and alms, all such were Relieved at
his doors, and seldom went away empty. From his charity I pass to his
hospitality, of which (having greater things to acquaint you with) I shall only
say this, that to those who came unto him, his Table was free, his Provision
plentiful, and his welcome hearty: As for his own Family, he was to his Lady a
most loving Husband, to his Children a tender Father, and to his Servants a
mild Master: But that which was most commendable in him, was his piety toward
God: He had an honor, reverence, and respect for the name, worship, and
service of Almighty God: He was never heard to take Gods name in vain, or curse
or swear: He was a true worshipper of God, and that both in public and
private: He loved the House of God, and for a testimony hereof, he bestowed the
adorning of his Chancel, and an augmentation to the Vicaridge: The beautifying
of this part of the House of God was a work commendable in it self, more for
the time, in that he did it before he repaired his own House; but most of all
for the manner, in that he did it without vainglory, or hope of praise from
men, keeping what he bestowed upon it very private, and so doing his work in
secret, for which we hope his Heavenly Father will reward him openly in the
sight of Saints and Angels. And for an Augmentation to this Vicaridge, he has
given and settled by Will the Tithes of two Townships in this Parish, viz. Lady
Holton, and Aill Holton, which after the expiration of one Life, by which they
are at present held from the Church, will return to the Church again. His love
to the Church and Service of God will further appear in his constant and
commonly early coming to it, and in the reverence and devotion expressed by him
there; whenever he came into it, he fell upon his knees, and made a private
prayer; afterward he joined with the Congregation in the Public, conforming
himself all along to the Service and Ceremonies of the Church of England: he
was a constant Guest at the Lords Table, to which he bare such a reverence,
that during his stay in the Church, he seldom or never turned his back toward
it, but according to the practice of Antiquity worshipped looking toward the
East and the Altar. As for his private Worship, without question it was daily
and devout: Besides the Common Prayer in his Family, he used private in his
Closet. And as for reading of the Holy Scripture, it was his daily delight and
practice; he read three Chapters every day, and the whole Bible every Year;
this course he began at Eighteen years of Age, and continued till his death,
when he was about Forty-seven, so that computing the time, it will be found he
read the Bible over nine and twenty times; he began to remember his Creator in
the days of his youth, even then he devoted himself to his Service, and his
First Fruits being holy, it was a token that his whole life would be Holy, and
so it was, for as he began it holily, so he ended it holily. In the beginning
of his last sickness he grew apprehensive that his end was nigh, and so began
to put things in order against the time: He made his Will, and settled his
worldly affairs; nor was he unmindful of the concerns of his Soul, for besides
his own Prayers, he desired those of the Congregation. He sent for me, and
desired me to give him the Sacrament, which I did the morning before he Died,
and he received it with an hearty Devotion, saying unto me when I gave him the
Cup, O here is the best Cordial. He confessed his Faith before me, and his sin
before God, and he desired Gods pardon, and the Churches absolution, both which
I trust he had. After this his Sickness increased, Nature decayed, and he dyed
of a Fever, a fiery Disease, which we hope proved to him like Elia's fiery
Chariot that conveyed him up to Heaven. To which place of Rest and Bliss God
bring us all for the Sake of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

