THE SPEECH OF His Grace, JAMES DUKE of ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, To
both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, On Saturday the 27 of September, 1662. Upon His
GRACES giving the Royal Assent to several Acts of Parliament.

DVBLIN: Printed by John Crook, Printer to the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY,
and are to be sold by Sam. Dancer, 1662.

THE SPEECH Of his GRACE James Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THere is no duty incident to the Place I have the Honor to serve the KING in,
to which I come with less willingness, or confidence, than to this of speaking
to such an Assembly: And by that time I have done, you will acknowledge I have
reason to be unsatisfied with the necessity imposed by custom upon all that sit
in this Place, to make speeches; a Custom perhaps reasonably introduced by
those that did, or at least thought they did it well; but somewhat hardly
continued upon those that were sure they did it ill. And yet though I am in the
Number of the last, I will rather obey the Necessity, than hazard the
Imputation of Sullenness or Singularity. Besides, I do not know, but that to be
silent at this time, and in this place, may be a greater Fault than any I hope
I shall commit in speaking; for we are taught by Infallible Authority, and
enjoined by Indispensable Precept, and it seems to be agreeable to the Dictates
of Nature and Reason, as well as of Religion and Piety, that for all the
Blessings we receive from the Divine Majesty, we should make as proportionable
Returns as ^e within our Power: And therefore Public and National Blessings,
do require Public and Solemn Celebrations. This was it that induced the
Transmission of that Act for an Anniversary Thanksgiving for His Majesty's most
Happy Restitution; and this is it, which if it be duly, that is, sincerely
performed, is most like to perpetuate to us, and to our Posterity, all the
Happinesses consequent to that Blessing.

What these Happinesses are, or at least may be, if we Our selves obstruct not
the course of them, would be best discerned, and set off, by a Retrospect into
the state of things for above twenty years past; and by opposing to that dismal
Object of Our remembrance, the cheerfulness and Serenity of the Prospect
forwards.

If the Miseries and Desolations of those years could be enumerated in the time
I mean to allow this Discourse; or if they could be described to the life, by
so ill an Orator as I am, they would be fewer, and more supportable than I
doubt the sad experience of too many have found them to be.

I shall therefore only put you in mind of some more Remarkable and
Fundamental deliverances and Restitutions, wrought by most wonderful
Providence, as a thankful acknowledgement fit, as I conceive, to be the subject
of the first discourse from this place, where I have the Honor, how unworthily,
and how unresemblingly soever, to represent the Majesty of my Great Master.

This very Seat of Royalty is delivered from some neglected corner, or
contemptible use, or from a Profanation worse than either from the Usurpation
of mean and low Aspirers, who having no shadow of right to it, had no other way
to ascend it, than by treading down and destroying what ever was ordained by
God or man, to fence and guard it; their extravagant Ambition transporting
them, and darkening their understanding to that degree, as not to consider how
short their possession of that Throne must be, to the disarming and violation
of which, they themselves had but newly shown the way.

We see this Throne now restored to its proper place, and Natural use,
surrounded and supported by Peers and Prelates, by Officers, Magistrates and
Judges, the Outworks, as well as Ornaments of Majesty.

We see it restored to the approach, and I doubt not to the delight of the
meanest of the Commons, whom you Gentlemen do, nor ought not disdain to
represent; for they are the Foundation upon which Monarchy is built, the
strength wherewith it is guarded, and the wealth whereby it is sustained,
enriched and beautified.

It is restored to the undoubted Lawful Possessor, the Offspring of a long
continued Race of Princes; in whom all the Contested Titles of former Ages are
met, without the pretense of a Competitor, and in whom all the Virtues of the
Princes of those Ages are united, without the severity (to say no worse) of
some of the Great and Warlike; and without the as harmful weaknesses of others
of more devout and peaceable dispositions: A PRINCE that has given frequent
proof that though he loves and seek peace for his Subjects sakes, he fears not
war for his own.

This Sword* the Instrument of conferring Military Honor, and the Emblem of
inflicting Punishment, is delivered from the ridiculous Stage-like Pageantry of
later times, and from a more execrable and Tragical Abuse, from ^utting off the
most Innocent, and defending the most guilty.

We see it now by the visible, immediate hand of God restored, and put into
that Hand that only had His Commission to bear and use it; and let it be Our
Prayer. That he bear it long, and that he may bear it long, that he bear it not
in vain, but to the terror and extermination if evil Doers, and to the support
and Protection of those that do well.

The King himself, whose Throne and Sword these are, is accountable to God, and
We to God for him, for many and great deliverances: He is delivered from the
Murderers of his Father, and the Usurpers of his Inheritance; from their
restless endeavors to destroy his Person, and to blast his Fame; from their
open violence, and secret contrivements against both from Exile, and all the
Afflicting consequences of that miserable state of a King; from comfortless
wanderings for Protection; from cold Receptions; from narrow supports, and from
such applications for them, as were more unsupportable, than the want of them
could be to him that was born, and delights to give, rather than receive them.
He is delivered from a continual tormenting Anxiety for the danger of his
Friends, and the oppression and slavery of his Country; from the importunity
of impertinent Arguments, drawn from his misfortunes, to draw him from his
Religion, and from a necessity of hearing, and bearing with the Reproaches and
Revilings cast upon our then Desolate Church, only because she was desolate,
and made so by her own unnatural Children.

From this dejected, despised, and in all humane appearance, desperate
condition, he is raised and restored to the Throne of his Fathers, to his
Native Country, become more dear and valuable to him, by his experience of
others, to the free and uncontrol'd exercise of the Religion he was bred in, to
a capacity of making Royal Retribution for any kindness he has received abroad
or from home: And which is the greatest earthly Felicity, so good a KING as he
could wish, he is not only restored to, but by the love of his People, without
the chargeable, and many times dangerous assistance, of Strangers, who are not
over tender, not much distinguishing betwixt the party they come to assist, and
that they come to subdue, when they are made Umpires in such Quarrels; for they
rarely employ their Auxiliary Treasure and blood, purely out of Generosity and
Justice, which may in Romance be found the ultimate end of such Assistance, but
seldom in the truth of History.

Here it may be observed, that if the revolt and deviation of our Nations from
their KING, and from Monarchy it self, was the most unreasonable and prodigious
that any age has known, their voluntary uncompelled Return to both, is as
much without example; nor indeed could the Return have been so miraculous, if
the Revolt had not been so prodigious: And it may also be worth the observing,
that as the first most bloody Eruption from Peace to Rebellion, took birth in
this Kingdom, so from hence came the first Overtures to Peace and Submission.

By, and with the Kings deliverance and Restitution, our Church is delivered
from Contempt, Sacrilege and Desolation, and restored to a due veneration, a
competent improving support, and to fair beginnings of Decency and Order.

Our Laws are delivered from corrupt, incompetent Interpreters, from monstrous,
unnatural expositions and applications, and Justice is restored to the
distribution of upright, learned, lawfully sworn and authorized Judges.

The noblest acts of Loyalty shall now no more receive the judgment due to the
fowlest Treason, due to the unrighteous Judges, that pronounced it without
Authority in the Persons, or Justice in the Sentence. High Courts of Justice
shall no more usurp that name, nor our Benches be crowded or oppressed with the
throng and wicked weight of those that ought rather to have stood manacled at
the Bar. A happy change to those for whose destruction those extravagant
Tribunals were erected, and a secure change to all; for it has been often an
observed method in Gods never failing Justice, to catch Cruelty and Oppression
in those very snares they had prepared for others.

All men are delivered from the intanglements of two-edged Oaths; from the
conflicts raised by them in men's breasts, betwixt Conscience and conveniencie,
betwixt the prostitution of Conscience, and the ruin of their Fortunes; than
which a harder, a more Tyrannical choice cannot be obtruded upon Christians:
For here the election was not, Swear thus against your Conscience, or you shall
have no part in the Civil Government, no Office in the Army, no Benefice in the
Church; but, Swear thus, or you shall have no house to put your head in, no
bread to sustain your selves, your wives and children.

To conclude these Observations, Who is not delivered from some Oppression, and
restored to some Advantage; even those that shall lose the wages of iniquity,
their ill got possessions, shall be delivered from the oppression of a bad, and
if they have any, shall be restored to a good Conscience; if they have none,
they were not in the Kings, and I hope will not be in Your care.

Those that shall be kept out of their ancient Estates, the Inheritance of
their Fathers, through defect of their Qualifications, and by the All-disposing
Providence of God, who was not pleased to make them active Instruments in this
Happy Change, are delivered from Tyrannous Confinements, causeless
Imprisonments, and a continual fear of their lives: The good Land lies before
them, their industry is at Liberty, and they are restored to the freedom of
Subjects, and protection of the Laws: If an Irish Papist be oppressed, they shall
relieve him; if the blood of the meanest of them be shed, it shall be strictly
enquired after; Let this state be compared with that they were in before the
Kings Restitution, and it will be found the greatest looser has got something
by it.

As it is our duty thus thankfully to commemorate these great things done for
us; so it is our duty to endeavor in our several Stations, to improve and
secure them to Our selves, and Our Posterity: And sure the most Natural way to
that end, is to call to mind, and avoid those Errors that brought us into
those miseries from which we are redeemed.

Many are the causes too boldly assigned, for the Calamities these Nations so
long labored under: But in such Inquisitions the verdict is seldom impartially
brought in, the Jury are too often the Criminals: But I think I may safely say,
that one, and that a fundamental cause, was, that the late King was maliciously
represented to the People; I am sure the Freedom, Peace, Plenty, and
Happinesses they were told they should enjoy without him, proved miserable and
fatal delusions.

Let us mistrust those that shall use the same Arts, lest they involve us in
the same misery; and let us judge of the Kings intentions to his people, by
his Public Acts of grace and bounty; by his mild and easy Government; by his
desire and endeavors to make his Subjects happy at home, and renowned abroad;
and by the reluctance of his Nature to just severity, when the wickedness or
frenzy of the worst Offenders extort it from him.

That something will be amiss in the Administration of the most perfect
Government in this world, must be expected; but whoever shall think that those
things are to be rectified by force upon the Government, and than effected,
proposes to acquiesce, and return to Obedience, cannot know himself so well, as
to be sure, that Opportunity and success may not suggest more inordinate
Appetites to him; And there are those alive that know, how far further than
their first intention, the Reformers of our times were led on, til the
unwarrantable force they had raised, grow too strong for their Management flew
in their faces, and in conclusion jucted those villainies, that I dare say their
Souls abhorred; but neither their Policy or Power could restrain.

We have had sad experience, and let as be the wiser for it, in how short a
time, in how few days, the industry of many years, nay, of an Age, may be
destroyed and laid waste, when Rage and Rapine are let loose. If once Sedition
grow too strong for the Law, and Rebellion for the Magistrate, so that the Law
is silenced, or the language of it corrupted, or inverted, and the Magistrate
removed as burdensome and unnecessary, let us remember what variety of misery
and mischief is brought upon the people, how unsupportable their sufferings
are, and how intolerable their fears of suffering they know not what more, by
whom, or how long. Let the people remember how many, and how chargeable their
Masters, nay how many and chargeable the changes of their Masters were, when
once they foolishly affected the misery, indeed the impossibility of having
none,

When Misrepresentations had taken place and root in the minds of the people,
their hearts grew narrow and barren, toward the King; those that soon after
robbed them both persuading them to keep their purses full for them to empty.

This close Oratory is seldom unsuccessful, but what the people got by
following this thrifty counsel, some have taken the pains to compute, and it is
found, that the Impositions laid and levied upon the people, to support
Usurpation and Tyranny, in a few bad years came to more, than the most
chargeable Princes had raised in some Ages to conquer Enemies and Infidels
abroad, whilst this was employed to make Enemies of Friends, and little better
than Infidels of Christians at home.

I confess, this Animadversion is not so seasonable now, or proper to be
applied to you, who in your Liberalities, have out gone all Example, and
prevented even the Kings wishes; nor are those Liberalities the less, but the
more valued by Him, that he intends to apply them entirely to the security and
improvement of a true Protestant, and a right English Interest in this Kingdom.

There is nothing that declares, indeed that constitutes perfect union, and a
happy Harmony, so much as mutual trusts and confidences, and the interchange of
gifts and benefits; it is so in private Friendship, and it is much more so, in
that good Intelligence which must make a King and his people happy.

The King has trusted you as far as even King trusted Subjects, and He has
given you more than ever any King or Lord of Ireland had to give.

You have trusted the King with all you had, and all you had to pretend to; and
you have given Him more than he thought of to desire; Let it not therefore be
apprehended, that this Commerce must cease by the Prodigality on both sides, as
if there were no more to be given or received* No, my Lords and Gentlemen,
protection from Foreign Invasion and Rebellion at home, the due and incorrupt
administration of Government, and of the Laws, and under them the advancement
and encouragement of Piety and Learning, Trade, and all sorts of Industry and
Improvements, are benefits that may to the end of time, descend from the Throne
to you and yours: And a due subjection to that Government, and obedience to
those Laws, and application to that Piety and Learning, to that Trade and
Industry, and to those Improvements, may be as lasting Retributions from the
People to the Throne.

I should here end this unusual Exercise, but that I am commanded by the King
to let you know; that as he is abundantly satisfied with those demonstrations
of Duty, Loyalty and Affection you have given him, during the whole time of
your sitting, so he looks with great Pleasure and Delight upon those Acts of
Grace and Bounty that have past from him to you; and he commands me to be sure
not to forget to assure you, upon all Proper Occasions that all his Promises
shall be inviolably observed; and that the will consent to whatever else may
make this Kingdom flourishing and happy, whether it shall be the Enacting of
new and profitable, or the repeal of old, unuseful, or burden some Laws.

To say any thing of, or from my Self in this place, may be Presumption; but to
say nothing to you, my Lords and Gentlemen, to whom I owe so much must be
Ingratitude. You have before and since my Arrival, been pleased to make many
and obliging Expressions of your Approbation of the Kings choice of Me for this
Government: I have great reason to fear, both the King and you consulted your
Indulgence to Me, more than your judgment of Me.

Yet without much presumption or vanity, I think I may say, thus far the King
and you may be excusable, that He chose, and You approved a Person, whose
Fortune and Family must prosper or decay, must ruin or subsist by and with
this Kingdom. This has not perhaps always been (...) case, and it is possible
mean Abilities thus stimulates, (...) be more profitably industrious than
greater, actuated, (...) less, or by contrary Incentives. There are upon me all
^^^ginable Obligations to apply all that is in me, to the (...) and prosperity
of this Kingdom: Those of duty, fidelity and thankefulness to the best, and
most bountiful Master in the world; those of Retribution and Gratitude to you,
for extraordinary and liberal manifestations of kindeness and affection, and
those of self-preservation and happiness Hence it may be concluded reasonably
and naturally, that my endeavors will be hearty and faithful and my failin^
which shall be as few as I can unvoluntary, and therefo^^ the more pardonable.

You will presently, when I am retired, be at liberty at ^^journ your selves to
the time you desired.

FINIS.

