EIKON ASILIK TETAPT OR, THE PICTURE OF THE Late King James Further drawn to
the LIFE.

In which is made manifest by several Articles, That the whole Course of his
Life has been a continued Conspiracy against the Protestant Religion, Laws and
Liberties of the Three Kingdoms.

In a Letter to Himself.

The Fourth Part.

By TITUS OATS, D. D.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, (...) the Oxford-Arms
Inn in Warwick Lane, MDCXCVII.

TO His most Excellent Majesty WILLIAM III.
By the Grace of God, And the Choice of the Good People of England, Of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Rightful and Lawful KING, Defender of the Faith,
and Restorer of our LAWS and LIBERTIES, As well as the Victorious PROTECTOR of
Oppressed Europe; TITUS OATS, D. D.

His Faithful, Dutiful and Loyal Subject and Servant, most humbly dedicates
this ensuing MEMORIAL.

EIKON ASILIK TETAPT: Or, The Fourth Part of the Picture of the Late King JAMES.
SIR,
I Know you expect I should be as good as my word, and truly so I will to the
utmost of my poor power, because of the great regard I have for your Person,
Cause, and Interest; and before I enter upon any more lines of your sweet face,
in order to perfect your Picture, let us take a dish of drink together, and
give you a true state of your interest here in England, and when we consider
the excellent qualifications of your Hell-born Crew here, you may easily
conclude what a nasty pickle you and my old Landlady are in; and that I shall
do in these six particulars.

1. Your Cattle here have acted their parts, in tampering to make parties
against the present Government, which parties were to have been made either of
your Friends or your Enemies; the former are such a parcel of Cowardly Rascals,
that, to tell you the truth, as they quitted your Father in the time when he
had most occasion for them, so they did you; witness your friends both here and
in Scotland too* notwithstanding the application they made by your especial
direction to Sir Timothy Stiff-Jaws, when old Preston's hopeful design was
baffled by the vigilance of the present Government, nay, I doubt not but that
they might by Scotch Robin have made some effort of that nature upon some of
our Dissenters; but alas, it was to no purpose, for they understood their
Interest (as well as an old friend of yours did of cheating your Brother of a
tickling sum, you know for what use) and therefore all attempts (if ever any)
were to all intents and purposes fruitless and vain; well, I pray what tools
did you make use of, very sorry ones upon my word, a sort of people whose
persons were neither known, nor had they credit for a two-penny Loaf; persons
not able to make you a party worth the mentioning, nor can I (by the best
enquiry I can make) tell who set them on work, or what Warrant or Authority
they have for what they do, for if one should ask Sir Timothy Stiff-Jaws, to
whom (as I said before) they were to make application, he would swear by my
Landlady's white hand, that he knew never a Rogue of them all, and would not
lose his good Preferment as long as there was a shilling to be got, though I
must tell you, that in spite of the Whore his neighbor, he has quitted his
Post since a penny could not be got in it with any great matter of content: he
is now at Grass, and waits, dear Sir, for a comfortable minute, that he may
have my Landlady by the hand again without disturbance. I suppose he might make
you underhand half a dozen poor Curs, and these the Rogues call a Party, and a
Party for you, and upon the strength of these Fellows impudence, your
nonsensical Crew shamm'd a simple Declaration from you, bearing date from St.
Germains, which did you more hurt than the Fishermen of Feversham could do for
their hearts blood: Well, when your gracious Declaration came, Lord! What a
stir they made with it, and publish it they would, hand over head, without any
regard had for the Publishers and disposers of the same, or the least thought
of making any provision for those willing Vermin, that lay at the mercy of our
Government, to be drawn, hanged and quartered, for such an eminent piece of
service; and some of them have taken a civil swing, tho much ado before they
could be persuaded to it.

You was not pleased to put us off with one Declaration, but a second and a
third was issued forth, bearing date from St. Germains, in which you lovingly
declared what great and good things they should have, the Lord knows when, if
they would but meet you the Lord knows where: But, I pray Sir, why did you
reflect upon the ingratitude of some of your old Friends? Alas! alas! you did
not well consider that they might be got into good employments, in which they
were to Battle their sweet Bodies for a convenient season; or it may be if some
of them had been so scandalous that they could not get into an employment of
considerable trust, they were got behind the Hangings, with a comfortable
Pension, to the end that they may use King William in that Post, as they did
you when you employed them: Nay, sweet Sir, now I think on it, there is your old
Friend Sir Simkin you know, who turned Whig to betray the Whigs to your
Brother, and then he turned Tory to betray your Brother to the Whigs, then
turned Papist to betray your good Worship; what could you do with such a Spark
if he should take the other turn, but keep him behind the Hangings, to do some
job or another, tho it cost you two or three thousand pounds per annum for
Secret service; for in my conscience Rhiming Jack Carryl, and the rest of your
doughty Crew at St. Germains, would scarce sit at Council Board with him, he
would be so scandalous; he says he is a man of good parts, and wou^d himself
sign a Certificate even upon Oath, since honor has so long been a stranger to
him, yet none of your poor humble Curs now with you, would be seen in his
company for forty shillings a man, lest he should betray you once more. Come,
let me ask you one civil question, if you should be King of Poland, or
Jerusalem, or Ushant, or Bell Isle? Would you ever admit him so much as Clerk
of your Kitchen; truly you must have the Grace of a great deal of good Nature,
to believe him worthy of such an Employ; for since he has made so many turns,
let him have nothing with you but that of a Turnspit, he being too lend for any
else; yet for all this, this Case-hardened Coxcomb, that brags of doing great
feats for the support of our Government, has pretended to such an Interest
with you, and my very good Landlady, that one would think that he was ready to
make another turn, and some of your Cattle here would fain make us believe he
is doing you service. For my part I don't, but if you believe it, you may then
imagine, that by him you may accomplish your restoration, without putting your
friend Lewis to the charge of an hard Onion or a round Coal in the said
service; if they cannot rely upon him, the fools will brag that they have some
friends that are in place. I confess I do see some of your old Villains yet
employed, but the boast that is made by your Crew of their aid and assistance
is rather noisie than dangerous; I am more afraid of the men of Brains,
Quality and Reserve, that manage in the dark, I am sure we cannot be too wary
of such Instruments. I looked upon Sir Timothy Stiff-Jaws and Sir Formal the
younger to be more dangerous instruments for your service, than ever Sir Simkin
could pretend to be; and they would have appeared in their colors, could your
old hanged Exciseman have carried his point, for you know four thousand Horse
at command is a pretty Post, and might have done something, I Will assure you,
toward your changing your French air, of which I suppose you are pretty weary:
But what next, what are we to do now? Truly since Betraying and Plotting is
pretty well out of fashion, Sir Simkin sets up a Mercury Office to help men to
places, and values himself much upon his last calling; how long the trade will
last I cannot tell, but if I thought it would hold any considerable time, I
would put a friend of mine an apprentice to him for seven years, provided he
might be free of the Trade when he comes out of his time.

I*ll warrant you now that you have a great desire to know of Sir Simkin's good
health, and when I saw him: Truly Sir, I see him often; and he has his health
well, but he has left off the use of his Beads; and leaving them off at an
unseasonable time, it was of some prejudice to the little reputation he had
amongst some of your friends; as for Mother Church, she has left him as an
outcast, and what game he is playing, the Dee'l and John a Cumber knows best:
his office does take pretty well as I hear, I have not had occasion to make use
of him, you may have a cast of his Office if you will trust him again.

2. I am to observe a second thing to you, concerning your willing friends
here, and that relates to their Pamphlets, which I must tell you, Sir, are
spitefully dangerous; that it is death to touch them, and so dear and tedious
to spread them, that they are of little or no use to your Cause and Interest:
For example, Scotch Robin's Great Britains, Groans by reason of the depredation
of the Dutch: The lying Rascal should have confessed, that the English had been
very remiss on the one hand, and the Dutch very diligent on the other; that
has been indeed the cause of our decay, and their interest in Trade; but the
Book (had not there been too much of it) was only to rail at King William*s
supposed mis-management of his Affairs, and thereby he would imply that he was
a Tyrant; but the Rogue durst not for his Ears say; that King William was an
Usurper, for if he had, he might have been hanged for his pains, without Madam
VVilkinson's interposition to save him: But you may imagine, that it may be for
your service to have King William*s management of his Affairs exposed to the
scorn and contempt of the World. Well, suppose it be, I believe he does as
little value it, as the Feversham men did your Worship, when they clapped your
Arse. I do not find he is afraid to let a Parliament inspect his Management,
and thanks be to God, he lets them have time enough to call delinquents to an
Account; but how in the name of an old Oyster-wench is this for your service?
For to publish his miscarriages (to the world) would be a notorious reflection
upon your Brother*s Government and yours; for your Scribblers, as Scotch Robin,
and his friend old Hodge, and his inferior crew, writing against K. William
for the cause aforesaid, they write against you, and directly murder your
sweet self, in compliment to James Stuart, late of Westminster, Labourer.
These fellows when they write of our King William, they arraign him as a
Tyrant, with little or no imputation upon him as an Usurper; so that the
clamor they make is about his Male administration; so that tacitly they admit
of his Authority, and so wound you through his sides. In a word, all they drive
at is, that our King is not so good a man as your sweet self. I pray, Sir, is
not their reflecting upon our King, a publication that you was a man that did
break your Faith and Word with the people of England, with this difference
only, that King William has done it as well as you: Well, I think King William
has justified his Government and the management thereof to three Legal
Parliaments; and if you could but have done as much but to one; you needed not
to have ambled to St. Germains.

But, Sir, see what a pack of Rascals you rely upon, since all the subjects on
which they treat, and propositions in their Books by them laid down, are as
contrary to the interest they pretend to, as light is to darkness, nay Simkin
himself could not have done your business more effectually, than these
scoundrels have done it, for here they betray your Title and Honor, and sink
your Prerogative, that if ever you should return, you would not have enough to
piece the knees of your Breeches withal, and that would be a sad thing, my
friend, to have that Royal business reduced to so low an ebb: surely these men
are in hopes of Sir Simkin's getting them places: They write so wickedly for
you, and as little to the purpose, as if they were disposed rather to six you
in Rome, than in England, what is this but betraying you, and betraying is
betraying, let it be to St. Germains or the Hague, it is all one in the Original.

3. I would observe to you a third thing, if my Landlady and this little Cub
would give us leave, and that is the Caba^ling of your Party, which is no more
than their meeting in so many Clubs, for what I pray you, truly to stuff their
Guts, make good Cheer, drink your good Health and my Gammer Sweetapple, your
young Cubs Health, one would have thought they had been all the disciples of
Sir John Greasy Guts: nay, they do drink to your speedy Restoration, but the
Devil a bit of Counsel or contrivance was there of restoring of you, and my
Landlady, or drawing one single Soul to their Party, nay, they meat and drink
it away as if the 80000 Pound that was forgiven to Sir John, had been divided
amongst them to make them hearty merry; in truth, Sir, their Expenses one time
were so lavish, that one would have thought that a Band of Pensioners had sat
at St. Germains, and that Greasy Guts had been Speaker, to have supplied their
extraordinary occasions, and that you had entrusted your Brothers old friend
with the other two hundred thousand pound, too be paid to them for secret service.

Truly, Sir, this they call secret service, and very well they may, good men,
for it is all over secret, only their Character, Names, Places of Abode, their
Persons and their Business are known; we could and can easily find them, and
take them up when we please, without the charge of a Kingston or a Fuller to
discover them, the former you will do well to return to his Trade of a Tailor,
and the latter to that of a Coney-wool-cutter: You will say what is this
Kingston? Truly, Sir, an humble poor Cur of yours, that a friend of yours in
the Kings Bench Court helped to the use of a Pulpit in the Diocese of Bristol,
where the good man exercised his Talent, and run down the Popish Plot with all
the shreds of Learning he had; in time the Bp. of the Diocese came to
understand, that this fellow had never been ordained by either Bp. or
Presbyter, but that he had been only a broken Tailor, that had impudence enough
without any color of Law to get up into the Pulpit; the Bp examined the
matter, and dismissed my Spark from his preaching. Well, what then? Truly the
next thing he took up was to be a Spy upon a Party, to betray them, as if Sir
Simkin had laid his hands upon him for that purpose, without the help of a
Scotch Bp. here, and truly there was no manner of need of his service, for your
Crew were as secret as Noonday; had these people managed as your Jesuits
managed with you the Popish Plot, we had then stood in need of forty Spies,
whereas in your last managed designs there was no need of one, for every man
did so plainly see the foolish behavior of your Conspirators, that they must
have been blind had they not seen their designs

Who would be plagued with such a pack of Scoundrels? I advise you to write to
Sir Sweetface Tellpenny, that ^e pay off the Rogues that plot so foolishly,
that they are the reproach of a Conspiracy, for they mind nothing but eating
and drinking, as if they had been Consecrated for that work by Sir John
Greasyguts, in a pretty Chapel a mile or two out of Town: but if the Gentleman
pay them off, I pray let him do it without account, lest he should be forced to
reduce his Books, as he once was upon another account; but showing of Books and
cutting of Books, and betraying our Masters, is as much out of fashion at
Court, as the Mass it self; and Royal Pimping left Whitehall when your Brother
went to his place, and you in a decent manner left the Government* being
quietly driven from it by the perjured people of England. If Sir Sweetface
Tellpenny should not be at leisure to discha^ge your Pensioner Plotters, I pray
be so gracious as to let Honest Tom the Exchequer man do it; that*s a Loyal Our
Pl^as^ure you, one (that if he was well examined) has not only the talent of
Sir John Greasyguts, but he has a great deal of Sir Sweetface Tellpenny, so
that he may in a most humble manner serve to cheat you, as both the other have
done your dearest Brother, of pious memory; they are all in pretty good Posts
(not Whipping-posts) and have a fair opportunity through mercy to cheat a third
Monarch, if he shall be so graciously pleased, without the least danger of
standing in the Pillory for that acceptable piece of service.

But you say, what would men have you to do? Truly I have nothing for you to
do, but to recollect with your self what a set of Rogues you have relied on,
and they have all failed you, and above all, to call to mind how they pretended
Loyalty to you, tho they knew you ascended the Throne by fraud, perjury,
violence, and murder; and when you were driven from us, they struck in with
the Government of a Prince, that ascended the Throne by the voice of the
people, and pretend to have a great esteem for his Justice, and Valor, but in
truth, it*s for the Money-getting employments they have met withal; I say
remember these things, and if you had but a grain of sense, you would do that
to you self, you caused to be done to the truly noble, and never to be
forgotten Earl of Essex.

4. I have a fourth thing to observe to you; you have a number of fools that
run up and down and brags of their Commissions, and foreign correspondence,
showing of Letters, etc. and sometimes they will prate of you, and your worthy
Ministers at St. Germains: as Harry Higden, and the Town Bullies used to talk
of a Constable and his Watch, and let the subject be what it will, the Scene is
St. Germains, the Cipher it runs still in the old way of Trade and Lawsuits
with a Clause at the end of all to this effect; I hope to see you suddenly, for
my Uncle's Cause will come to a hearing the next Term. Now this is a vail every
body sees through, and the deep mystery lies as open and intelligible, as a
Proclamation; nay one would think that Sir Simkin was amongst these people, and
was incognito, (as he was once you know where) and so had betray*d them, and
exposed their pretenses to the Government, and so you are once more betrayed in
spite of your Teeth: Well, if you are, I cannot help it, if I should cry my
eyes out; you must give them more caution for the time to come; but upon the
whole, you may see that your Rascally Crew, have neither Brains, nor Interest,
nor Fortune, but have struck into a vein of intelligence by themselves, and for
want of better security, they are forbid to vouch for one another; they all
sing the same song, and use the same authority for every thing they say, and
do, and all this while not a Drawer in the Tavern they frequent, but can call
every one by his right Nickname, and tell what post he has, or was to have
enjoyed in your service, had your simple designs taken effect. Do but observe
how these Vermin live in a great measure by spunging upon your sweet Self, or
your credulous friends; nay rather than the Rogues will be idle, they will fall
into Distress to be helped out again, and spend what they get, in guttling and
fuddling; and as for those that have done you good service, they sham off, with
a God-damn ye.

And are these things so? Yes, truly, and so they will be, as long as they have
an unfortunate Prince, for whose Cause they contend; and as long as they are
managed by those whose Loyalty consists in Drinking and Swearing, and Whoring
too, or else they would not be liked of. They now and then will make a man of
some Figure privy to their Intreague, then, poor Cur, in his own defense, he is
forced to maintain them, just as you did your Irish Officers in half pay, that
they might not make swear upon you in your Brother's time. Some there are whose
Estates have been shrunk for the curiosity of knowing a dangerous secret:
Moreover, this can be made out in due time, that not one Letter in ten of your
Rogues ever miscarried, and scarce a man of them was taken up, till the
business of the Assassination was discovered, tho the ways of their
Correspondence, their Persons, their Haunts, and their pretended Business, has
been as well known to the Government, as they themselves are to one another.
These are a pretty sort of managers I assure you, they commit as many Solicisms
in plotting, as Tom Jenner used in his Speech-making, or as Wright in his Law.
What you are out of order now, and seem very much displeased: Come, come, I
pray, come over into England, and look after these Rogues, and that you may not
be discovered, do but look and act the part of a Wise and Honest Man, and then
no body will know you, and then you may repass without the danger of the
Feversham men's having the least stroke at your posteriors; but I doubt you
will not have the courage of coming to us, though you had the courage to run
from us, therefore there must be some expedient found out, for the keeping
these Rogues in order, or they will make you and your Commissions cheap; and
not only so, but they will be in no condition to do that Mischief, you have
graciously designed for them to accomplish; and not only so, but they will
hinder and keep off others, of more sense, and better interest, and might be of
more use to you and danger to your Enemies: Come, for all your swearing, what I
tell you is of greater weight it may be, than you are aware of. Come what think
you of Squire Boldface, he is in the same post you left him; he was an active
Rogue for you in the time of your Tyranny, and would have done what you had
bidden him; I pray try him at this time, he lives near old Sir John's, he may
chance to put you in a way to Govern these Rogues at a better rate, or else our
Pottage will be all spoiled, and then what will my Landlady say, I would not be
in your coat for forty good Cherry-stones: You know this Boldface is a pretty
fellow, and has all the qualifications of a Rogue, that can do you some
service in this affair, and if he fail you, you will do well to send for them
to St. Germains, for they will certainly defeat all your glorious undertakings
for the honor of the Nation.

I pray be not in such haste, but stay and take a little good advice, for alas,
I have business of very very great weight to discourse with you, therefore sit
down, for we must not lose a Hog for want of a little Tar. What think you? Do
you think that the old broken Colonel might not be entrusted with the managing
of your party? nay, rather than fail, let him take into his Assistance young
Sir Trusirum Synagogue, who, tho he be a young fellow, yet he is pretty well
improved, since his Father's death, and is much come in to your Cause, God wot;
it may be he may be of as much use to you in this affair in particular, as you
have been to the Nation in genetal: I think I have hit the point as near as the
Main-tack is to the Cook-room door: Nay, now I think on^t, I saw Sir Tiffany
Pushpin reading in his Chair, as his manner commonly is, he will make a third
man to join with the aforesaid two Champions of yours, I think he did not turn
Papist to betray you, as Simkin did; but notwithstanding all that, he was a
thorough-paced Rogue, he may therefore be a fit man to keep your Conspirators
in order, and not let them expose themselves to the world for Fools, as well as
Knaves; what, because he is a poor Cur, you don't remember him, come, put on
your Considering Cap, and recollect with your self, and tho he had not the
opportunity of joining with old Sir Maple Face in the noble Science of Book
cutting, yet through mercy he is his near Relation, and has the precedence of
him, we all know why: When he makes up his formal mouth, one would think that
in his Chair, for want of a pair of Beads, he is saying his Prayers upon an old
Almanac: I must say that for him, I never saw him in one without a Book, so
that one would think that he never spoke or did any thing without Book: He and
old Simkin has each of them a Son, good men both, that may prove as great
Blessings to this Nation, as their damned Fathers have proved Plagues and
^urses.

Come, Sir, I think I have taken Care of your concerns, but that you may not
want a further supply, there is my friend and acquaintance Mr Spitfire, since
he was laid aside from enjoying a pretty sweet employment, he has bellowed and
roared against our Court, as if you your self had been there in propria
persona, you know he was famous for an Adventure upon a naked man in the Verge
of the Court, which might have silenced the Gentleman; but since nothing will
but a good employment under you, I humbly offer him to join with the rest of
these humble Servants of yours, to make up the number of Governors of your
foo^ish unruly friends here at home; but that you may not want a Council of Six
to govern the affair, I pray be pleased to accept of Sweetface Tellpenny, for
he by paying them well, may do very much toward the keeping them in their
Gears, for in good footh my old friend, they are a scandal to Treason, Mutiny,
and Rebellion it self, as their current fames stand at present; and that they
may not want a Chaplain to say Grace over their businesses, there is Scotch
Robin, with Madam Wilkinson's Books, may be of great use to them.

5. I must observe to you, that they are great sticklers for Intelligence; let
me be kept out of my Pension till Doomsday in the afternoon, if that be not as
true as that of your running away, because you durst stay no longer; but let me
dye, if ever they gave one true Syllable in six, either of men or things,
whether it be for want of Judgment, Information, or Integrity, or of all three,
may be a question; there are a great many who have appeared Enemies to the
Court, and these they call Jacobites, but alas they are much out in their
calculation, for these are but a sort of Grumblers for want of a little Court
Holy Water, and are no more Jacobites than my self, though my Pension has been
kept from me these five years, and some of them kept out of their expectations
from this Government eight; so that they reckon all to be your friends that are
angry with the Government, that have not had the opportunity of ruining of it,
as your Cattle would willingly have done, if they had been taken into it: Oh!
that you were but here with a wise head, and an honest heart, that no body
might know you, to hear them talk of Descents, and bodies of Jacobites to cover
them, you would split your sides with laughing at their extravagant folly; for
if you were to have twenty thousand lousie French Curs to land here, they could
not expect to be covered, unless they covered one another, as Tumble-down Dick
would have covered the Booksellers Boy, or a sweet-faced young Gentleman yet
alive to tell the story; such a covering they might have met withal, but as for
any other covering, they know nothing of the matter; nay, my old friend, I
suppose they have sent over their Emissaries to invite you, and to tell you
they are ready; truly so they are, some are ready to starve, and some are ready
to be hanged, and others of them are ready with your sweet self to run away,
and truly I am ready to dye with laughing when I see their management.

Come, come, to deal plainly with you, these can neither fight nor cover, but
in that way I mentioned, for they are purely for Passive Obedience and
Non-Resistance, and will no more fight than your Army did at Hounslow-Heath, or
at Salisbury; the Rogues will not show any Courage, unless it be that of Tom
Jenner, or your sweet self, valiantly to run away: In short, they are a pack of
Rogues, that are in a direct faction against the more sober sort of Jacobites,
and give false Characters of them aboard, and calumniate them at home, as
discouragers of all Loyal designs, as they call their nasty scoundrel Plots,
when, in truth, they have only shamm'd themselves to the Gallows, and by their
vain and villainous attempts they have exposed themselves as a rascally
Generation of people, that will not be content under any Government: for if
they had you here again, those very men would be the first that would fly, not
only in yours, but also in my poor Landlady's face; God bless her, and keep the
poor Gentlewoman on the other side the Water; and scratch her Eyes out, rather
than they would stand idle for want of business, and send you and her, and the
little Cub, a Grazing the second time: Therefore I humbly conceive that your
Cause is upon its last Legs, unless these men have some better way than is yet
known to the Government. But still you huff and bounce, and say they are your
friends, so they are, and it is fit they should, for in my conscience I think
if they were yoked to any Interest, but your own, it would be yoking an Ox and
an Ass together, which would be an unequal yoking: but for all your huffing and
making such a noise of their friendship, let me tell you the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, that they depose you their pretended King, in
the very conditions upon which they say they would have you restored, for they
would make you accountable to them, or else good night Nicholas: But what a
swearing do you make, and will in spite of Hell it self have them to be
understanding men. Well, be quiet, I will say so too, and there is good reason
for it: For in their laboring to restore you, they good men, only think to
accomplish an impossibility; and above, all they neither understand the state
of the Nation, nor the humor of the people, nor the measures of Government,
nor the complication of Interests and Parties, nor so much as the root of the
Disease, much less the Remedy: but to please you, they shall be men of
intelligence, because they get in to the most public Coffee-houses about the
Town, and therefore they cannot want for News, and News-letters; and upon the
strength of Dyer's Letters, they set up for men of business and intreague, and
they assume to themselves the Government of the whole Province of Jacobitism.
Oh, what undertakers you have had for Levies, Associations, Parliaments,
Councils. Lieutenants, Seamen, Soldiers: Nay, because the nature of their
designs required secrecy, they have made the whole Town to ring of their
exploits, and orders; so that in giving you intelligence, they have been and
still are intelligencers to King William, and give us a better account of what
is done at St. Germains, than they give you what is done here; so that they are
rather the instruments for this Government than for your good Worship.

Well, what think you of the point, don't you think your self blessed with a
parcel of pure understanding Loggerheads? Oh, how does Tom the Exchequer-man
value himself upon sitting at the upper end of the Table, in Company with these
his Brethren: I never find him famous for any great adventure, unless it was
for sending a Coachman to Bridewell, for asking him Eighteen-pence, for
driving him from the Exchange to Westminster Hall; and the poor man, I suppose,
did share of Tom*s blessing, when the Rogue was a Justice of the Peace: He is
sometimes in pretty Company, where (to his great sorrow, poor Dog,) your name
is mentioned, but not much to your advantage: He is an ignorant Rascal that is
hearty in your Cause, when it does not threaten his Pockets, but an
Intelligencer he is, just such as your Brother and you used to have in you
Ministry.

6. I must observe a sixth thing to your good Worship: Your Cattle here are a
bold pragmatical sort of people, they are great undertakers I must confess,
that is to say, when they have the obedient Child that cheated his old Dad of
his Estate in company with them; they are as great talkers as ever met at the
Devil Tavern; nay, they value themselves upon huffing and making a noise to no
manner of purpose; they are great secret-keepers, for they tell every body what
they know, and more especially since Scotch Robin has joined with them; and as
they contrive their matters, the poorest Porter in the Street, nay, Squire
Boldface, Sir John Greasy Guts his Neighbor, would swear that their Management
is a scandal to their very Cause and Commission. Now you make your Face up, as
if you were somewhat concerned at the News. Come, Sir, I will appeal to Tom
Long the Carrier of Exeter, notwithstanding his simple remarks upon Mr.
Baxter's Life, or to Mr. Wind and Stink of All Souls, or to Tom Little Pitcher,
his Kinsman; nay, to Doctor Dunce of the Abbey, with his disputed Title and
endless Wars, who was a great Companion to Sir John Femvick, that worthy good
man; nay, rather than fail, I will adventure to appeal to Rhyming Jack Carryl,
or to your old Fiddler Hodge, and his inferior Crew of Spiritual Bums, whether
or no your Puppies have not acted contrary to all the measures of common sense,
as well as Political Prudence, in such a manner, that no man of credit or
brains, even of their own Crew, will have to do with them; nay, since Scotch
Robin the Bookseller has advanced himself into some Reputation with these
Coxcombs, he has flattered several people into a vain attendance, and
dependence upon Risings and Descents, till the poor Dogs have spent themselves
to their Shirts, in waiting and preparing for their days of Jubilee; and after
many disappointments upon the back one of another, they have brought themselves
under a fatal despondency of any Relief at all; and since, Sir, your contest is
at an end, I will tell you, that had I been of your Party and Interest, I
should in spite of Scotch Robin and all his Politics, have advised you to
have taken the Counsel of Sir Sweetface Tellpenny, who would have told you the
vanity of applying to wrong persons, and in wrong methods, and by wrong
instruments: You thought the method you used would take, but alas, instead of
that, some of your Rogues have been taken, and made wry mouth at the West end
of the Town for their pains, and old Sir Timothy Stiff-Jaws, if your people had
but made due application to his Worship, he would have told them, that you
ought to have retrenched your number at St. Germains, and inspected into their
Ability, Credit and Morals, and that you ought to have drawn your Commissions
into fewer hands, and fixed upon some men of Honor, Quality, and Interest, to
order and communicate in chief, and not leave themselves to the mercy of so
many forward and impertinent pretenders, and hangers on, who would certainly
betray you as soon as they were pinched. Now, Sir, you may remember that you
blessed us with two or three Declarations, but all to no purpose; but if upon
the declaration of War between us and the French, your mighty Ally, instead of
your Declarations, had himself published a Manifesto to all the Princes of
Europe in your favor, and if he had protested that he aimed at nothing but
your Restoration, and to settle you in the legal possession of your Throne,
without the least encroachment upon the Laws of the Land, or the Religion,
Liberties, and Properties of the people, without proposing to himself any other
recompense than in the Conscience of so meritorious a work; this might have
gone a great way, I Will assure you, had he and you but reputation in Europe but
of two ordinary Porters, especially if it had been so explicitly and exactly
drawn, as to make no room for a Reserve; but the truth of it is, you and he had
so often violated your Words and Oaths, that such Declarations would only have
served for Bum-fodder, and would have signified as little as your pimping
Manifesto's did to the Popish and Protestant Princes of Europe.

You would have me deal plainly with you I suppose, if you would not it is all
one, I shall not be afraid to proceed to the Thirtieth Article, therefore sit
down and hear your charge, with all the patience that becomes so foul a
Criminal, and then the World will abhor you as a detestable Wretch, and England
will be pitied by all the Princes of Europe, in that we would not exclude you
from inheriting the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Your Villains do threaten me,
but I shall not be afraid to lay down the truth with all freedom, and if I
suffer for it, it is no great matter, for it is no new thing for me to suffer
for acting the part of an honest man.

ARTICLE 30.
30. You stand charged with the fomenting a Popish Plot, or Conspiracy, for the
Alteration of the Religion and Government, and Countenancing those that were
charged to be in that part, that did relate to the life of your Brother Charles
the second; for the management of this Article, 1. I will show what was done in
order to this encouraging men to undertake and to engage in this design. 2.
What steps were taken in the design, in order to effect it. 3. Who assisted in
it. 4. Who were engaged here at home. 5. The design it self. 6. Concerning the
discovery of it. 7 I shall show you what evidence there was to prove it. 8.
What Credit it obtained in the Nation. 9. Of what great use the discovery might
have been to King Charles the Second, if he had pleased to have managed himself
according to the Counsel of Parliament, and the Patriots of the Protestant
Religion. 10. What were the consequences of the discovery of the Popish Plot,
and how fatal it was to their Popish party.

1. I will show you what was done in order to the encouraging men to undertake
and engage in this design; the design bespoke it self for nothing but a cursed
Jesuit and men of the same principles, who might to all intents and purposes,
be the more paced in this holy undertaking of that villainous party: The
Jesuits, that in conjunction with your self, and wicked party of Papists and
Popishly affected persons, undertook this affair. You know, Sir, that you no
sooner was by the providence of God, and the earnest desire of the people of
England, restored to the Land of your Nativity, but the Popish party* began to
bestir themselves for the restoration of their Religion, therefore they apply
themselves to the Jesuits, and Jesuited Priests, and men of Arbitrary
principles, and protested their zeal for the Restoration of the Catholic
Religion, but they durst not enter upon any design in the years 1660 and 1661,
till they were sure how the Parliament would steer their Course, in relation to
the uniformity of service here in England, who should carry the point, whether
the Bishops or the Dissenting Protestants, and therefore it was resolved by the
Jesuits that nothing should for that present time be undertaken, but the
drawing in of some men into Conspiracies, and to provide Rogues lustily and
heartily to swear Treason against them, in order to the destruction of some,
and to bring others into disrepute with the Parliament, that they might be kept
under by some severe Laws that might be made against them, to the end, that
they might be in no condition to give any opposition to them in their designs,
that should be by them formed for the effecting so blessed a work; besides all
this, they at that time were not sure of your Countenance, because for several
years you made a sort of profession of the Protestant Religion, and received
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the usage of the Church of
England, with the King your Brother; and he himself was not married, and they
thought it convenient that nothing should be so much as proposed, till they
might have the countenance of some Popish Consort, and then it was thought that
they might act the more safely, if the King could be engaged in a War against
the Dutch, which they longed for with much impatience. But, Sir, I must descend
into some particulars, and therefore I will undertake these two things. 1. I
will put you in mind of what happened to encourage the Popish Party in
undertaking their villainous designs against the Protestant Religion and
Government. 2. I will show you what encouragements you and your Popish
Counselors gave to your party to undertake the same.

1. I will put you mind of what happened to encourage the Popish Party in
undertaking of their villainous designs against the Protestant Religion and the
Government, and this is necessary to be done, that you may remember how you and
your party have treated this Nation by way of recompense, for the restoring
your Brother to his Throne, and you to your Native Country, which, well
considered, we may see what a Blessing you both were to this Nation. Therefore,
Sir, observe.

7. Another Argument against the Bill of Exclusion was, that it would have led
the Parliament to attempt other great and considerable Changes, and thereby
endangered the whole Government, and the peace of the Nation. Now, what your
Villains would have had the Nation to understand by this change, is worthy
consideration. Therefore, first, if by a change they meant a change of the
constitution of the Government, let me tell you, that he could never have
forged a more villainous Lie, than those wicked Wretches did, that they might
in conjunction with you instill such thoughts into the mind of the King, as
might effectually alienate his Soul from the use of Parliaments. It is evident,
even to these Holbourn Wretches, that there was no Vote or Proposition in
either of these Parliaments, that could give any ground for such a malicious
reflection, and thefore in this matter, we that were lookers on might
reasonably charge your Brother and you, and your whole party, with a malicious
design against all Parliaments, in thus arraigning the whole body of the
Nation, upon these ill grounded and malicious suggestions. I am sure this did
not become the grandeur and justice of Princes, nor was agreeable to the
measures of Prudence and Wisdom, by which you should have governed your selves.
And Now, Sir, I will give the true reason why you thus delighted in these men,
viz. your hating Parliaments, being afraid they should have called you and them
to account for your high Crimes and Misdemeanors by this means, together with
the inclinations of your dear Brother, you so sway d him, that you could never
want grounds to dissolve not only three such Parliaments, but threescore, if
there had been occasion.

In the second place, Sir, if you and your admirers had understood by
attempting great and important changes, that the Parliament would have besought
the King, that you might no longer have the Government in your hands; that your
villainous Conspirators should no longer preside in his Councils, nor possess
all the great Offices of Trust in the Kingdom, that our Ports, Garrisons, and
Fleet should no longer be governed by those that were at your Devotion; that
marks of Favor and characters of Honor should no more be placed upon such as
the wisdom of the Nation had adjusted favorers of Popery, or Pensioners to the
French King: These, I must confess, were great and important changes, such as
became English Protestants to believe were designed by those Parliaments, and
would have been by any other Parliament your Brother should have called in his
time, and such as the people of England would have prayed for, and left the
success to Almighty God, who governs the hearts of Kings and Princes. Truly,
without these changes, the Bill of Exclusion would have signified little; it
might have provoked, but not have disabled your wicked party: Nay, the money
the Nation must have paid for it, would have been used to hasten your return
upon us.

8. Another Argument used against the Bill of Exclusion was, your great Grace
and Favor for your Country, and the excellency of your Temper and Virtue.
Surely, Sir, if you heard these men magnify you for your excellent personal
qualifications, you would have spit in their Faces, and told them they ly'd;
for the violence of your natural Temper, was sufficiently Known, and your
vehemence in exalting the prerogative in your Brother's Reign beyond its due
bounds; and the principles of your cursed Religion, which carried you to all
imaginable excesses of Cruelty, convinced all Mankind that there was a
necessity of excluding you, rather than to leave you the name, and place the
power in a Protector: For in good truth, they must have looked upon it as the
greatest folly, to have made such a change in the Government, which would have
been a means to destroy, and not to preserve the Government. Sir, they saw your
Temper, that was bred up in such principles of Politics, as made you in love
with A bitrary power, and bigoted to that Religion which always propagates it
self by Blood, could never bear with such shackles as would even disgust a
Prince of the meekest disposition: This was your Temper, and how it is amended
since you placed your self at St. Germains, I suppose your followers can tell
better than I.

But what a regard and favor you have born to this Nation, was well seen from
your first return to England, 1660. to your leaving it in 1688. You engaged it
in two wicked Wars with the Dutch, and a third with France. I would not have
your Cattle love too much of your Grace and Favor: But truly if you had any
for this Nation, you was pleased to conceal it, except in two things, in which
you did England the most signal service that ever man did, the one was
destroying your Brother, and the other your running away; and if you will keep
on the other side of the small River, that parts France from us, we will
forgive you all the faults of your life. But notwithstahding all the noise your
party have made about you exclusion, I think they are now fully satisfied, or
at least may be, that those three Parliaments that did proceed to exclude you,
had just grounds for it; so that all your pretenses stand convict, as foolish
and impertinent: And these things being thus, can any man judge you otherwise
than an Enemy to Parliaments, and that way of English Government, which made
you and your Traitors so much to inviegh against your most just proceedings.

1. You may remember, that the Nation could not be redeemed from that Bondage
and Slavery that threatened it by the Arbitrary Government of Charles your
Father, but by the Long Parliament that sat down in the year 1640, and by the
mismanagement of affairs by those, to whom the guardianship of this Nation had
been committed; they thought nothing would bring on a new Heaven and a new
Earth, and repair the breaches in the Nation, occasioned by the confusion,
rage, and distraction they labored under; which were the consequences of the
aforesaid mismanagement of affairs, but by the restoring King Charles the
second; to gratify this expectation, the Convention which met on the 25th of
April 1660, hand over head, without any Preliminaries of asserting the right
and privileges of the people of England, so manifestly violated by your
Grandfather, and Father, and so restored your Brother to his Throne, without
the least opposition: The hopes of the happy days under his Reign, quite
blotted out the remembrance of the villainous designs that were carried on in
the time of your Grandfather and Father, for the destruction of the Protestant
interest; and furthermore, like Court-Parasites, flattered him and you, stiling
your Father the Martyr for England's Church and Government: The King your
Brother being restored, he began to be as Arbitrary as either his Father or
Grandfather had been before him, and the Kingdom lay under a necessity of
submitting to him, rather than run into a new confusion and disorder, or revile
the old ones for the misery they brought upon the Nation: The memory of these
times were so odious to these Flatterers, that if the Parliament took notice of
any of their Irregularities or mismanagement of the Government, they were
presently charged with running back to the Parliament that sat down in the year
1640; and they seeing the King restored without any terms, thought it was
necessary to form a Council, consisting of a number of men, that were to meet
at Somerset House, in order to get something in favor of poor Catholics; and
this was to be a standing Council for that purpose: To this Council the Jesuits
both at home and abroad were to make their application from time to time, as
occasion should require; and they having such an encouragement as this, they
could not but reasonably expect some great thing from your Brother, because of
the Oaths and Protestations he had made to them of restoring their Religion, or
at least to give them all the Indulgence imaginable, till he had an opportunity
of setting up that Worship of theirs as the public Worship of the Nation;
which they thought must of necessity come to pass the one or the other, since
he was not restrained by any Preliminaries at his admission to the exercise of
his Kingly power; this fatal mistake of the Parliament, was the cause of much
joy to the Jesuits, for upon this Courtney within a Fortnight after your
Brothers coming in was dispatched away to St. Omers, to give them an account of
what a prospect they now had of advancing the Catholic Cause, and what a
Council was pitched upon to meet at Somerset House, to manage the Cause of poor
Catholics, in order to their ease in respect of Religion, and what preferments
several of the leading men of that persuasion were like to have at Court: So,
Sir, this was the first encouragement your party received, through the want of
some necessary restrictions, to have put upon your Brother, in order to have
secured the Nation from Popery and Arbitrary power.

A second encouragement the Popish party had to oblige men to undertake and
engage themselves in their villainous designs against the Protestant Religion,
and Government of this Nation, was your Brothers neglecting the old Cavaliers,
that (if they had any Religion) it was that of the Church of England. These men
had been great sufferers, not only upon your Father's account, but also upon
your Brother's, to the ruin of themselves and families; indeed they thought,
and that very justly, that upon the Restoration they should enjoy Halcyon days:
But alas, through yours, and the advice of old Chancellor Clarendon, they were
in a worse state than they were before; for these poor miserable Wretches
having Mortgaged their Estates to redeem their Sequestations, the remainder
paid the Taxes to the King, and the interest of the Mortgage; notwithstanding
all this, they are not at all countenanced by the King, who, one would have
thought, should have made them his chief favorites, if he had retained one
dram of gratitude. He had favorites, it is true, but none of the old Protestant
Cavaliers; you will say then, who were his Favorites; you may remember that
his Favorites were those of the Popish party, in conjunction with a party of
men who knew not his Father, but humoured him in his sensual pleasures, and
they were of the Female, as well as of the Male Sex, who were a sort of
Favorites his Father was not acquainted with; nor, in short, do I find that he
had ever any regard for his Fathers memory, in that he so basely left those,
who had not only ventured, but lost all in his Fathers service; and these men
having great Antipathy against the Papists, for carrying all before them in the
Court at Oxford, in your Fathers time; were much brow-beaten by these Popish
Favorites, and they being discouraged, were in no capacity to contend the
point with that villainous party at Court, so that they in your Brother's time
carried all before them in spite of fate: The poor Dissenters, they durst not
stir, the Bishops severely chastizing them for their severe usage of them in
the times of the Civil War, and the high Church-party run in with this Popish
party, as men that had deserved well from the King, and whose Religion and
theirs was of nearer a kin, than that of the Dissenters; so that your Popish
party having such a Reinforcement from high Churchmen, were considerably
strengthened, and taking the advantage of your Brother's neglect of the old
Cavaliers, who hated them, they found by this means so much encouragement as to
engage a number of men to undertake with them in their cursed designs.

3. A third encouragement the Popish party had upon your Restoration, was, the
great ascendency your Mother had over the King your Brother, for she being a
Daughter of France, inclined him to her side, so that he no sooner left
Brussels but he quitted Spain, and embraced the interest of France, and an
Alliance with that Crown, and she living ten years after his Restoration, so
fixed this as an habit in him, that all his life after he could never get rid
of it, notwithstanding all the provocations of the French King to the contrary,
who upon the great inclination there was in your Brother, and you to him,
became a mighty protection to the Popish party. By the way, Sir, give me leave
to observe to you, that it was a most inhumane thing in your Brother and you to
quit the Spaniard, who entertained you both, when the French had in a most
barbarous manner, and with all the reproach imaginable, expelled you both, and
joined with the then Lord Protector against you to ruin you and your whole
Family: again, observe how unjust it was, considering what protestations and
promises both your Brother and you had made to the Crown of Spain, of making
and keeping a strict alliance, offensive and defensive, that you might be
revenged of the French King, for his false dealing with you; yet, contrary to
all your promises and protestations, it is remembered what success the French
Ambassador had with your Brother in his negotiations; for though he did not
make any league with the French against the Spaniard, yet he and the French
King dealt with the Spaniard as if he had been an open enemy; nay, Sir, that he
might not fall short of his respects to his Brother of France, he most
willingly waved a Treaty of Commerce, the said Lord Protector had made, to the
great advantage of the English Nation, and graciously left his people to be
treated in their trade to France at the pleasure of the French King: In a word,
your Brother was no sooner sixth at Whitehall, and you at St. James's, but the
French King was become your Confident, and the King of Spain slighted; which,
as it was against justice and humanity, so it was against the maxims of Policy
and Prudence, the French Nation being natural Enemies of the English, and the
next Neighbor to it, and of all Nations the most formidable; all these
considerations should have made you to have made a firm alliance with Spain at
that time, for their condition was very low, being brought to that sad state,
in a great measure, upon the account of your Family, both in your Grand fathers
and Fathers Reigns, insomuch, that notwithstanding the largeness of the
Dominions of that King, yet out of them all, he could not find an Army to fight
against the Portuguese; this I must say, that God did visit that Crown with
severe Judgments, for their unjust dealings with the Americans, both in respect
of the War they made with them, and the cruelties they exercised toward them.

You will say the King of Spain was poor, yes so he was, and the Proverb was
good, That Vermin will quit a falling house; you well knew that the Popish
party could not bear up in their undertakings, in the design of changing our
Religion into Popery, nor our Government into Slavery, upon the Credit, Purse
and Interest of the King of Spain; but upon the Purse, Interest and Credit of
the French King, your party thought they might with the better success, and
with more ease, accomplish their wicked designs and purposes, against the
Religion, Laws, and Liberties of these three Kingdoms. Let me tell you, Sir,
that notwithstanding all the efforts the Popish party made in the years 1660
and 1661, they all proved abortive; for they have not their expectation fully
answered, for they wanted some considerable person to head them; but you know,
your Brother and you thought it convenient to be plaguey Godly for a little
time, and therefore the Red-Letter-men were to expect a little longer.

4. That all might not be lost for want of looking after, your Mother comes
from France to give those of the Church of Rome some countenance, and to be
head of that Council that was appointed to sit at Somerset House; you know the
pretense of her coming over was a Treaty with her Son about the Marriage of
Madam her Daughter with the Monsieur of France; but the real cause was, to make
earnest solicitations on the behalf of the Popish party, that they might in
some measure receive the benefit of those promises your Brother and you had
made to them, and to most of the Popish Princes in Christendom upon their
account; and though you could not engage your self to appear barefaced, you at
that time wearing a Protestant face, as did also your dear Brother the King, so
that she to encourage them came over and resided here in England for some time;
and that the interest might be strengthened, the Marriage of her Son the King
with the Daughter of Portugal was no less designed, than that of her Daughter
with Monsieur: Give me leave to tell you, in this affair the Queen your Mother
did testify more love to her Daughter, your Sister, than she did to the King
your Brother, and more like a Daughter of France, than a Queen Mother of
England; by her coming over, she did not only secure the interest of France in
England, but she secured all the Popish party to be true to the French
interest, and secured the French King to be their great friend, that would not
cease to do all good offices between them and his dear Brother the King of
England, and they might be assured of you in a short time; and also by her
coming, a great number of Priests, Jesuits, Monks and Friars came over, who
were caressed with part of the Treasure of the Nation, amongst whom was one
Kirton a Friar, that had two hundred pound a year Pension given him; the
pretense was, that he was an excellent Chocolate-maker for your Brother the
King: She also spurred on the Council that sat at Somerset House to use that
diligence that became them, that they might answer those ends that their
meeting together required: This plainly shows what encouragement the Popish
party received by the coming of your Mother from France.

5. Your Brothers Marriage with the Daughter of Portugal was another
considerable encouragement, for though she brought no considerable Fortune to
the Crown, yet still she strengthened the French interest; the French King in
order thereunto proposed and promoted the Match, for never was one word said of
it till the Arrival of the Queen Mother, and then you know that affair was
driven on with all the Zeal imaginable, insomuch that if any of the Church of
Rome that were of the Spanish Faction had offered any thing against the Match
with Portugal, he or she, or they were in danger of being forbid the then Court
at Somerset House. Sir Kenelm Digby was one of the Council at Somerset House,
and he was in danger of losing your Mothers favor and his place, at that
board, only for expressing himself not with the due respects that she expected,
to the intended Match with Portugal; and the Lord Castlehaven was forbidden her
presence, for asserting that Match could never tend to the Honor and Advantage
of the English Nation: and the late Duke of Norfolk, though he was a Papist,
and Loyal enough, yet because he was not of the French Interest, and was
against the Match, your Mother did but look sowrely upon him; nay, you may
remember, that for some time all the Honor he could get was but to be made the
Son of a Duke, and it was some time before he could obtain that mark of Royal
Favor. The Match was concluded on, and over came that piece of Portugal Flesh
for His Majesty's use, and she was no sooner arrived and fixed at St. James's,
but behold another Council was appointed there upon the account of the
Catholics, and so they had now two Councils, one at St. James's, and one at
Somerset House, and truly all things run on merrily on their side, they having
two Queens to Espouse their Cause; then finally you were reconciled to the
Church of Rome, and so your Brother and you being both of a Religion, what
greater encouragement could that villainous party of Men expect? and then came
all the Ambassadors, Envoys, Agents; they had the Privilege of open Chapels,
so that London it self was made a Nursery for Popery.

2. You now may see, what encouragements the Popish party had to engage in the
design of changing our Religion and Government, in order to bring in Popery and
Arbitrary power, when you, being reconciled to the Church, and See of Rome, did
establish a third Council on the behalf of the Popish party, which became
wholly yours, they owning you for their head; your business therefore was, to
strengthen their interest at Court, by having the King your Brother always
ready to heap his favors upon them, and to enlarge their Interest in the
Country, by obtaining such Immunities for them, as no Protestant Dissenter
could ever obtain in all your Brother's Reign, notwithstanding they were more
quiet under their pressures and provocations, than the other were under your
Brother's favors and caresses: your party before your arrival, at your last
reconciliation to the Church of Rome, had met with these encouragements to
engage men in this design: I pray, Sir, let us compare Notes a little, and let
us see what encouragement you gave those, that were engaged in the design of
subverting our Religion and Government; give me leave to put you in the mind of
these, in their order.

1. The first encouragement that you gave them, you procured them employments
in the Government; nay, if it were a place but of 20 l. per Annum, a poor
Catholic was preferred before another, if he stood in competition with him; you
did espouse that party, with that zeal, which put your friend Coleman into a
sort of a Religious ecstasy, when he considered what a Prince God had given
them, who was become to a miracle zealous, of being the Author and Instrument
of so glorious a work, of converting three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps, the
utter subduing of a pestilent Heresy, which has domineered over great part of
the Northern part of the World a long time, and that there were never such
hopes as in this time, notwithstanding the opposition you were like to meet
withal; and truly, Sir, I could not blame Coleman, for this rapture of his; for
the providing for your friends, was a good sign of your conversion, to that
degree of Zeal that Secretary of yours spoke of: Now, Sir, the getting of your
friends into employments, did strengthen their hands, that they might be fit
for business, or else Sir Patrick Trant might have continued in the
Black-guard, for ought I know, to the day of his Death; but your conversion
converted him, not only to your Church, but also converted him from being a
Black-guard-boy, to wear a great name and place: I pray, Sir, to what end was
Sir George Ratcliffe to have had a Patent for to be a Baron of England, but
that the Popish party, might be more strengthened in the North, that the little
ones might be encouraged, and their numbers increased, by the protection he
might give them in your name; you were so successful in this, that you boasted
to Beddingfield, and to others before him, that were your Confessors, that you
did not question, but that in a short time, you could raise an Army of your
Cotholick friends, to establish the Catholic Religion.

Obj. Why might not the Son of Charles the First, show himself greatful to
Roman Catholics, and procure them an Interest at Court? had not they an
universal esteem for their Loyalty to Charles the First, and Charles the
Second? Why in such a heat, good Sir; where was the Loyalty of your Servant
Manning? where was the Loyalty of those that petitioned Cromwell for Liberty of
Conscience? and promising in lieu of so great a favor, to destroy your Family?
alas, Sir, here is Loyalty for you; besides all this, behold it was they that
had a hand, nay, a great hand in your Fathers death; where was the Loyalty of
the Irish murderers, that renounced your Fathers Authority, after they had
performed his Gracious Command, of murdering of one hundred and fifty thousand
Protestants. It Is true, they went into your Fathers Interest, but not to serve
him, but to be protected by him from the Justice the Parliament would have
inflicted on them, for the wicked War they had in conjunction with that Villain
Laud, fomented against the Scotch, and had also contributed to the same, and
not only so, but had commenced that wicked War of the King your Father, against
the Parliament of England, they were the Authors of our Civil War: But, Sir,
suppose they had been great sufferers upon your Father's account, was that an
argument why they were so well provided for? alas, Sir, if that were an
argument, why was it not an Argument for the old Cavaliers? no, they were too
generous to engage in any design against the good English Government, for they
thought that when they engaged with Charles the First, that they had fought for
the Protestant Religion and Liberties of England, and therefore many times
wondered the Papists herded with them, and were much displeased to see Popish
Councils and Counselors perferred before their Faces, and they scarce suffered
to have the Kings Ear; therefore, Sir, you know well enough these men were not
sit for your work, and service; on the other hand, you were sure of the
faithfulness of your Popish crew, their Religion being security enough to you,
that they would engage in the design with you, and therefore they were to be
encouraged: These Rogues had not one drop of Cavalier Blood in them, no, not
one drop of any Blood, but that of the Whore of Rome, the poor Cavaliers were
therefore to be starved, and these fellows suffered to Revel and Surfeit upon
their calamities; this was the first encouragement they received from you, viz.
their Interest at Court.

2. Your second encouragement you gave them was, the check that you gave to
those who opposed them, especially the old Cavaliers; for, Sir, you may
remember that upon the coming in of the King, your Popish party made them
themselves very fine, nay, they resolved that none should be so fine as they,
but the old Cavaliers were resolved not to be outdone, but they would be as
fine, though they did not live to pay the Tailors; but when they showed
themselves at Court, your Brother and you scarce knew them, though the Papists
at that time had all the demonstrations of affection showed them, to the great
astonishment of the poor Cavaliers; but when they had recovered themselves,
they fell into a desperate rage with the Papists, asking them what they did
there, and began to arraign them for their former Rogueries, but you was
pleased to tell one, that had signalized himself in your Father's service, that
it was not for him nor any other to malign the Roman Catholics, who had been
your Brother's best friends; and therefore we might easily see, since that few
or none durst appear so against them, to suggest any thing that might bring
them under the least jealousy, lest they should be said to asperse the only
friends of the Government; and I truly, have stood amazed, that the little
Credit the Papists had got by shrouding themselves under the protection of the
King your Father, should be so highly improved, nay, it was scarce credible,
till the World saw the design in which with you they were engaged; then we
plainly discovered the reason, why they that opposed them were severely treated
by your Brother and your self, not for any service they had done, but for some
future villainy they were to perpretate, the reducing the Nation to the yoke of
France and Rome; this was the reason why they were so dear to your Brother and
you, and upon this account you thought they were men that were not to be
opposed by any.

3. You gave them a third encouragement, which was, the peace they enjoyed in
their Persons and Estates in the Countries where they lived, so that they did
not only escape those legal arraignments upon the account of their Religion,
but also upon the account of their many Traitorous designs against the Nation,
and they lived in peace and quietness notwithstanding their being obnoxious to
many penal Statutes, so that since the return of your Brother, till their
damnable design was discovered, who lived more comfortably in the enjoyment of
themselves and their Estates than they? and truly, none but the poor old
Caalviers envied them, for when we saw the end for which they had this
countenance, that it was, that in time they might the more easily engage with
you in the destruction of the King*s person, and the Government of England,
then all Protestants began to look about them, and no other expedient could be
found, but the extirpation of those that were in such a damnable design as
this, and led to it by villainous principles, sucked in from their Priests and
Jesuits; the Parliament addressed several times for the restraining the number
of those Vermin; but you know for the peace and quietness of the best friends
of yours, few of them were put in execution; nay, Sir, when they were indicted
for not coming to their Parish Church, once a month, a noli pros was obtained
on their behalf, that they might not be disturbed in the profession of their
Religion.

4. A fourth encouragement you gave them was, your strengthening them with the
favors and friendship of several Prelates of the Church, and your Brother's
Ministers of State, but as for the former, they were very careful to engage
their Clergy not to preach against Popery, but against the Fanatics, for that
the Papists and the Church of England did differ but in things, nd points that
were not material; hence it was, Sir, that your first Duchess was seduced to
the Synagogue of Rome, by the filthy treachery of Bishop Morley, and Bishop
Shelden, by the help and aid of the fantastical quibbles of old Gunning. There
were three, that seeing the insolency of the Church of Rome, did make bold to
give her a scratcht face, and wrote both learnedly and severely against that
filthy Whore, and therein did the Protestant Religion very great and signal
service, for which reason none were by your Brother or you made Bishops in the
Church, but died unproffered, excepting one, who outlived both you villainous
Reigns, and is now a Prelate of the Church; I would fain know of that man,
whether or no he was not sometimes Brow-beaten by your Brother, or you; your
Brother, twice in my hearing said, he should never be a Bishop in his Reign; he
made his words good, and if you had said it, it would have been never the
worse: But thanks be to God, we have neither a Portsmouth nor a Cleveland to be
Bishop-makers in our Court: Our King has made several, and none of them a
Scandal to their profession, you made not half so many, and what they were I
will not here say any thing, but only this, that they are older now than they
were ten years ago; one of them I suppose knows the price of a Bowl of Grains;
but after all, by restraining the Clergy from preaching against Papists and
Popery, gave them great encouragement to engage with your design levelled
against the Religion, Laws and Liberties of these three Kingdoms, and the Death
of the King your Brother: Deny this if you can, and let any of your Patriots
stand forth, and answer what I now write, and convince me of any untruth if
they can.

5. Another encouragement you gave the Popish Party that they might engage in
the said design was, that you and they had Created in the King such a trust in
you, that he committed the administration of affairs to your self, and the
leading men of your Popish party, and what they durst not advise the King of at
Whitehall, that they would advise you at St. James's, and there were very few
of their projects that related to Popery, and the French interest, but were
readily put in Execution, as the first and second War against the Dutch, and
many other things shall in their proper places be insisted on, and as for your
power with the King, it is so plain, that all the Nation saw, that there was
nothing done without your approbation and consent.

6. Another encouragement you gave the Popish party was, that if any male
content should happen to discover your Wicked designs of Subverting the
Government, and of killing the King your Brother, he would by no means believe
them, and so that they would all of them come off with impunity, which made
that villainous party grow very bold and daring, and to carry themselves with
that insolency, that they were not to be suffered to live in a Protestant
Kingdom, this, I say, will be further made appear in its proper place.

2. I come now in the second place to put you in mind, what steps you took to
effect your design of changing the Government into downright Slavery, and the
Religion of the Nation into downright Popery, and for the destruction of the
Kings person; this is worth^y of your consideration, since God in his mercy to
this Nation has placed you in that admirable Climate at St. Germains, where
you have time enough to consider of these things, I pray, that if the little
Welsh Gentleman, can understand any thing, that he may be taught these things,
it may be he may have as much a regard to you, as if he were your own dear
Child.

3. The first step you took for the effecting your cursed designs was, the
debauching of the Nation, this I have touched upon in the first part of this
memorial; you may remember that upon the 11th of May 1660, both Houses sent
Commissioners to invite your Brother home, and Admiral Montague with the Royal
Fleet to convoy him over, and in his Company came your self and your younger
Brother, and such a Crew along with you, as if you intended to take up with
Newgate for your head quarters, rather than St. James's, or Whitehall: truly,
Sir, this I may say, and call God to Witness, that I never heard an oath sworn
in all my Life, till the day of your blessed restoration; truly the day that
you arrived in London was rather a day of madness than of prudent mirth and
rejoicing, for your being delivered from your low estate, and entering into a
state of luxury and ease; you presently began to change the face of the Nation,
the Poor Cavalier party, under the persecution of their adversaries the
Parliamenteers lived quietly upon that part of their Estates which was
permitted them after their composition, and there was a face of Religion in the
Nation, whereas upon your return all sort^ of men, even some professors
themselves, did too much imitate the prodigality and luxury of the Court, which
scarce entertained any but upon these terms then to Crown all to humor the
King your Brother; the public Theaters were stuffed with the most obscene and
filthy actions and interludes, one would have thought that Laud had been
raised from the dead, and his Brother Mazarine, to have written Books on the
behalf of these proceedings, to prove that for the King's comfort they might be
more obscene: to justify that, two Priests had the management of the
Playhouse, and to grace the business, had engaged their new Gracious Master to
be present at the first opening those Scenes of filthiness; persons brought to
such a degree of profaneness and ungodliness came in little time to be of no
Religion, whatever their profession was before, and therefore indifferent to
seem to be of any further than Interest and Temptation should incline them, so
no man will have much list or any considerable propensity to be of that
Religion, that shall condemn those practices they are resolved upon; now it is
evident that there is no persuasion in the World, that so much countenanceth
debauchery and profaneness as the Religion of the Church of Rome, and so you
had the success you expected, in debauching the Nation; for how many turned
Papists, to gratify their own and your lusts at once; but enough of this in the
sixteenth Article.

2. The second step you took, was a wicked Oath you imposed upon the Nation;
the Oath was in these words, I A. B. do declare and believe, that it is not
lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, and that I
do abhor, that Traitorous position of taking Arms by his Authority against his
person, or against those who are Commissionated by him, so help me God. Truly,
Sir, you are a pretty Gentleman; I pray let me have you pretty picture with
this Oath coming out of your Mouth, and I do believe it would make a pretty
show, and if I should be so happy as to see such a sight, I would say that this
well contrived Test was of the first impression, for I never met with any of
our ancient Laws, that ever obliged any to swear to an opinion, or belief: for
I humbly conceive, not without some reason, that if swearing could determine
all Controversies, and beliefs, all learning, reasonings, and instruction would
be at an end; I wonder therefore our Prick-eared Priests would ever ascend a
Pulpit, or our Bishops in Charles*s time, took so much pains in the alterations
and additions of that useful Book, that takes up its quarters so near the Bible
in the Churches, if swearing to beliefs and opinions, was of such use in your
Brother's Government, since he that swore the most, had the Mastership of more
Logic and Religion, than his non-swearing Brethren, you designs could not well
have gone on, till you had sworn the members of Corporations, not to give your
Crew any opposition, for they had been so often beaten by the Non-swearers of
those times, that they never love fighting; and because they were a parcel of
cowardly fellows, they were resolved to forswear fighting; and that they might
not meet with such rugged exercise from others, they, instead of fighting, made
them take up this more gentle trade of swearing, that they would not fight; and
when you had tied up their hands from that sort of practice, by this new Oath,
you go to work to destroy us, believing that none would give you any
opposition, since they had so lustily promised to be quiet, by this pretty Oath
they had taken, and in time, Sir, you had improved the point to such a pitch,
that a Member of Parliament could scarce enter upon any debate of any
expedient, for the defense of the Laws and Liberties of his Country, but his
Nose was wiped with this Oath, and looked upon as criminal, if he should vote
for an Act of Parliament to borrow the Militia of the King, it looking like
entering into an actual War against the King, you and your Traitorous party
thought to have done wonders with this Oath, and truly they went a great way
with it, but it never did a Tyrants business yet, nor never will.

For do but remember that there was a Test that passed the Convocation in the
short Parliament, that met in April 1640, to preserve the Hierarchy of the
Church of England; your Companions you have with you, will tell you that it did
not, for the very next Parliament, within the compass of a Year dismissed the
Bishops sitting in the House of Lords, at which some of them gnashed their
Gums, they having no Teeth to exercise that gift withal, for which they caged a
goodly Troop of them in the Tower, with his Majesty's Lions, not for their
Lamb-like carriage in the high Commission Court, or their Dove-like behavior
in the Star Chamber; nay the poor Deans and Archdeacons, they had a share in
their favor, for the Parliament eased them of all Temporal Jurisdiction, nay
here was worse than all this, England and Scotland entering into Covenant to
extirpate that order of Men, the Covenant, that was crowded out by the
engagement, the engagement made its exit upon the Protector's assuming the
Government; truly a Man that had but an Irish understanding, might have thought
that Men had sworn so long till they cared not what they swore, or to whom: Old
Monk before he came out of Scotland caused all the Scots to renounce, and
abjure your whole Family; and so he did the Irish Brigade at his coming to
London, nay the abhorring and detesting of your Family was a great part of the
last Speech and Confession of the dying Rump, and within a short time in came
your Family with several squadrons of Oaths, as if your Government had been to
have been supported with those Forces; truly you made them serve to adorn your
Government, but this little Whipper Snapper of an Oath was to be its sweet
Anchor, but it did not do the business: for though you had taken that Oath to
your Brother, it proved no antidote against his being poisoned, nor you from
being walked out of the Kingdom by your high Church Crew; but to give you your
due, you and your Popish crew went as far with this Oath in your Conspiracy
against the Lives and Liberties of England, as Men could do, for all men you
judged were to obey and not to resist, therefore you would give all diligence
to secure the point to Pox us all with your French Power, and Romish Religion;
there were several other Tests not worth the notice of any Man.

3. A third Step you made to effect your design was the inflaming the
differences that were amongst Protestants, you had as great a talent at this
sort of business as any man could be supposed to have, had your party kept pace
with you to a hairs breadth, for at your coming how did you endeavor to
heighten the difference between the Conforming and Nonconforming parties? how
watchful were the Good men of the Episcopal party over the Dissenters, judging
them to be greater Enemies to their cause and Quarrel than the Papists, because
of their great numbers? and being in a bodily fear that the Dissenters would
not only outlive, but out-preach them, this was a great crime, Sir, in the
poor Protestant Dissenters, which high Church would never forgive, for some of
them cared as little for preaching, as you did for fighting, unless it were
with an honest Protestant at the Old Baily, or the King's Bench Court, where you
were always sure to get the better of them, and then you very seldom gave
quarter to any that lay at your mercy; nay did not Castlemain p^ess the Bishops
to revenge themselves upon the Dissenters for their severe usage of them and
their Clergy, for their scandalous lives and ignorance in the word of
Righteousness; nay, he did not only advise in the matter, but pusht on their
taking revenge with Head and Horns together, rather than the poor Dissenters
should go unpunished, or that the division should not be widened to the utmost;
therefore upon the whole, let me ask you, or any of those Traitors that were
with you at St. Germains, whether these differences thus influenced, was not to
betray us into the hands of your villainous Popish party, for it was not your
Province, I suppose, to strengthen the Protestant Interest against the
Conspiracies of the Papists; no, you will not pretend to that, for that would
be a solicism with a vengeance; or did you judge that the Papists could by
their plottings do any great damage to a Protestant Interest firmly united;
truly it is plain, that because of the strength of a united Protestant
Interest, you could have but a poor account of your well-laid designs; in a
word, therefore it was the weakening the Protestant Interest you aimed at, and
nothing could weaken them but dividing them, and then this point being gained,
to work you and your Rogues went to destroy both, and had effected your design,
had you not met with an unlucky fellow that discovered all.

4. There was a fourth step taken to effect your Popish and Traiterous designs,
and that was the engaging the high Church party, to run in with the Popish
party, in arraigning the Dissenters for Traitors and Rebels; nay, tho several
of them, who had with much zeal fought under the late King your Father, and
your Papists were somenters of the said War, and would have fought against the
King in the service of the Parliament, if their services might have been
accepted of, and if any of them did fight for the King, it was because his
Cause was like to the Gallows, received all and refused none; it is well known,
that it was the folly of some of those you aspersed that brought your Brother
home, for which I think they have well paid for it: but what does all this tend
to? why they were to be battered at by the Church and Popish party together;
but that they might the more effectually be destroyed, and then the Popish
party with reason might expect the more easily to carry their point against
high Church it self, whom they judge Heretics as much as they do the
Dissenters; and this I must say, that our high Church, if they had been
destroyed by you and your party, they might have thanked themselves for their
ruin, though I must confess I should have been sorry that so great a number of
men should so heartily contribute to their own destruction, and reject our
Brethren, that would so heartily have joined in with them, to have destroyed
you and your villainous party, in order to have preserved the Protestant
Religion.

5. There was a fifth step you made to effect your design, by creating in many
unthinking people, especially in many of our Baal's Priests, that the Kingdom
did enjoy a sufficient security for our Laws, Liberties and Religion, and
therefore how your party used to quarrel with those men, that were apprehensive
of our dangers, in those cases your Brother apprehended that our Religion and
Laws, tho I should have thought that his apprehension of the danger of the
Protestants, had risen from Nell*s wanting of Money, to buy Clothes to wipe
down her Mistresses Stairs, or from her Mistresses wanting some new rigging, if
none had thought of the danger that we were in but himself; but we had four
Parliaments that saw the danger as well as himself, and did not only see the
danger with which we were encompassed, but with what great difficulty we were
like to meet withal in order to prevent it; till their eyes were opened, you
went on with a full career in your Plots and Conspiracies, and met with great
success, suitable to that zeal, to which you were, as Coleman says, converted
in a very high degree; the plain truth is, that you had a mighty work in hand,
and a mighty mind to it, and therefore it was fit you should take mighty steps
to effect the same.

6. Another step you took to effect your wicked design on foot, was to create
and preserve a Jealousy in the King, of the faithfulness and loyalty of the
People, and a jealousy in the People of the sincerity and good affection of
the King to them; so that they seeing they could not keep up a War between the
King and the States General, yet they would maintain a War between the King and
the People of England; and, truly they had their ends, for they brought your
Brother, in a manner, to set up his Standard, and proclaim a War against his
honest Subjects, by the frequent Rapes he committed in the time of his Reign,
upon the Laws and Liberties of the people; witness, his quitting his legal
power, and setting up of a French mode of Government, and laying aside those
Laws by which he was to have governed his people, so that he became universally
hated by the honest party of the Nation, and thereby the more exposed to the
vengeance of your cutthroat Crew, who, to destroy him, would ordinarily expose
his Government, that they might so divest him of friends in such a measure, as
that none might appear to avenge his death, but rather rejoice in his
destruction, as you and your party did when you had done his business; and I
must say this of him, he died more lamented than you thought for, and less
lamented than most Kings of England that died before him.

3. I come now to show you who assisted in this Conspiracy; you could not carry
on any design without some great assistance, therefore it is necessary that
they should be pointed out, that the World may know them from other men, and
that the World may see my plainness and sincerity in this particular, that your
wicked party may be left without excuse, that always admired you, and would not
have had your Crimes detected: But, Sir, it was attempted, though in vain, by
several Parliaments, to have called you to an account, whilst you was James
Duke of York, but the King your Brother, at your procurement, broke up those
Parliaments that would have done the Nation and you too that right, that become
the Patriots of their Country; but since it was so, I think it necessary to
remind you of those great assistants you had to support you, in order to carry
on your wicked designs, of changing our Religion into downright Popery, and the
well established Government into downright Slavery; and of these in their order.

1. Lewis the French King was your main support in this affair, it was he that
gave you his friendship, and the use of his Purse to assist you, against those
who had reason to cry lowdly against you; though they could not be heard, these
you called your Enemies because they opposed Popery and the French interest,
and these were looked upon not only Enemies to your self, but also to the
French King, nay the band of Pensioners thought they had gone as far with your
as they durst, and when they could not for their own sakes keep your Company
any farther, you presently Proclaimed War against them, as being neither in the
French King's interest nor yours, and therefore you stuck close to him, and for
what reason you can best tell; he did desire you to make what propositions you
should think fit in the then conjuncture of affairs; your main agent there was
Sir William Throgmorton; who was much obliged to you for the good opinion you
had of him, for you acquainted Old Le Chaise the French Kings Confessor, that
the said Sir William was a very honest Man, one of great veracity (though he
was not a Lord Chancellor) that held Correspondence with Coleman, one of your
Family in whom you had great confidence; and what then? truly you took the
French King at his word, and made such Proposals to him as you thought
necessary to bring your designs about; I pray Sir, what were those Proposals? I
remember they were these Seven; 1. That it was necessary that your Catholic
Friends should be without the least noise formed into Troops, for which there
would be a Sum of Money necessary to put at least two Months pay into their
Pockets. 2. That his Majesty would heartily come into the design, if 300000 l.
were paid for Three Years, by which he might bridle the Impertinency of the
then Parliament. 3. That in case the thing should take wind, and that design
should reach any of their Credits, that all Commissions should run in the Name
of Johannes Paulus de Oliva, to render the thing very improbable, if any
discovery should be made. 4. That his most Christian Majesty should set apart
such Sums of Money from time to time, as should be necessary for the Landing of
an Army in Ireland. 5. That his most Christian Majesty should prevail with the
King your Brother to lay aside Arlington, and several other Ministers of State,
that were not in his Interest and yours, and dissolve the Parliament. 6. That
all Correspondence that he the said French King should maintain with you,
should not come by the way of Barrillon; but by the way of the Portugal
Ambassador; and under a cover to Coleman, and that no Correspondence should be
held with the King your Brother, but what you were to be acquainted with, but
not he with yours, but when you pleased. 7. That what Money there was
transmitted, was to be in the names of this Coleman, and Sir William your
honest Man, and they accountable to you; every thing was agreed to, but that of
the Three Hundred Thousand Pound per Annum for Three Years to your Brother;
it is true, since all Sums were transmitted, but the French King's Opinion and
yours was the same with yours, that he could not mend his pace in the Design,
and therefore not a penny could be got till he could give the French King
reasonable good proof, of his Stability and Sincerity, as you had done: these
Seven Propositions were the then Propositions, what other Propositions there
were made when the design was ready for Execution, you shall have them in their
proper place; but these Propositions were such, as when the Popish Plot was
discovered, would have proved fatal to you, and much to the discredit of your
Brother the King, if Coleman had not been Hanged in England, and Peter Talbot
Poisoned in Ireland, for both of them would have come in Witnesses against you,
and Honest Dick Talbot your trusty Tyrconnel, would have been a Third, and
being Covetous of gaining a Fourth, which was Old Plunket the Popish Primate,
whose Death you hastened, as a gracious reward of his telling them the design,
he saved you from Suffering the public Justice of the Nation due for your then
Treasons, and you got him hanged for his pains; an admirable piece of gratitude.

Some may inquire why the Lord Arlington was to be had aside, I have told you
already in the first part of my Memorial to you; but I must tell you now one
thing more, that is, I will put you in mind of it, for you know it well enough,
it so nearly concerned you; be pleased therefore to observe that the Lord
Arlington was once the only Minister in Credit, and he thought himself out of
all danger of the Parliament, for once you know that he had burnt his fingers
with you in your Popish and French designs, and was in danger of being
impeached, but came off you know how, and being so fairly delivered he faced
about, and was always for the sitting of the Parliaments, and to recover and
increase his Reputation with the Parliament, and to become their greatest
Favorite, he exerts his power in appearing an Enemy to the Popish Party, though
at that very time was a Papist in Masquerade himself, and not only so, but
opposed the French Interest: to show his Zeal against your Popish Crew, he
revived certain Orders for prohibiting the Papists from coming into your
Brothers presence, and put them in Execution at his first coming to be Lord
Chamberlain; nay, he did what he could to strengthen his hands against your
mighty Ally the French King, and your self; for he prevailed with the King your
Brother, that he, and the Earl of Ossory (who had Married two of Min Here
Odyke's Sisters) might go into Holland with the said Odyke to make a visit, as
they did pretend, to their Relations there; but to your great Sorrow, you found
that they went to propose the then Lady Mary your Eldest Daughter, as a Match
for the Prince of Orange, a Match with whom you always abhorred, for you was in
a very great rage, not only with Arlington and Ossory for that presumption of
theirs, of offering at such a thing without being made privy to the same, but
also all Arlington's friends at Court, lay under your great displeasure; but
some of them, who had as much Courage as you had Wrath, dealt plainly with you
in the point, and told you, that your Daughter was not to be looked upon as
yours, but as the King's Daughter, and Child of the Kingdom, and so that your
consent was not much to be considered in the disposal of her, but only the
Interest of State; but this was not at all satisfactory to you, and your French
Pensioners, and Popish Crew, because you all foresaw by that, that the
Protestant Interest would be strengthened, and the French and Popish Interest
hurt, and Arlington would render himself the darling of the Parliament, and the
Protestant Interest, and the States General of the United Provinces.

Well Sir, you may remember that this trusty friend of yours the Lord
Arlington, set forth upon this Errand upon November the 11th, 1674, and
returned not till the sixth of January; during his absence Old Veracity, and
Duke Lauderdale, and some other of your French Pensioners, who were the Persons
of considerable credit with the King your Brother, and did pretend to be united
to you; These Villains set up their Throats and roared, declaiming loudly, and
with the greatest violence against poor Arlington and his actions; and truly
they gave you such hopes in his absence to blow him up and his whole party at
Court, so that (as Beddingfield told me) you passed the time pretty
comfortably, you expecting by these traiterous impliments to have routed him
and all his Creatures, and in so doing they drew you on to believe, that upon
the ruin of the Lord Arlington they could do you Service and the French King,
and that they could with the greatest ease imaginable manage and deal with your
Band of Pensioners; but protested to you, till they could get rid of him, they
had not courage to speak to the Parliament, for fear they should not succeed;
nay your old White-hair'd Friend, whose gratitude to the Duke of Buckingham was
so notorious, told you that if you could not get rid of Arlington, that the
Parliament would sit again in spite of them all; and further acquainted you,
that if the Parliament should come to hear of this, that they had used their
endeavors against their sitting, would prove an unpardonable Crime, that
neither the French King nor you, no, nor your Brother could save them from
punishment; these Villains knew the greatness of their Crimes, and therefore
they were forced to play an odd trick with you now and then to save themselves
harmless; but you, whose nature and property was never to forgive, was forced
at this time to dissemble with them, by your pretended acquiescing in their
judgments, though full sore against your proud Stomach, and if you remember,
Arlington was too many for all your Party; for if I am not out, he would not
have you to treat with the Parliament in his absence; for on the Tenth of
November, the very day before his departure, (he so managed his Affairs) the
Parliament was put off till the thirteenth of April 1675.

What overtures these two Lords made in relation to the match I cannot well
tell, nor will it be much to the point if I could; but when they had done that
for which they were sent, they returned home; but, alas, the creatures found
themselves not able to prevail against Arlington, by those means and arts they
had then tried, they resolved now upon counsels which were to outrun him in
his own course, which accordingly they undertook, and became as zealous men for
the Protestant Religion, and Liberty and Property, as ever the Lord Arlington
could pretend to have been before; and in pursuance thereof, persuaded the King
your Brother to issue out those severe Orders and Proclamations against your
Brethren in the Faith, which you knew came out in Feb. 1674/5, by which you see
they, even they your own French Pensioners, did what in them lay to extirpate
your own dear Religion, and to Banish your Brethren out of the Kingdom; what
ungrateful wretches were these, to pursue such counsels, as were in opposition
to your Worship? Had you advanced these Vermin? O yes, and they had professed
much duty and service to you; what Scoundrels were these so basely to leave
you? Come, don't cry, your friend Coleman knew who it was that would support
you; in order to this, presently an Express was dispatched over to France, and
trusty Jack Smith was dispatched away to the Most Christian Turk, and oh what
Complaints you made to his Father Confessor of these Rogueries; and truly it
was high time to enter upon new thoughts, how to preserve you in this juncture
of affairs, from the deceits of these men, upon whom you used to depend very
much, for the support of your Cause: alas, Sir, what would you have them do,
they had for a long time been acting in your designs, till they were as
obnoxious to the people as the Devil could make them; it was therefore highly
necessary that they should do some small matter to render themselves a little
grateful to the Parliament, provided there was a necessity of its sitting at
the time appointed, and you know that nothing was so pleasing to the Parliament
as brushing of Popery*s Jacket a little; notwithstanding all this, the sense of
their Guilt was such, that they had rather have seen the Devil than a Session
of Parliament, and therefore they would have been glad to have found out any
expedient to have put it off, though they durst not for their ears engage in it
openly themselves: But, Sir, what was all this but shamming the Nation? for all
this while, like State-Moles, they were hard at work underground to secure
you; for what they had done openly against your interest, and the interest of
the French King, their point, Sir, was to whet your zeal for the dissolution of
the Parliament, and that they had been somewhat severe against the Saints of
your cursed Church, only to make way for a dissolution; and that an objection
of the people might be fairly obviated, viz. that the dissolution of the
Parliament was in favor of Popery; which clamor theyt old you was prevented
beforehand by the severity they had used against it.

Upon this you sent to the French King, as before, and made your propositions
in good earnest, for it was but in vain to trifle, since you saw your self
shammed, you could but judge what sort of Cattle you had to do withal, and what
you had to trust to if you lay at their mercy, and that you now must trust in
the mighty mind of his most Christian Majesty; then you made your application
to him, and like a good Boy, you promise heartily to perform what was required
from you; he complies with you, and so you were safe, you had his Purse, and so
you were easy, and Coleman, his 20000 l. and so all was well, and what could
you desire more; truly, Sir, it was not well enough yet, for not only Arlington
put a great many tricks upon you, and your French Pensioners had not been so
close to you as they might have been, if they would have put on Courage enough;
these you thought you might have weathered, but alas, Sir, here was a
Parliament; yea, a Parliament in the way that had done a thousand Rogueries
against you and your party: Truly Sir, I pity you much; what was to be done in
this case? I have you much in my heart, for all your barbarous civilities you
have showed me, yet I cannot in the abundance of my grief for you forbear
laughing to see what a sad pickle you were in; but as angry as you were with
Arlington, you could not avoid grinning at your tools to see what a distress
you had brought them to, for if they left you, you were resolved to destroy
them, and if they engaged with you, the Parliament would do the like, therefore
nothing could save you and your interest but the dissolution of that haughty
Parliament. Come, cheer up in the midst of these troubles and afflictions, the
old enemy of mankind stood by you, for the Cause was not so low but you found a
revivate; you know that the French King did dispatch Letters to your Brother,
and pressed him to a dissolution of the Parliament, and promised him a good
Pension, provided he would never call another; was not here a friend at a
pinch? well, what did you do in return of this favor? Truly you make him a
French Grimace, and promise that you will improve this Royal favor of his;
truly it was but fit you should, for there was a necessity that you should be
rid of the Parliament, for your Pensioners had played you several Jades tricks,
and had been very resty for several Sessions, so that you could neither make
them lead nor drive; therefore, by the advice of your Council at St. James's,
the French King was heartily applied to, and pressed with much earnestness to
write his thoughts freely to the King your Brother; which you know he did, and
a sum of Money was sent, as an earnest of the French Kings affection to your
Brother; and now you were in hopes all would do well, but April comes and the
Parliament met, and no Parliament, dissolved, but another prorogation; you upon
this was very warm with your Brother upon the matter, and how could he answer
this to the French King? At last your Brother dealt freely with you, as the
French King had done with him, and told you that he could not tell which way to
incline; the Arguments indeed you and your party had used, as also the French
King, for the dissolution, were exceeding strong, and not well to be answered;
and the Arguments for its continuance were as strong; but, to your great grief,
there was one standing Argument that carried the King your Brother on to
continue them, and that was this, if he did try them once more they might give
him Money; if they did, then your Brother would have gained his point, and
Portsmouth hers; if they did not, then your Brother told you he could dissolve
them upon their refusal, and be as he was; so that he told them he was in a
possibility of getting Money by their continuance: But did you not see the
cheat of your Brothers Argument? and if you had had any Brains you would have
turned the Argument upon him, and have told him plain, that a dissolution would
have certainly procured Money, and the certainty of three hundred thousand
pound a year, was better than the bare possibility of getting Money by the
continuance of the Parliament: Your Brother repented of his refusing the French
Kings offer, for in the year 1676 a gracious Compliance of Governing without
Parliaments a la mode de France: But the French Kings Maw was not set that way
at that time, but you, good man, according to your Propositions got what you
aimed at, in order to have your party ready to rise to do the work; and tho the
French King could not dissolve the Parliament, he went thorow-stitch with you
to dissolve both our Religion and Government; this was the first great support
you had.

2. You had the General of the Jesuits, that was another great support in your
design, for you did not only make application to the French King, but also to
him the said General of the Jesuits diverse Letters were written, at which time
the state of the Jesuits was such, that they could not contribute much, they
were content to part with what they were able; but there was a necessity of a
great Sum to begin the War, to which end they were very confident that his most
Christian Majesty, notwithstanding the great and chargeable War, in which he
was engaged against the Confederates, would do what in him lay for the
Restoration of the Catholic Religion in England, and that therefore his
Reverence was applied to do his part; you may remember that Coleman your
Secretary not only in your name, but I suppose also by your Order, did make
application to his Reverence about the same Affair; you did not wait long, but
you had the Sum of Eight Hundred Thousand Crowns, that was transmitted to
Coleman your Secretary by Bills, under the name of Dr. Gibbs, a Physician that
lived at Rome; and they was paid at four payments, the Bills were received by
one Busby a Merchant then living in London, and some other of your faithful
Crew in that City, and at that time you may remember that the said General of
the Jesuits was with much difficulty persuaded to take upon himself the Signing
Commissions, that were to be Issued for the Offices both Civil and Military,
and Ecclesiastical too; so that no damage might accrue to you, in case any
should be so wicked as to discover the Design, and that this thing might appear
in its self improbable, and at the time of the advice of the Moneys being
returned, he was pleased to signify the same to Barrillon, at which you were
much offended that he had not done it to your Secretary; this particular
passage may satisfy all mankind, that you were resolved to quit the Cause with
as much Honor as you could; but notwithstanding when the Plot was discovered,
the Word saw that it was not the General of the Jesuits, that was so much the
leader of this Conspiracy, though heartily engaged in it, as your self and the
French King, and that his Signing the Commissions was but a blind to screen you
from the public Justice of the Nation: and also to defend your Villainous Ally
from the vengeance of the whole Protestant Interest of Europe, in which quarrel
those Princes that were not of the Romish Church would have not have stood
neuters in so Just a Cause.

3. The Bishop of Rome was another Support, for when the said General of the
Jesuits had undertaken the point relating to Money, and had transmitted the
same, he assured the Fathers of the Society here in England, that the then Pope
would not be wanting, when any considerable progress was made in that
undertaking, you know what it was, and it shall be laid before you in its
proper place: that you might not fail of the Popes assistance, you had Sir
Henry Tichhorne, whom you constituted an Agent at Rome, to negotiate your
affairs with the Pope; and Cardinal Howard was always ready to do his part, but
was much concerned to see that you made such use of Peter Talbot, who was an
impudent false fellow, and always spoiled the business in which he was engaged,
and that the Pope did not much approve of Talbot's being made privy to any
thing of weight; but, alas, nothing could wean you from him, and therefore it
was to no purpose to persuade you: but come to the point; there was never yet
any Conspiracy carried on, but that Romish Prelate has been at one end or
another of the same; I pray observe, Sir, what disturbances and fatal mischiefs
the claim and exercise of the Papal Authority and Jurisdiction has occasioned
both to Princes and People, that were of the Church of Rome, therefore you
might have reasonable hopes that the Pope would give you his assistance to
convert three Kingdoms, that had so long groaned under the burden of Heresy
and Schism; for certainly when you were pleased to communicate your zeal to
accomplish so mighty a work, he had the same mighty mind, which he expressed by
his Tears, when he read your Letters, not for Grief but for the great Joy that
the good old Gentleman had conceived, for the great progress you had made in
the advancement of the Catholic Religion; and withal, engaged to write to the
French King to persevere in his good intention of furthering so good a work,
which Letters were carried by Tichborne, and were graciously and most humbly
received by Lewis your friend, who was much encouraged, when he saw your
Brother and you blessed with such an Ally. Barrillon acquainted your Brother with
the Pope's zeal for his being delivered from the Parliament; it is well known
that he closes in with every part of the design, but that of his own life, that
your party did not communicate to him, lest he shauld have begged their pardon,
and not have consented to be so far engaged. I dare say you could not blame
him, it is necessary to put you in mind that Coleman made the same propositions
to Cardinal Howard, as you had done to the French King, and he by your
direction signified the great sense you had of the friendship of Lewis your
Ally, and of the great readiness there was in you to make such improvements of
that his friendship, with all those good Offices that you were capable of, all
which was by him the said Cardinal to be communicated to the Bishop of Rome;
nay, he pressed the said Cardinal to use his Interest with the Pope, to press
the French King to engage the King of England, if possible, to dissolve that
Parliament, that was so great a Bar to your carrying on your design, for the
advancement of the Catholic Religion; and in order to this work the Pope was
accordingly pressed, and he wrote to the French King to press the King your
Brother to dissolve the Parliament; and further to encourage him with the offer
of his Purse, as he had done to you, but the Pope, when the Cardinal discoursed
him concerning a new Parliament, judged no Parliament of England would ever
engage in the design of restoring the Cotholick Religion; therefore he thought
that what was to be done must be without a Parliament, and that the French King
ought to consider what an advantage it would be to his greatness, to be liberal
in a work of this importance; for whereas an old Parliament has been hurtful
to the Catholics, a new Parliament can never be supposed to do them any good;
therefore the good old Gentleman would by no means hear of a Parliament, and so
his opinion and yours was much alike, but wondered at the Earl of Arlington,
concerning whom, he was pleased to say, in his Letter to the French King, that
he was represented to him to be a good Catholic, notwithstanding the heavy
charge you brought against him, the said Arlington, to his most Christian
Majesty, and withal, the Cardinal, by the express command from his Holiness,
did assure you of his Holiness, his Friendship, and withal he sent you his
Benediction.

And when your design was ripe, and almost ready to be put in execution, the
Fathers were assured that the Bishop of Rome would supply you with a competent
sum of Money, when he was satisfied that you had made some progress in the
mighty work that you had upon your hands; and truly, Sir, it was an expression
of very great zeal in the Bishop of Rome, if you will consider how he supplied
the Emperor against the Malcontents in Hungary, tho the Apostolic Chamber
was then much in debt; as it was a signal manifestation of his zeal to stand by
you with his Purse, so it is a proof not to be denied that he was a mighty
assistant to you in this mighty work.

4. You had the Crown of Spain for your assistance in this mighty work, for
though Don John of Austria, and the then Queen Regent of Spain, was at
difference about some things in relation to the Government, and their own
private interests, yet they both agreed to join with you in this work of
changing both the Religion and Government of this Kingdom; and Circular Letters
were by them both dispatched throughout the dominions of Spain, and with some
difficulty they raised two hundred thousand Dollars for the service of that
part of the design which was to be carried on in Ireland, and was paid by some
Irish Merchants residing at Galloway; at which Coleman was angry, and thought
that you ought to have had the management of the Money, since that you were at
the head of the design of restoring the Catholic Religion in the three
Kingdoms; but you reprehended Coleman, since the Merchants there had paid in
the Money to the Popish Arbhbishop of Dublin, who was ready at your command to
transmit the Money, whenever you should see i^ necessary; and besides all this,
your Brother had a great desire at that time to borrow that very Money of you,
which you could the more readily deny, whilst it was out of your power.

5. Another support you had for the carrying the mighty work upon your hands
was, the Crown of Portugal, and Russel, the English Bishop of Portlegrah,
pressed the Prince of Portugal to contribute to the carrying on of the great
design then in hand, and had his Messengers sent about to the Religious of that
Kingdom; when you had raised for you the sum of fifty thousand pounds, and a
certain Lady was much concerned that no greater sum could be raised thence,
since she had prevailed with the Generals of the respective Religious Orders,
to write to their Provincials and Guardians to contribute largely to so pious a
work; but Perrot, a Secular, did pacify the said Lady, and did assure her that
he had more reason to wonder that so much came, since the Jesuits had wrote so
many notorious lies not only to Portugal, but also to many other places in
Europe, of the state and condition of the Catholic Religion in England: and,
Sir, what he said was true, he told you that he doubted the Jesuits run too
fast, and it would do well that you obtained of the King your Brother Liberty
of Conscience for the Catholics, it was as much as could be expected; but,
Sir, you may remember that Beddingfield did endeavor to incense you against
the Secular Clergy, who were much influenced by the said Perrot, he being their
Superior here in England; and told you that Perrot and the Secular Clergy were
a sort of Rascally fellows, that had neither Wit nor Courage to manage such a
design: but at length a small spell being thrown in amongst the Secular Clergy,
they prostituted themselves to your Cause; and Watkins, that was Superior of
the English College at Lisbon, was written to by Perrot, and another attempt
was made upon Prince Peter; but your design was discovered, and so all that
attempt turned to no account to you at that time.

6. You had most of the Princes of Christendom that were of the Popish
Religion, and of the French Interest, to support you in your design, by the
means of the Popes Internuncio then at Bruxels, with whom Coleman your trusty
Secretary held a great Correspondence; and if you please you may remember that
Coleman in one of his to the Internuntio, that the design prospered so well,
that he doubted not but in a little time the business would be managed to the
utter ruin of the Protestant party, which Letter bore date Aug. 21. 1674: but
these Princes being engaged in Wars, they could not contribute, but if the
design had prospered, you know they had all engaged whenever there should be a
General Peace, to assist your Brother and you in that good work of advancing
the Catholic Religion; but upon the discovery of the business, the whole face
of affairs of Europe were changed; and whether you could get any Money from
them I never learned so much, you know best, and so did your Traitor Coleman:
But so much may serve for the point in hand, to wit, a short account of those
who had engaged their assistance from abroad.

4. I come now to put you in mind of those who were engaged here at home, and
as I said before, so must I say again, that it was not the old Cavaliers that
you had engaged in this villainous design, for they were better natured, and
had a greater regard to our Religion and our Liberties, than to be drawn into
this Conspiracy, nor were they those alone that professed communion with the
Church of Rome, for then our danger had been the less, but there were some that
seemed to be of the communion of the Church of England, and were Papists in
Masquerade; but that I may be plain and particular with you, I will lay them
forth to the world in these following particulars.

1. You had your Papists in Masquerade, I bring them in foremost, and these
were the wicked Ministers, that notwithstanding their mighty pretenses to the
Church of England, as by Law established, to preserve her, yet at that time
they were pensioners to France, and abettors of the Popish party, and promoters
of the French Interest, and thereby rendered themselves Enemies of the
Government, and of the whole Kingdom: These were a set of Rogues that had not
one drop of Cavalier Blood in them, but revelled and surfeited upon the ruins
of those men, who had done much on your Father's behalf, and had undergone
great sufferings upon his account, and your Brother's, and no care was taken
but of their starving for want of Bread; such was your Grace and Favor to
them. Your Scotch Ministers of State gave great proof of their heartily being
engaged with you in the Conspiracy, for they did what in them lay, to ruin the
Protestant Interest in that Kingdom; they over-turned the Laws and Liberties of
that ancient Kingdom, and so reduced the Laws to the Will of the King your
Brother; that none could tell the difference between the condition of that
People and the Subjects of the French King, excepting him; that the Scotch were
by them made the greater Slaves, and it was a rule that your Conspirators at
St. James's laid down, that in Scotland Slavery and Debauchery was the surest
way to bring in Popery, as Popery and Debauchery would certainly bring in
Slavery upon the English Nation, both which was to be effected, or all would be
lost: Your wicked Ministers at Court in England, good men, they plied their
business with as much zeal as possibly they could, to make all things ready
against you mounted the Throne, and truly, they met with little or no
opposition in their progress, for the then Parliament, through their being
corrupted and bribed by the Ministers then employed, they had lost much of
their authority and esteem, so that though they sometimes made a little noise
about Popery and Arbitrary power, they durst not be over bold, because that
then they would have endangered their being dissolved, which was worse to them
than death it self; so that by these means your wicked Conspiracy went on with
impunity, and few or none were called to an account, till the discovery of the
Plot. It is true, they now and then roared against Lauderdale, they got
Buckingham removed from being a Councellor; they, it may be, might have an
aching Tooth at several, but I know nothing they did against any of them, but
make a noise till your true friend appeared, then they did talk with some of
your Conspirators, and would gladly, Sir, have spoken with you, but that you
went to take a little Air in Flanders.

2. You had the Popish party that were engaged with you in a barefaced manner,
and with as much impudence, as your Heart and Soul could desire, Priests,
Noblemen, Gentlemen, throughout the whole Kingdom, so that you were in a very
hopeful way of doing your business, had not God in his mercy prevented it; they
were all ready, they wanted but the word, and the business had been done to all
intents and purposes, and I doubt without any possibility of retrieving.

3. You had your Army ready at hand, and if they might have been secured to be
a standing Army, they would have done what you commanded, and you had your
Irish villains in Ireland, that wanted nothing but your word, and they were
ready to have engaged in any thing that should have contributed to the
advancement of the Religion, to which you were so miraculously Converted, that
your zeal was such, that you valued it above all things in the World, and
therefore your design could not but thrive, since you had the benefit of such
admirable assistance, so that reasonably you could expect nothing less, than
the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and the total overthrow of
England's Liberties.

4. You had a certain Queen, that had received very great affronts from you
know who, her Bed invaded, and defiled by a parcel of Whores, and it was high
time for her to declare her resentments, by engaging her self in the
Conspiracy, especially since Mother Church was to be advanced, and Heresy,
which had so long domineered in these Northern Countries, to be extirpated; she
knew what assistance you had from aboard, and therefore, Good Lady, she would
not be behind hand at home, especially since she could no otherways be revenged
for all the wrong that had been done her. She was brought upon the Stage for
it, but he that was most concerned, thought he could do no less in point of
Honor, to preserve her, though it was from the public Justice of the Nation.

5. You had your Female Companion, which was pinned upon the Nation, by the
Advice and Counsel of Lewis your Ally, who, in order to secure your Brother and
you to his Cause and Interest, adopted her a Daughter of France, and was to pay
her Portion; she was a main instrument to encourage Popery and Slavery, and
what intercourse there was between you and the Sea of Rome, upon the Marriage
with that hopeful piece of Household Stuff, I have already showed you in my
first memorial: the band of Pensioners had such a foresight of the sad
consequences of that Marriage, that they made many Votes, and did Address the
King your Brother, to prevent the consummation thereof, as appears in the
Journals of the said Parliament; and her carriage when she was Duchess of
York, and when she wore the Name, Style, and Title of Queen, was a sufficient
proof of her intentions to advance the design of subverting our Religion, and
changing the Government, and murdering the King, the Jesuits your trusty
friends can well tell to this day.

6. You had the standing Court-Whores that were engaged with you; for this, let
me tell you, that whoring and consuming the Treasure of the Nation, were Crimes
that were to be pardoned, but their being State-Whores was the thing that
rendered them in their day to be a greater grievance to the Nation, for they
were put upon your Brother to betray his Councils to Rome and France, and it
was by their aid and assistance that you completed that mighty part of
converting these Kingdoms by poisoning him; for though he was a Papist, yet not
Papist enough to hold the Throne, and what steps you took in his time you took
by their assistance, and sometimes you met with unexpected delays, so that you
could not preserve alive the work that was upon your hands, and therefore it
was resolved that he must dye, that the work of the time might go on without
contradiction or delay, your Jesuits resolved upon it in the years 1676, 1677,
and 1678, the Whores agreed to it in 1677/8, upon the Marriage of the Prince of
Orange with your Daughter.

7. You had your Brother engaged with you in the whole design, but that of his
own life, and I suppose you could not expect his consent to that part of the
Conspiracy, and therefore to prevent his Jealousy of that, you forged a plot
upon the Dissenting party, and began with the Lord Claypoole, who was committed
to the Tower, and you had two of your Popish Cutthroats ready cut and dried,
to have sworn him out of his life, and several others, so that you might
destroy the King and, lay his Death at the door of the Dissenting Protestants;
and in this, Sir, you happily failed, when I appeared, to take your Cause and
Design, and laid it before the Parliament, who were willing to save your
Brother's Reputation, if it had laid in their power, and his Life, if he
himself had been pleased graciously to consent to it, but he would not, and
therefore, through the blessing of God, you did his business as effectually, as
if Sir George Wakeman had done it himself. This I put down to show you, that
since he would not let the Parliament preserve his life, the destroying of
which was one of the two good things that ever you did, the other was your
running away.

8. You had our high Church brokers, that through their folly and madness
against poor Dissenters, turned Pimps for, nay, prostituted themselves and
their Cause to Rome and France, rather than the Honest Party of England should
escape the gracious Vengeance you designd for them. Did they not, to serve your
Cause and Interest, preach Sedition, and villi^ie the Reformation, promote
Popery, assert Popish Principles, decry the Popish Plot, and turned the same
upon the Protestants, and endeavored to subvert the Liberty and Property of
the Subject, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments? In a word, many of
these Devils brokers, they appeared to all sober thinking men, a very scandal
and reproach to their Function. And, that I may clear this point, I will
instance in some of them, by Name, that the World may see these sort of Rogues,
how they helped on Popery and Arbitrary Power, to which they were by your
Brother and you engaged; and for the doing of which, they had your Brother's
Countenance and yours.

1. The first I shall bring upon the Stage was old Sheldon, a whoring wicked
Fellow, and in his younger days was as lewd as his Gown could make him: It is
well known, that there was none greater than he and your Servant Coleman, none
more ready to satisfy your former Duchess, that she might turn Papist,
without any danger to her Soul: This, Sir, was at your instance. And to him,

2. We join Morley, that wicked Bishop of Winton, that urged the Duchess with
the necessity of obeying her Husband, and that there was but little difference
between the two Religions, and he hoped to live to see an Accommodation between
the Church of Rome and the Church of England.

3. Your old Friend Gunning; he was a Fellow of rare Principles, and of him I
shall say nothing, he having showed himself in his own colors in the House of
Lords in his time.

4. Let me add old Cosins, that met with his Friend, a Papist, after the
Meeting at the Savoy, upon the Return of your Brother and you, to the ruin of
the Nation, and swore, God damn me, Old Boy, we have saved Bell and the Dragon,
and we will not be long before we make your Church and ours to meet, that we
may be revenged of these Fanatic Rogues. And,

5. I will instance in Guy Carlton, the Bishop of Chichester, that said at the
Bishop of Ely's Table, in the hearing of Bishop Gulston and Gunning, He had
rather have Poperty than Presbytery in England, for the Difference between the
Church of England and the Church of Rome might be composed, but it was
impossible that ever the Presbyterians and the Church of England should ever be
reconciled. At which words Bishop Gulston took offense and departed. There were
others of the same Kidney, but your inferior Clergy were without number; there
was your Thompson of Bristol, and your rascally Chaplains, and others, Rogues
of a deep dye: These, I say, Sir, were your reverend Assistants in the mighty
Work upon your hands, though they did not foresee the evil Consequences of this
their Carriage in reference to the Interest of England, both as to its Religion
and Government: Nay, I hope they did not fully see into your Designs; if they
did, you, I hope, will judge of them according to their Merits.

5. You being so well guarded and regarded, you were in a little time resolved
to set up and show your self and wicked Party what you would be at; but, Sir, I
took pity upon you, and would not let you discover your self, and therefore I
laid it open, and the Design of your Pope, French King, General of the
Jesuits, and the Society, and your Brother and your self, which was the
reduction of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the Sword, to the Romish
Religion and the French way of Government. To effect this glorious Design, you
and your Brother gave the then Pope Authority to entitle himself to the
Kingdoms of England, Ireland, and Scotland, to have the absolute Power and
Government of the Church. In order to this, he dispatched his Legate into
Ireland, and Cardinal Howard was to have come for England, and your Brother's
trusty and well-beloved Cuckold and Councellor was to have had a Cardinals Hat,
and was to have gone for Scotland, to have taken Possession of the
Ecclesiastical State of that Kingdom; in the behalf of the Bishop of Rome the
two others were to do the like in England and Ireland. Moreover, sir, by your
Brother and you it was contrived and agreed on, that the General of the
Jesuits should derive a pretended Power from the Bishop of Rome, (with which
Project the French King was highly pleased:) According to this Project, the
Bishop of Rome did grant a Commission to the said General of the Jesuits, and
this Authority the said General did derive to Thomas White the Provincial, to
issue forth the Commissions of him the said General of the Jesuits; and
accordingly be, with the Counsel of the Jesuits in London, did issue forth
such Commissions, to Captain-Generals, Lieutenant-Generals, and Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captains, and the Advocate-General Richard
Langhorn, and to your Secretary of State Coleman; you have a whole List of them
in my Narrative already printed and published for your special service, although
not by your Royal Command. Further to carry on your wicked Designs, your
Jesuits, by the same Authority consulted concerning your Brother; and because
he was not a Galloper in your Cause, he was by them condemned to death, and
that was to be executed either by stabbing, shooting, or poisoning him: To this
your Servant Coleman was privy; and say, you know nothing of the matter, if you
dare, to this part of the Conspiracy; The Court of Claims in Ireland, if they
had then been sitting, would have declared him Innocent, upon your Letter, as
they did the Marquis of Antrim, upon your Brother's; nay, Sir, if they had
carried their Point, then you were to have received the Crowns, as forfeited by
your Brother to the Pope, as of his Gift; and you was to have been obliged to
have such Prelates and Dignitaries in the Church, and such Officers in Commands
and Places civil, naval, and military, as he had and should commissionate; and
you had agreed both with him and the French King to extirpate the Protestant
Religion, and to consent to the Assassination of the King your Brother, and to
massacre, by the help and assistance of the French King, the Protestants, to
Fire our Towns that stood in opposition to these cruel designs of yours. You
agreed to pardon the Assassines, Murderers, and Incendiaries; and in case you
died without Issue male, these three Kingdoms were to be made three Provinces
of France, and become Subjects of that Crown for ever. Here your Brother and
you were engaged to the French King: And that the Prince of Orange might not
pretend to the same, he was also condemned, and designed against by Name, by
the Proviso and Consent of the Pope, French King, your Brother, and your self;
and how you appeared in the Design against him I have already set forth in my
first Memorial to you: Truly you your self must not have escaped, if you had
not heartily complied to follow such Steps and Counsels as should have been at
any time proposed by your Counselors at St. James's. You have here laid before
you the design in short, and it was a black one (God knows); and, What say you
to it now? Sir, if you will let the little Gentleman of Wales learn to read, (I
have a good Schoolmaster for him) he may see here the true Picture of your
sweet self, which he may spell over by degrees; for I would not have the Boy
have too much load at a time laid upon him, lest he should be disabled from
serving the Tyler, his true Father, with a Hod of Mortar or so, in order to its
conformable Livelihood.

6. Concerning the discovery of this Plot of yours, it is fit a word should be
spoken to that point, because I believe the revival of this Story will much
oblige you and your ragged Crew at St. Germain's, and your Saints you have left
behind you. You may remember, that your design prosper'd so well, and your
damnable Ar^y were so insolent, that notwithstanding the fair pretenses your
Brother and you used for the keeping them up, and your old Parliament briber
put your Brother upon the asking of more Money, and no War with France;
notwithstanding they had so largely paid for the War they had advised to be
begun with that mighty Monarch, and they considered that an Army without a War
would be of dangerous and pernicious consequence to the Nation, therefore they
agreed to this Vote, in answer to your Brother's Speech made to them some time
before; Resolved, That the House taking into consideration the state of His
Majesty's Affairs, and the great charge and burden His Majesty and the Nation
lies under, by the Army now in being; we humbly are of opinion, that if His
Majesty pleases to enter into a War with the French King, the House is, and
always will be, ready to support and assist in that War; but if otherwise, then
they will proceed to the consideration of providing for the speedy disbanding
of the Army. And truly, dear Sir, you could not well blame the Parliament for
this Vote, for your design in general did to them appear, notwithstanding the
plausible Arguments your Villains used for the keeping up of that Popish Army,
though you know this disbanding the Army was not the thing you aimed at, for you
never designed it from the first moment that it was raised, for it being
Officer'd to your Hearts content, was that which the Catholic Cause, with the
assistance of France, (when it was at leisure by a general Peace) was built
upon. Now this Vote coming instead of Money, upon these hard Conditions, no way
suited with the mighty design you and your Conspirators had in hand; for though
you had, as I said before, got a pretty Spell from the Parliament, yet that
being employed by your old Friend the Parliament-manager, and the rest of your
Rogues, as I have mentioned before, Money was wanting to pay your Soldiers and
Fleet; and truly Nel Waal and her Mistress, and the rest of the Bawds, Pimps,
and Whores, had swept a great deal of what was given by these methods from the
Parliament, for holy secret service.

This Vote therefore made you and your Conspirators very uneasy, your
appointed time of setting up being come, and prudently (as Men in your
condition) you obtained of the King your Brother to give the angry Vote of the
House a mild Answer. The Vote before mentioned passed the House, and was sent
to the King your Brother on the 27th of May, upon a Monday; the next day, the
28th, His Majesty sent them this Message; His Majesty having perused the Vote
of this House, has thought fit to return this Answer, That the most Christian
King has made such Offers for a Cessation till the 27th of July, as His
Majesty does not only believe will be accepted, but does also verily believe
will end in a general Peace; yet since that is not certain, His Majesty does by
no means think it prudent to dismiss either Fleet or Army before that time; nor
does he think it can add much to the Charge, because the raising the money, and
the paying them off, would take as long time as that, although the speediest
disbanding that is possible were intended; That in the mean time His Majesty
desires some Supplies may be provided for their subsistence; That as hitherto
they have been the most orderly Army that ever was together, they may be
encouraged to continue so; That there is another thing which presses His
Majesty with very great inconvenience in his domestic Affairs, which is the
want of the 200000 l. you promised to repay him at your next meeting after,
which does affect the whole Branch of his Revenue, by having a fifth part taken
out of every Payment, which should be applied to the necessary Uses of his
Household: He does therefore desire you would immediately apply your selves to
the Repayment of that money to him.

The House having received this Message, they took it for granted, as well they
might, that their Work was done, and began to look about and consider what was
first to be done; they saw well enough to what intent the Army was raised, and
began to suspect they should never be able to lay the Devil you intended to
raise by that Army of yours, for they had several Items of your Conspirators
corresponding with France, from whence they apprehended your Brother and you
was to have Money; and by the management of things at home, they found it would
be very difficult to unhinge your designs; they resolved to raise Money to
disband the Forces with all speed, and to continue none in pay any longer than
Money could be raised; so they vote a Land Tax of 200000 l. to disband the Army,
which was to be done by the latter end of August at the farthest, and began to
think upon another Bill, to secure the Nation from Popery, and to take care of
us when we were dead, by passing a Bill to award the Act for burying in
Woollen; but your Brother seeing the House of Commons very busy about the
disbanding the Army, sent them a Message on the 7th of June, as follows; His
Majesty, in his Speech to both Houses on the 23d of May last, told them, That
if he were made able, he would keep up his Army at Land, and his Fleet at Sea,
for some time, till a Peace was concluded, if that might be; but because that
would depend upon your supplies, he left it to you to consider, whether to
provide for their subsistence, or to disband them sooner: His Majesty has
often since had his Thoughts employed upon the same subject, and is every day
more and more confirmed in his first Opinion, to wit, that the saving a few
days Expense can no ways countervail the Prejudice that would proceed from the
parting with his Fleet and Army, if after that a Peace should not follow; and
though it should, yet the hazarding so much upon the mere presumption of the
issue of the thing it self, altogether uncertain, and quite out of his own
power, is hardly to be countenanced by any Precedent; His Majesty therefore
again recommendeth to the consideration of this House, his Advice on the 23d of
May last, that they would see the Effects of the Cessation in Flanders, before
His Majesty be necessitated to disarm himself, but more especially of that part
of the Army which is in Flanders, which if he should recall before the Peace,
would be liable to a very bad construction, viz. that having taken several of
the King of Spain's Towns into his protection, he had without any reasonable
Warning, in order to their regarrisoning, withdrawn his Forces, and abandoned
those Towns to the discretion of the Enemy.

Now, Sir, I pray remember, that notwithstanding this Message, the House of
Commons did not think sit to keep up your Popish Army, for that they now
plainly discovered the use and purposes of this Army, and they knew who advised
the Speech, and those two Messages, and had a pretty guess at the meaning; and
therefore, though some of the House were for giving longer time, yet the
generality were of opinion, they had been kept too long already, and saw it
absolutely necessary, notwithstanding the fair stories, That the design was
never to part with them now they were raised, but that you and your
Conspirators had another Work to do for them. And as secret as the thing was
carried, they had an account both of the Letters of France and of Flanders, and
of all your Negotiations with the French King and his Ministers, as well as
your Villainous Jesuits had from time to time an account of the Motions in the
House of Commons. In short, after many Debates, the House concluded of a Bill
to raise Money for the disbanding of the Army, and gave them for doing it till
July for that part at home, and those in Flanders till August following; and
after passing the additional Bill for burying in Woollen, they provided the
Reimbursement of the 200000 l. formerly borrowed, and which had been so often
pressed to be paid: They arose, being adjourned till October following; but
fain would your Conspirators have had longer time, by the Parliaments consent,
for disbanding their Army; but since you could not have their Consent, you and
your Villains were resolved to do it without Consent. The next project you had,
was to attempt the settling a new Excise upon the Crown, for the better support
of the Government, upon pretense that the Revenue was not sufficient; but the
House of Commons did not relish it, the very Band of Pensioners opposing it;
and the reason for it was, that in case there should be more standing Revenue,
their Trade would be spoiled; for then there would be no need of their service,
and your old Parliament-briber would keep his Dinners and his Moneys too,
without which those Rascals could not live: but the Parliament being gone, you
and your Rogues being a little unsatisfied that you had not bubbled them out of
more Money, began to mutter behind their backs of their unhandsom carriage to
the King your Brother, and to load the Parliament with the Infamy of being the
cause of the Cessation like to be, and the Peace which was expected to ensue;
the French all this while playing their Rogues tricks in Flanders, straightly
blocking up Mons, which they expected to carry before the Peace.

The Dutch and the Spaniard, with the assistance of the English Forces that
were in Flanders, under the command of the Earl of Ossory, were resolved to
succor Mons before the Peace took place; but the French King being aware of
their designs, pressed night and day, the more to streighten the Town, and
stopped up the ways, so that all relief was hindered from coming to them; for
Luxemburg, who did all this, had a vast Army with him; the very Flower of
France; the Prince of Orange, with the Dutch and Spaniard, at the earnest
solicitation of the Spaniard, were resolved to succor the Town, that it might
not fall into the hands of the French before the Peace was concluded; they
march directly for Mons, where they found it close blocked up by the French
Army under the command of Luxemburg; but notwithstanding, the getting into
Mons, by reason of the Blockade, and the advantageous Posts the French were
possessed of, as if there had been a new Courage put into the Spaniard and
Dutch, and as if it were a fatality on the French, to blemish all his former
Enterprises, and to give him a parting blow, the Prince with the English then
with him pressed upon the French so hard, that they forced them out of their
advantageous posts, and made them quit the Field; and by this course Mons was
succored, though with the loss of many Men on both sides; but the French were
strangely beaten, and retired in great disorder in the Night, which was so
great a blemish to the French King's Glory, and struck such a Fear upon his
Army, that it was verily thought by judicious persons, that had the Dutch and
Spaniards followed the blow upon the French, they had ruined his whole Design.

Your Designs on foot beginning to appear to most thinking men, and meeting
with this sad disaster, I remember your Countenance was disordered in a strange
manner, as if you had broke up some House or robbed some Church, for which you
were to be called to an account; and then sometimes you would mimp up your
Mouth like some old Custard-maker, and say, It was a hare-brain'd rash Act done
by the Prince of Orange and the Duke of M^nmouth, who just came in as they
began to fight, not like Soldiers, but like Madmen. I remember it was upon the
self-same day that your Brother was made acquainted with that part of the
Popish Conspiracy that concerned his Life; but of that in its proper place.

But upon this defeat of the French, at which ^n honest company of your good
Friends laughed heartily, and as heartily drank yours and your Conspirators
Healths. But I pray Sir, how did your French Mustard-maker take all this?
truly, Sir, you well remember he sent several Messages to your Brother and you,
and told you both very roundly, that our Forces were the cause of this Affront
and Abuse put upon them; and, in plain terms, he called you both to an account
for your breach with him, in suffering the Duke of Monmouth and the English to
fall upon him contrary to agreement; truly this made your Brother and you
uneasy, as also the rest of your bloody Rogues, for you were much afraid that
he would not furnish you with his purse, according to the other agreement; but
you and your Rogues with open cry protested your Innocence, and that you had
not the least thoughts of any such Action, and truly, I did believe you were
much in the right: Well, what to do you could not tell, for you were all of you
ready to beshit your selves; but this, Sir, you may remember, that you
dispatched away your trusty Messengers both to the French Court and to Holland,
and promised upon the Faith of Gammer Potte^'s Honesty and her Husband's
Religion, you were not at all privy to the Prince of Orange's Counsels: Right;
but what then? truly you would be a good Boy, and stop such ungentile
proceedings for time to come, and withal assured the French King, that the Duke
of Monmouth went not over by your consent; more truth yet ^ nor had he any
business there, but his curiosity only led him to it; and for time to come
better care should be taken of him, than to be busied about such affairs;
withal assuring the French King, that he should have no thanks for his pains
when he came home: So you pulled up your Breeches, and escaped a scowring for
that time, and so you and the French was as intimate as the Tinker of Ba^bury
and his Trull; for, to give you your due, you never forgave the Duke of
Monmouth that scurvy bout, but had an Eye upon him, as Saul had upon David for
slaying his ten thousands.

Well then, what becomes of the Peace? Truly this Foil the Monsieur met withal
did not retard the Peace, but rather furthered it, for your Ally ordered his
business so well, by his Emissaries at the Hague amongst the States, and with
the Governor of Flanders, Villa Hermosa, that the Prince of Orange, just as if
the De Wits had been risen from the dead, had positive Orders immediately after
the Fight, if not before, not to go on any further, for that the Peace was
concluded; from which Peace the States General had good reason, as well as the
Spanish Netherlands, yea, and England too, to have dated their ruin, as did
appear by the fatal Consequences of that Peace, had not God designed a
Deliverance for them all, and a Deliverer too: But your villainous, Popish and
Popishly-affected Conspirators plied their Work, and first got in the States
General, then the Spaniard, and then the Emperor, even to the abandoning their
Allies Denmark and Brandenburg, who were drawn into the War for the Common
Cause of Christ^ndom, and had been most eminently serviceable, with their Arms
to divert the Swede and French Interest; yet then were le^t in the lurch by
them, whose part they had taken, and forced to quit all their Conquests, and
lose their Charges, or else they had been liable to have been undone; which
made the then Elector of Brandenburg say to our Minister then at his Court,
(who was sent to him to make an Alliance with us) That he knew us too well, and
that we were only influenced by Jesuitical Councils, and therefore would not be
concerned with us. I wonder what Sawcebox it was that had discovered the mighty
Design you had upon your hands to this Prince; if I could tell, you should have
him sent over to St. Germains next week, or on Monday morning. Truly here were
strange Discoveries of your gracious Intentions of swallowing all Europe up in
a perpetual bondage to the French Tyrant.

Well, what do we with our Forces? surely they were well educated by this time:
Was it not good Manners to call them home, since they had done the Work abroad?
O yes, by all means our Forces must come home, or they would have been sent
home with a sting in their Tails, for the Spaniard now was as unwilling to keep
them as you was once to send them; and truly they were at last but coursely
used; and therefore they being a parcel of case-harden'd Rogues, home they
came, not to be disbanded, but to do the rest of the work; for I am fully of
opinion, that neither the States General nor the Prince of Orange were privy to
the then glorious Design of forcing this Peace upon them. Well glad were you
and the rest of the Conspirators to see the brave Boys come home in Companies
and in Regiments, and great care you took to have them quartered about the
Country; but the Inhabitants did not receive them with such hearty welcome as
you desired, for upon their arrival you were sufficiently plagned with the
complaints of those upon whom they were quar^er'd; and, to deal plainly with
you, Douglas's and Dumbarton's Regiments, and others, who were most Popish, did
even terrify the people; but that which most troubled the Country where they
were quartered, was, that they had no Pay, and run all on score, as well for
their Victuals and Drink, as when they were first raised they had done for
their Clothes to the Drapers and Clothiers, which became very burdensome; and
above all, they were rude and intolerably insolent; yet the Country were the
better contented, because they expected every day their being disbanded
according to Law; but whatsoever their Expectations were, you and your Villains
did never design to disband them; but the City and Country saw through the
thing, and were very apprehensive of some Popish Design on foot, and began to
storm heartily against you and your Crew.

Well, how then did you carry your self, for here was a brave Army? ^h, how you
and your Cattle hugged your selves with this Army! Nay, I cannot blame you, for
all things went on your side as your Heart and Soul could wish; what with your
Popish Soldiers, and Popish Officers, Popish Councils, Popish Priests and
Jesuits, and Popish Whores swarming about the Town and Country, and France
coming off more a Conqueror by Peace than ever he could have done by War; and
now in power abroad, and you and your Conspirators being in a good condition at
home, having your Army about you, and some Money, (though not enough) to make up
that Defect, you had Assurances from France: I wonder, in the Name of God, you
did not then strike the stroke, and give the fatal blow, and pull off the
Vizard, and set up for your self; You know that it had been often debated at
St. Jam^s's: Truly, to give the Devil his due, you were very eager to strike at
that time, since you had all things in so good a posture, and would, good man,
have done your good Will in that business, but, I confess, you were di^swaded
from it, and urged to act privately a little longer, to see if there could not
be a way found to get a little more Money; wisely considering, that he which
designs to build a great House in Wisdom, first ought to sit down and consider
the Cost. And in a close Cabal at White Hall, upon a Couriers coming from
France, soon after the Peace was concluded, it was strongly debated, Whether to
try the Experiment for Money with the Parliament, or to rely upon the French
King, from whom your Brother and you, and the rest of the Conspirators,
expected such great matters; you may remember that in this Consult there were
three Factions, and three different Opinions amongst them, though all the Rogues
agreed in the main, That they never had so fair an Opportunity as now, yet they
could never be sure of their Game without Money: And you know that more Money you
wanted. The French Ambassador here was admitted to many of your Secrets, yet
not all, for he was no Friend, but to his Master's Interest purely, and no
Bigot to the Church, but whatever he drove at, he was still ^icking with our
Court. And another part of your Rogues spoke to this effect; That your Services
to France had been great, and your Interest with him so interwoven, that they
doubted not but he would assist you both with Men and Money: But you know that
others of the same Cabal of Devils were of Opinion, that how willing soever he
might be now, yet his Purse, by this long War, was exhausted so far, that it
was unreasonable to expect sufficient Help from him, and that i^ was better to
have two Strings to your Bow than one. And to try the other bout to get Money
from the Parliament, truly Mr. Catch^art, in he steps, and tell you plainly,
That he would undertake for the Parliament, and doubted not but by the time of
their sitting down in October, but to win so many of the Pensioners over to the
giving of Money, that they should be a very great majority in the House. As for
the other Faction, they advised to send to the City to borrow Money, and if
refused, to force it; and you had at your beck a case-harden'd French
Cutthroat, that offered his humble Service to Command those Forces into the
City, and swore Be Gar he would lay the City in Ashes, if they did no^ with
much Humility deliver him two Millions presently. I pray Sir, recommend me to
that Rogue at a Dead-lift; I have seen the Villain sometimes at your quondam
Mansion at White Hall, and he does womble up his Locram Jaws, as if he had a
Need to sh --: He has a very great Affection for you still; he says, He
cannot forget your Favors, Be Gar. The other part of your Banditti were
pressing to make a Mutiny amongst the Protestants here, or in Scotland, or to
engage the Irish to rise, so that Money might be got by this means to suppress
them: But, you know, at last it was agreed to try the Parliament once more, in
order to bring them to a good humor; and the Fatigue of Council being over,
and the Year spending apace, you thought it necessary to enter upon some
Action; therefore all the Flota at White Hall, and the Frigates, they weighed
Anchor, and attack Windsor-Castle, which willingly surrendered; and to
aggrandize the Merriment there, comes over some great Personages from France,
and were very much pleased with the Court, and the secret Devices suddenly to
be put in execution, after the next meeting of Parliament, was agreed on; all
was well with you, the Whores ^risking about, Nell and her Mistress, and the
rest, were as merry as the Maids, and all your roguing Banditti hugged
themselves with the great Happiness they were to enjoy.

Well Sir, I do believe they were merry about their Mouths, and they had a
great deal of reason, for all things went on in a sweet harmony; and so it did
at Belshazar's Feast, till the Hand appeared writing upon the Wall, and then
they were all confounded and amazed: So it was with you, for in the midst of
all your Merriment, in the Month of August, all on a sudden a black Cloud
appeared, which did prognosticate a Storm to fall upon you, even in the height
of all your Expectations; and though it seemed to you and your Cutthroats to be
but a Tri^le, and small at the beginning, yet by degrees it increased
extremely; and that was the most secret Devices of you and your Conspirators,
for your introducing Popery and Arbitrary Government came in some small measure
to be discovered by an old hearty Friend of yours, but you had your Penniworths
out of his Carcass for his Service in that particular. Well, to be plain with
you, it was my own dear self, that makes this modest Address to you; and if any
one say, that ever I gave you one good word in my Life, I will be his humble
Servant that proves it. Before I quit this Point, I must answer two Questions
that have been asked me by several persons: 1. What was the Opportunity I had
of making this Discovery; and, 2. Why, or to what end, I made the Discovery.

1. What the Opportunity was that I had of making the Discovery. And truly this
I must say, and take Shame to my self, the course I took to get into the
Secrets of the Jesuits, was no way warrantable from the Word of God, for I
dissembled my self to be a Papist, and yet was none, one that pretended Zeal
for their Religion, and at that time was an avowed Enemy to them and their
Religion. I have asked God forgiveness, and all true Protestants; I am sure God
has pardoned the Sin of his Servant, since he had no other thing before his
Eyes, but the Good of his Country, and the Honor of God; though I confess, to do
the least Evil, that the greatest Good might come of it, is unlawful; and I am
sure there is no true Protestant in England, but what will not only forgive my
doing that Evil, in joining with the Church of Rome, to discover the Designs
carried on by you and your Conspirators, but will stand by my Truth that I did
at that time discover. I have reason to bless God, for that they have given
good Testimony of their Zeal for the Cause of God upon my account, and relieved
my Necessities, and visited me when sick and in Prison, and were not ashamed of
my Chain: But I would not have any man to think, that though God was pleased to
bless my poor Labors for the good of the Public, to follow my Example, in
joining with that cursed Communion, though his design be never so honest, lest
God in Justice leave him to the Counsel of their own Wills.

But it may be you are impatient, and therefore I shall hasten to my intended
business, which is, to declare my self fully to you, concerning the
Opportunities I had of discovering the cursed Intrigues of the Jesuits, and
the cursed Plot you carried on for the destruction of our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion. I must tell you, that the acquaintance I had with some considerable
Papists, in the Year 1670, made me suspect a Design carried on by them to
advance their Religion, and to pull down ours, but I little thought they had a
design of murdering the King, which in process of time I found out; there was
one Cotton, that was at Mr. Guildford's in Kent, this Gentleman was a
free-spoken man, and would be often tempting me to come over to their Church,
For, said he, it will not be long before you must either burn or turn,
therefore come over to us in time, that your Coming may be meritorious. This
Cotton I in time found out to be a Priest of the Jesuits Order, and one that
was engaged in the Popish Plot, and when I was engaged, Sir, with your Coleman
and the Society, I had with him a better acquaintance: From him, at first, I
found that the Popish Party had a Design then on foot to promote their
Religion, and were making what Proselytes they could, in order to enlarge their
Interest and Power in this Kingdom. I from that time had a great desire to get
into them, to see whither their Designs tended, being very fearful that they
designed no less than the total subversion of our Religion and Government, for
this Cotton had the Impudence to tell me, That your Brother was engaged with
you and the Catholic Party, to advance your Cause and Religion, and was
resolved to bring in Popery, it being a Religion that was most consistent with
Monarchy; and, that your Brother was resolved to be like his Neighbor Princes.
This was in the Year 1670, about Christmas; which Discourse I discovered to Mr.
Walter Drury, whom I did assist in the Service of his Cure at Sandhurst, in the
County of Kent, and he told me, that Mr. Cotton had talked as plainly, or
rather worse, to him, but he had sufficiently told him his own, so that Cotton
was shy of having any farther Discourse with him about those matters; and
withal, Mr. Drury having threatened to complain of him, Mr. Cotton did withdraw
from that Family; and another came in his room. In the Year 1672, I was
acquainted with one Keimash, who used very persuasive Arguments to me, to have
brought me over to their Church, he then frequented Arundel House in the
Strand, and was a Fellow that had insinuated himself into the acquaintance of
several Divines of the Church, and bragged, That he had reconciled above thirty
Ministers of the Chapter of England; but I found him a debauched lewd fellow, and
so my acquaintance ceased with him, for it was a hard matter, unless in a
Morning, to find him ^ober. I found him afterward to have been Chaplain to the
old Countess of Arundel, with whom he lived several Years, under the notion of
her Steward. In the Year 1672, I left Mr. Drury's Cure, and held a Living of my
own, upon which I resided for some time, called Bobbing, in Kent, and from
thence I went and served the King at Sea, as a Chaplain, where I found many
difficulties, by reason of sickness of Body; I refreshed my self at Tangier,
where was one Gerard, an Irish Dominican, that upon the first sight of me
inquired, whether the Catholic Religion was established in England? (this was
in the Year 1674, in the Month of April) I told him, No. Why then, said he, the
Dutch War is to no purpose. Why, said I, was our engaging in a War against the
Dutch to bring in Popery? Well, well, said the Friar, you will see in time. In
some few days we had notice of a Peace with the Dutch, of which I told the said
Friar; What then, said he, our great King of France is not at peace with him,
and he must do the work. In the Year 1675, I had obtained an Interest with
Henry Duke of Norfolk, then Earl of Norwich, and Earl-Marshal of England, who
was very kind to me, upon the account of my contending earnestly for his Right
of presenting to a Living in the Diocese of Chichester, to which Living the
then Bishop (a turbulent man) pretended a Right of Collating; and in the Year
1676, I was made Chaplain to the said Duke of Norfolk; I think the whole Family
will bear witness of my Fidelity to him and his Children. In the Service of the
said Duke I came acquainted with several Priests, and being then resolved upon
a strict enquiry into their designs against us, our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, I met with one Berry a Priest, that had been a Jesuit, but had left
that Order through some discontent and madness that had seized the poor Wretch: I
found him a poor zealous man, whose Zeal was far beyond his Knowledge; but this
Berry brought me acquainted with Mr. Langworth a Jesuit, and John Keins, and
Will. Morgan, that was then Priest to the Lord Powys, both Jesuits, who gained
my Consent to go over to the Church of Rome; and truly a few Arguments
prevailed with me, because I had a desire to see what they were doing, so that
in some measure I might prevent that impending danger that seemed to threaten
England with no less than an ^^recoverable ruin: But this, as I said before,
was my great Evil, though my design in it was honest, just, and good; and, Sir,
you know that it did turn to a good account, and would have turned to a better
account, had not I met with your Opposition, who was concerned in all, and your
Brother in every part but that of his own Life.

But, in short, I was by this Langworth reconciled to the Church of Rome; he
was Father-Confessor to the Lord Pe^re and his Family. Upon my being reconciled
I was brought to Richard Strange, then Provinciate of the Jesuits, who
admitted me into the Society; and when I was admitted, it was resolved by the
Jesuits, that I should pass the time of my Novitiate abroad in dispatching
business for the Society, which I cheerfully accepted, as an advantageous
Opportunity of doing that for which I was reconciled and admitted into their
Order, and therefore accordingly they provided for me. When I had paid Mr. Luke
Roach, Commander of a Biscay Merchant, bound for Bilboa, the said Strange the
Provincial gave me One hundred Pistols for my supply, in order for my passage
into Spain, and for my necessary Expenses there, and ordered me what other
Moneys I should need: I then applied my self to a certain Nobleman, who was
privy to my being reconciled to the Church of Rome, and had much pressed me to
it, in order to see what Work your Rogues were at: He paid into my hands ^oo
Guineas, which I changed here in England, and received Bills upon Father
Swina^, the Procurator-General for the English and Irish Jesui^es, who paid me
in Doll^rs ^o my Hearts content: What Letters they sent by me, you shall have
^n account of in their proper place: And when I had got a competent Knowledge
of their Design then on foot, which was, to murder your Brother, because he had
so often deceived them, for they assured me he had been reconciled to their
Church, and that upon his Reconciliation the Society in Spain had contributed
3000 Pistols to his support, which was paid in by Father Cou^tney, some time
Provinciate of the English Jesuits. I saw several Letters written by your
Brother to one Father Knot, in which the King your Brother testified his Zeal
for the Catholic Religion, and promised to restore it whenever he should come
to the enjoyment of his Right in England, and till he had an Opportunity to do
it, they should have all the Connivance in the World; and if the Case should go
so hard wi^h him when he came to the Crown, that he could not bring about their
desires, to make their Religion to be the Religion of the Government, yet they
should have an Indulgence that should be an Equivalent, and however they should
not be excluded from Offices and Employments of Trust; and that they had his
Heart and Soul. In a word, I was engaged with the Jesuits two Years, and I
found it high time to discover what I had learnt from them and your Servant
Coleman, who, you know, was a main Agent in this Hellis^ Design: I had a
hopeful Prospect of being countenanced by your Brother and you, and sometimes
the thoughts of the Difficulties I was like to meet withal, would make me
tremble. I applied my self to my noble Friend, of whose Money I had spent One
thousand Pounds in the Discovery, and he bid me be of good courage, and I
should carry my Point to the confusion of them all. I also communicated the
business to Dr. ^ong^^, and ^e to Mr. Christopher Kirk^y, and Mr* Kirk^y
communicated the same to the King, and entrusted the then Lord ^reasurer (...)
the discovery, (...) that the Discoverer should keep in with the Jesuits and
observe the^^ Motions, and from time to time discover what he had learned from
them: But K^^k^y could not but see your Brother's coolness in the Affair;
therefore to just^^e himself, on the sixth of September he had my Narrative
attested by my Oath, before Sir Edmund-Bury Go^fr^y; and when you and the whole
Court came from Windsor, I was before Godfrey the 28th day in the Morning,
being Saturday, and swo^^ to a complete Narrative of the Popish Design, and at
Night I attended the Privy Council, where I gave an account of so much of the
whole Affair as was convenient; so the whole Board saw that the Jesuits and
Papists, who were in strict Alliances with the other Conspirators, to root out
the Protestant Religion and Government. And though all the Conspirators of the
French Interest were in the Grand Plot, yet you know there were some of the
Jesuits and Priests, and Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Romish Communion, in
conjunction with your self, had no Patience to stay the ordinary course to
establish Popery and Arbitrary Power, which the other Rogues had resolved upon
at White Hall, to be done in its due time, and to go on gradually, being well
assured of your Game, if it was not spoiled through rashness; and therefore some
of your French Pensioners were not made privy to the Secrets of some of the
Priests and Jesuits Councels at St. James's, Weld-house, and elsewhere; for
you know that you and they were impatient to be in possession; and they hoping
and believing you right for their turn, they drove on a secret ^lot with you,
to remove the King your Brother into another World, whilst this Army was being
which you so much cove^ed. And though Charles your Brother, and his Villain, were
concerned in the grand Plot, yet none but the Popish party were in this Wheel
within a Wheel; and therefore when this came to be discovered by me to the King
and Council, though the persons to whom I discovered knew well enough what I said
to the general Plot to be true, yet they, being kept ignorant of the other
secret Wheel within their Wheel, were much startled and amazed at the
discovery, and were inclined not to believe that part of the Testimony, they
being all of them your most humble Admirers.

But this you may call to mind, that some of your deep-dy'd surseited Rogues,
had laid their design with you, for their bringing to pass what you had
designed about the King your Brother, he having so often failed you, and
therefore you found, that he was not any longer to be trusted, and you had
engaged them by several Demonstrations that they might trust you; therefore his
dispatch into the other World was determined; and further, that they would cast
the Odium of it upon the dissenting Protestants; in order to which, Claypool,
as I have observed both in my first and this Memorial, was committed to the
Tower, and I seeing the Jesuits so resolved to destroy your Brother, I resolved
to do what I did. The King had private Information, as I said before, in the
month of August, but he made light of it, and instead of making strick enquiry
after the Discovery, and the person accused, I found that was like to be
ruined, for going so far by the Jesuits; who because Dr. Tongue had been with
the King, they thought it had been my self who had the discovery communicated
to you, and you communicated it to the Jesuits and the Monks at the Savoy; and
though the Affair was not communicated to the Council, till the Jesuits should
have time enough if possible to stifle the discovery, and find out amongst
themselves who it was that had designed to betray them, I being the man they
mistrusted, I thought it necessary to withdraw from their Company, and so with
Dr. Tongue, I went to Justice Godfrey, as before, who had the Scheme of the
Conspiracy that was against the King's Life, which was so home and so full,
that the said Justice communicated it to an old friend of yours, who because he
would be in the Fashion, slighted it as much as your gracious Brother had done,
at the first discovery of it to him: and the said Justice Godfrey communicated
it to your sweet self, and you to your Priests and Jesuits with you at Windsor,
you know upon what account; and when Coleman came out of the Country, he had
notice to do away his Papers, but the vain glorious Puppy kept them, but some
of the Conspirators obeyed you, and conveyed themselves away; but Justice
Godfrey being in some measure Master of the Information, tells Coleman, with
whom he was intimate, of the thing, but C^leman knew more of the point than
Godfrey could tell him, and much better; and being well assured that such
discoveries and such discoverers could not hinder the design, did in effect
^onfirm all to the said Justice that I had said to him, and much more, and
advised the Justice to meddle no further in the Business, for that he would
find but little Encouragement or Thanks for his pains, for their Game was sure,
and gone too far, and too great persons concerned in it to value any thing that
could be done: This surprised Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey who was always looked
upon a very fair Gentleman, and zealous for the Church of England, and not any
way inclining to Popery, but carried it fair to all, and the Papists themselves
had a great esteem of him as well as others; but he finding your Friend, who
was privy to the discovery, had done nothing in the Affair, communicated it to
the Privy Council on the 28 of September in the morning, and as I told you
before, I was attending the Council at night; how I carried my self, if any of
that Council be alive, they will justify me; that although I was sufficiently
Brow-beaten, and met with great opposition from some, yet I stood to my point,
and gave such clear Demonstrations, that they were constrained (though full fore
against their will) to grant their Warrants to seize some of the Traitors that
night, which made some talk of a Popish Plot, but few or none except the
Conspirators themselves knew at first what to make of it; the Papists were so
bold as to laugh at it and deride it, and Coleman who was your Factor in all
the Popish Plot, did go into the City and strutted as if he knew as little of
the Business as your self; however, there were thirty six Bags of his Papers
seized, and he appearing before the Council in the afternoon, upon a Summons
only, such was his Interest with the Grand Conspirators, that he himself
thought it was out of the Power of Man to hurt him, especially since many of
that Council, then alive, were themselves engaged in the General Plot: upon
this Presumption he appeared and began to hector and bounce at the Council,
telling them, that in accusing him they struck at his Master; yet for all his
he^torng, they sent him to Newgate, for his Fellow Rogues could say nothing for
him.

We having got your great Goliath into Newgate, you thought it convenient that
all possible care should be taken, both as to the cause in general, and your
friend in particular; you gave Instructions to all you could, to hide their
Papers, and several of them were brought to Whitehall, where they were
carefully preserved, and to send away all you durst not trust; nay, rather than
fail, old Coventry, your never-failing League-breaker, he lent you a cast of
his Office, and granted your Conspirators passes, if they were disposed to beat
upon the Hoof; nay, you took great Care, that the Witnesses should not want all
the discouragement that might be; nay, rather than fail, some of the Clerks of
the Council were set as Spies upon them, and the very Minutes of the Council
were made use of to ensnare them, and the Honest Clerks themselves witnesses
against them for the Conspirators. Oh! but your dear friend Coleman was
committed; Ay, he was; what then, was it not high time? Yes, he was committed,
and you were not idle; yet for all this, you and your Rogues did not doubt but
to rub it off, and to carry your Point, for all your Creatures were in Places
of Trust about your Brother the King, and his Council, by whose help you and
they got your writings of the chiefest Import that concerned your self and
greater Conspirators so well secured, that whatever became of the scoundrel
Priests and Jesuits, yet you doubted not but to save the principal part of the
Cargo; and therefore what concerned your self in relation to your Traiterous
Correspondencies with the Pope, or the French King, and others which concerned
the Popish Lords, never appeared, except the Lord Berkshire's Letters, and
there being but one positive Witness at first, you were extremely pleased with
the hopes of baffling the discovery of your Conspiracy, but before the meeting
of the Parliament, there was but one great Block in your way, and that was the
vain glorious Discovery Coleman had made to Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, of this
you were to take Care: In order to this, the Parliaments meeting was put off
from the beginning of October, till the 21st of the said Month.

Well then, how did your good Friend Coleman carry himself in his Apartment,
truly good man he was very Melancholy, and was upon the matter disposed to
discover all the Intrigue from the beginning to the end, of which, Sir, you and
your Crew were extremely jealous; nay, in such disorder that at your Newmarket
Sports, you were more concerned for him than a little, but what was to be done
in this Case, I must say that for you, by your Command, word was sent to
Coleman to be of good cheer, a way would be found to secure Godfr^y well
enough, and since you were resolved not to leave Coleman whatever it cost you,
therefore he was bid not to be afraid, this I say was the Orvietan that Coleman
was to make use of against that Melancholy, that had so strangely as well as
strongly possessed him; for you know that he was to be continued right to damn
the Plot, and therefore care was taken to murder Godfrey, to prevent his
telling Tales of what Coleman had said to him upon the first Discovery. Godfrey
being murdered, and Notice being given to Coleman, he was then at ease, and
rejoiced over the Creature in a plentiful-way, and your Conspirators took
Courage upon the business; for they had now great Hopes that their secret
Villainy would not be laid open, and by consequence the damned Plot would soon
be at an end: But this base and barbarous Murder of this Justice of the Peace
stuck upon Men's Minds extremely, for they were well satisfied that the Papists
did it, which made some to fear their Turns would be next; and the City did so
highly resent it, that it did confirm the People in the Belief of the Popish
Plot, more than all the things they heard before, so that this Murder did not
at all make for, but against you and your Conspirators.

Truly you were in a sad pickle, here was a lamentable Kettle of Fish upon the
Fire; What must be done in this case, that the Cookery be not exposed to the
next meeting of Parliament? Indeed, you and your Jesuits were against the
meeting of the Parliament, but were zealous to have the Parliament prorogued
till the Spring of the Year, and by that time you hoped the Cloud would be
blown over: And furthermore you judged, that if the Parliament met, they would
be meddling with this Plot: And you were pretty much in the right of it, for
they had reason enough to enquire into the business. But on the other hand,
your Friend the Briber, and Mrs. Remarkable his Spouse, (who by the way was in
her Lifetime as true a Politician as ever pissed) they were for the sitting of
the Parliament, and for very good reason (if you did but know all) that Money
might be raised to pay the Army, which had run you out at Heels extremely: And
your Ally the French King, notwithstanding the Promise of his Purse, since his
Work was done, he did not lend you a lift at this time, though your Interest and
his was so inseparably joined and linked together; but you had some Assurance
that the Parliament would give no Money to maintain, whatever they gave to
disband; so that your Condition was but ill, and what to do you knew not: At
last, old Veracity, with his Jewish Face, thought of an excellent Expedient,
which was, That your old Friend Mr. Thinjaws should do what he could to bring
them into a good Humor, and give them a small Spell, as a Token of a future
Blessing that would fall upon them at the end of the Session: And a Parliament
of your humble Pensioners was held you know where, and so did Lamaz, and there
was a jolly meeting of all the Club of Voters, and an admirable Entertainment
was had for the Rogues, and some Guin^as were distributed, and all was well,
and Advice was taken that the Army should have its due Praise; but old
Grouthead, your Scotch Favorite, he advised the sitting of the Parliament, and
that the Plot it self should be made use of as a Cripple to beg Money withal,
and to beg for a round Sum, he having as religious a regard for the Pensioners
being gratified, as that old Mrs. Remarkable, Spouse to Mr. Thinjaws, should
have a Sum of Money to buy her some reverend Winter-rigging for her self and Fry
of both Sexes; so that, in a word, it was carried for the Parliaments sitting.

The Parliaments meeting being very near, the King your Brother sent for me, to
discourse me at the Prince's Lodgings in Whitehall, who was very zealous to
know of me who it was that maintained me abroad at that rate that I had lived;
but I refused to answer to that Question, but told the King in the presence of
the Prince, That I doubted, notwithstanding all the Efforts that I had made to
preserve him, he would be destroyed by the Popish Party; and since His Majesty
was pleased to make light of it, I told him, that I would if he pleased give
him some Reasons why they had such a Design on foot; to which your Brother
consented; and one Reason I gave, was, because he had made such Promises to
them, and assured them, that he was theirs, and that he was reconciled to the
Chapter of Rome when beyond Sea, as I had seen by his Letters; but the King bid me
say nothing of that: he declared to me, upon the word of a King, that now he
did believe that they had a design to murder him, and owned that he had written
such Letters as I then intimated to him, and withal told me, that if I had come
to him privately, and acquainted him with the Plot, he would of himself have
clashed it; and though I had designed well, yet the discovery of it had created a
Jealousy in the People concerning him. Then I acquainted him that I had seen
his Letters to the Nuns at Ghent, when he borrowed Money of them, for which they
waited several years here in England: in those Letters he did declare to them,
That he would restore their Religion when he came to his Right; and that was
another reason why they would destroy him: And that St. Germain, a French
Jesuit, had a hand in the Murder of Mr. K^lligrew's Man, when he lay upon the
Couch in His Majesty's Cloak. Here the King interrupted me, and commanded me to
take no farther notice of that business, and declared he knew more than I could
tell him in that affair of Killigrew's Man; but he harped much upon the great
Jealousy that the People had of him, and that it was much increased by ill
men, that did labor to possess the Peoples minds against him, and said, that
unless extraordinary care was taken, the Fanatic Party would rebel; and
inveighed very much against the Dissenters, and said, that he thought himself
in as much danger from them as from the Popish Party. And many things passed
betwixt the King your Brother and my self of this nature, and he told me, that
the Parliament was ready to meet, and he did not question but that they would
take upon them the examination of the Plot, and that if I carried it prudently
before them, I should never want a Friend of him; and whereas I had not
acquainted him as yet with the Names of the Great Men concerned, I would then
tell him. But truly, Sir, I with all decency to the Public refused to tell
your Brother any thing more, but told him, the Parliament would have the
Examination of the Plot, and therefore they should have the Names of the great
Lords concerned in it. The King parted from me in a heat, and the Prince
commended me for keeping their Names concealed; and, I suppose, according to
his usual way, he graciously communicated this Discourse to you, for the next
time you met with me you showed all the Lines of your silly Face to be enraged
against me, and gave me some hard words, which I did not well hear.

St. Parliaments day came on, and I well remember what a Sti^ there was at
Portsmouth's lodging that morning, and that Whore had advised my being close
confined, but I went to see how the Jade looked that morning, and to thank her
for the counsel she gave the King, but I would not see her, and there I was
forced to salute her by proxy, and gave her two or three of her right Names,
and eke mine and the Nations Blessing, and returning to my Lodgings, I met with
your good self, and I saw much Guilt in your Face, and you gave me an ill look
or two, and so I fairly got rid of the sweet Face of you, but this I must have
you to remember, that the King your Brother would have given me any thing that
I could have asked, if I would have fained my self sick, and not to have
appeared in Parliament, but that would not take with me, for I was resolved not
to lose two years Labor to comply with him, for I had the public good upon my
Soul, and that God knows was my main design.

The Parliament being met, you know that the old Gentleman made a gracious
Speech to both Houses, and after that he had given some of your Conspirators
reasons for the keeping up of his Army, he then tells them of the Jesuits Plot,
but not a word of yours and Coleman, and said that he left the Jesuits to the
Law, and that he would take as much care to prevent all manner of ill Practices
of those men, and others too, who had been tampering in a high degree with
Foreigners to introduce Popery; by this Sir he brought himself into the Plot,
and so much shall serve for his Speech: After him Roscius enters with his
Knaves Face, and he acquaints the Parliament with the necessity of the
Governments breaking the Law in keeping up the Army, and tells them they must
be contented with it for this time, and not only so, but they must pay for it
too; nay, further, impudently tells them they could not but be well pleased
with it into the bargain: I wonder that ever a King would sit on a Throne with
Patience, to hear the Logger-head make some fulsome nonsensical Speech as that
was; nay, if you had but observed with what a shitten Countenance he brought in
a poor mauled damned Plot to beg money withal, and oh! with what humble
Grimmaces, he addressed the House of Commons, as if the Villain had lain under
the Guilt of a Thousand Burglaries; but the House of Commons finding the Note
extremely changed from what it was at their last parting, they immedia^ely fell
upon that part of the King's Speech that related to the Popish Plot; and mighty
angry they were at the violating the Law, and misusing the Money given for the
disbanding of the same.

Well, both Houses set to it with all diligence, and looked into the Plot, that
they might find out all the Authors of the Nations Misery and Ruin; and in
order to find out the bottom of this Hellish Conspiracy, they appointed
Committees to inspect, and find out, and enquire into the Murder of Sir
Edmund-Bury Godfrey, and Addresses from both Houses were almost every day
voted, for the banishing of the Papists, or to have the Papers relating to the
Popish Plot delivered to them to examine, and to have the Militia of London and
Middlesex raised, and Pardons for the Witnesses. And to all Human Reason you
and your Rascally Crew appeared to be but in a nasty condition. And truly the
Plot took so much of the Parliaments time, that there was scarce leisure to
make one motion for a Supply, insomuch that Portsmouth and her Servant Nell
talked of retrenching their Expenses; And what was the matter? The Whores saw
that the Parliament ^ound that all Care was little enough to discover what had
been acted by your Villains, and to come at the bottom to know who they were,
and then to take care for further preservation. Lord, what Change was here! the
two Houses had no longer hard Thoughts of the Fanatics, but the Papists was
their only Trouble.

Come Sir, wipe that sweaty Face of yours, and don't cry, here is a word of
Comfort for you, read on a little. Were the Houses of Parliament so diligent?
Yes, they were. What, then old Rowly was too hard for them; for,
notwithstanding the daily Applications of many worthy persons of both Houses,
he would not let your Saints lose one Inch of his Affections to them; for the
Villains were so powerful and prevalent at Court, that diverse of the chiefest
Papers were mislaid, and whatever was privately done in either House, by their
secret Committees, for the discovery of the Plot, false Brethren got in amongst
them and gave Intelligence, amongst whom was a squint-eyed Friend of yours, the
Rogue is not yet hanged, but the Gallows has groaned for him many a Year; if
you will not believe me, you may ask my Lady Jefferies. And, to give you and
your Rogues your due, you concealed every thing you could get concealed; such
was your diligence; but yet as much as you did conceal, there was enough left
to show the World that there was a Plot, and a villainous one, and that you were
at the head of it, in order to root up the Protestant Religion, and destroy the
Government, which obliged the House to send for the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs
privately, who signed Warrants for the apprehending several Popish Lords, and
committed them to several Prisons about the Town. And another Gentleman being
under consideration, which at last came to an Accusation and an Impeachment,
for that it was found out by his Letters, the Intrigues he held with your Ally
for Money to procure a Peace, and deceive the Parliament; which Letters were
preserved and brought into the House by the procurement of a worthy Gentleman,
since a Peer of the Realm, who had wisely kept them against a rainy day; upon
which many of the open case-harden'd Rogues began to trudge beyond the Seas,
and some of your Plotters found it too hot for England to hold them; for the
Murder of Justice Godfrey stuck upon our Stomachs, without the least prospect
of being digested; and several of his Murderers did travel, for fear of being
called to an account for that bloody piece of Villainy, or of being in the Plot
to murder the King. And to give you your due, you did bestir your self; and
that the Journeys of these your Villains might be more easy, you had a couple
of good-natured Rogues, that made no Bones to oblige you with a cast of their
Office, that these Vermin might not be stopped in their way, by which they would
have endangered themselves and you too, and lost their Cause, in which they had
been true Drudges to your Brother and your self. You did also take more than
special care for the securing a jolly number of Jesuits, who were blessed with
the same Fortune, by the Assistance of your aforesaid Hell hounds, to get over
the Herring pond. I commend the Diligence of the English Gentlemen of the House
of Commons, but the Sons of Zerviah were too many for them, for the Ministry at
that time of the day, to serve you, were willing to help their Brethren in
Iniquity; and as the Parliament were ready to detect the black piece of Villainy
you and these Rogues were engaged in, the Court and the Conspirators were as
diligent to conceal, if not, on the contrary, far to outdo them in supplanting
the Discovery. Truly, to give the House of Lords their due, they acted with as
much Prudence as the Commons; they appointed a secret Committee, consisting of
five or six Lords, and by this Committee, whilst it was a secret one, and
whilst they kept their Examinations private, they did discover your sweet self
(God bless you) and the Queen-Dowager to be in the bottom of the Design: And
the Duke of Buckingham having for some considerable time had a Scheme of the
Conspiracy from my self, he well understood how to manage the Discovery to a
Hairs breadth, and he certainly did it with admirable dexterity, and committed
all men of whom there was the least suspicion, by which method several things
were discovered to that Committee, which would otherwise never have come to
light, and especially about the Murder of Godfrey: This, Sir, struck a mighty
Terror into the Hearts of several of your Vermin, that made them both fear and
tremble; and some of them, whose Hearts God had touched, (as you say in your
reverend Letter from Rochester) began to think of discovering your wicked
Designs against the King your Brother and our Religion, Laws, and Liberties,
and the Murder of that innocent Magistrate*

What News next? I think it is a Question may be asked without your making that
sour Face; you will turn my Stomach presently, if you do not accept of this
Goodwill of mine with a more cheerful Countenance; therefore, without the
Ceremony of making that Fridays Mouth, let us go on, and let me observe to you,
that the Nation was in a great confusion, and expected nothing less, but that
you and your Cutthroats would begin your Church-work of converting this Nation
by a Baptism of Blood, and this great City by a Baptism of Fire; and that we
might be preserved as well from the one as the other, the Parliament resolved
to have the Nation in a posture of defense, and to raise the Militia throughout
the Kingdom, and therefore prepared a Bill for that purpose, for the Militia to
be in Arms for so many days, which Bill passed both Houses without difficulty;
but you and your Hell-born Crew seeing this great Zeal and sweet Harmony
between both Houses, and that they were resolved as well to defend the Nation
as to ^ecure us from farther Mischief, you, by the Advice of your Counselors,
who had the Impudence to stay behind, made use of this Stratagem to divide your
Brother from the Houses, and put a stop to the passing the Bill, for you were
filled with Horror of the Militia's being raised, lest your Rogues should be
put out of their Traces, and be a means to frustrate all your designs. After
the Parliament was risen, you possessed your Brother with the danger of the
Bill, and whatever he did, he should not pass it, for it was too great a Trust
to be reposed in the People, and that it would be of a sad consequence to
himself. No, Sir, you were out, the true danger would have been yours, and not
the King's; and your Brother knew it well enough, and he therefore was as
willing to deny the passing the Bill as you and your Rogues were to have him.
The Bill being rejected, your Brother was troubled at the Parliaments resenting
the refusal of the passing so necessary a Bill; then he began to wheedle with
the Parliament, and declared, that he was ready to assent to any Bill that he
should have tendered to him for the security of the Kingdom by the Militia; so
that the whole power of calling or not calling, continuing or not continuing
them together, during the time limited, was in him, and that he might be the
sole Judge of the public Security: So we thanked him for nothing, and the
business fell.

Come on then; here was by this time a Mess of sad Tidings, for here a second
Witness appears, and brings in a more full Discovery of Godfrey's Murder; this
Witness was your old Friend Mr. Bedloe, who was employed, or was at least privy
to the Intrigue, and had been greatly employed to carry on the Plot beyond the
Seas, by the Priests and Jesuits; so that now your dear Friend's Testimony was
in a most unexpected manner corroborated and confirmed. Upon his coming in, you
and your Crew were much out of countenance and cast down, but it was not for
your Party to stand still, and therefore to work you go, and endeavor to
discourage him, and cry down his Evidence, and to baffle him upon his Knowledge
of the Rooms in Somerset House, where the murdered person lay, but in good
truth it did you no manner of Service, for the Parliament was then sitting, and
the secret Committee of Peers had got his Examination, so that by Bedloe's
fresh Evidence all but your Conspirators and your self were well pleased: And
he having been now thoroughly examined, both as to the Murder and Plot, made
such Discoveries, that the two Houses began to look about them with more
diligence and caution than ever, in regard it plainly appeared that you, as
well as the Jesuits, were at the bottom of all this Villainy, or the Wheel
within the Wheel, which some of your Protestant Rogues were not privy to.

Well, here you have an account of the Discovery; Prance confesses the
Murder, Dugd^le comes in, and Jennison, and Smith, and many others, I shall
speak of them in their proper places. Methinks you droop, take a Glass of true
Nants, and give Mrs. Pugg another, if it be not good for her Milk, it may be
good for her Water, and so it is all one; bring the Sucking bottle to the little
Welsh Cub, that we may have no noise, for if he does, I will call for Will.
Fuller, your Puggs Page of Honor, to jerk the young K^ave if he be not quiet,
for he is as intimately acquainted with his true Mother, if the Gentleman says
the Truth or can speak Truth, as your sweet self. I suppose he was one of your
Privy-Councellors once at St. Germain's, and may pretend to have Authority in
that case. But I must stick to my point, and come to a second thing I promised,
and that is, to show the reason of this Discovery.

2. Was there such a Design on foot, to destroy the King, extirpate the
Protestant Religion, and subvert the Government, and ought not this to be
discovered? What if the Queen-Dowager were in it, and you and the Court-Whores,
and the Court pimps, and Court-Bawds, and some of the Ministers of State and
Justice, and your villainous Council at St James's, must they not be detected?
Were we to be afraid to speak the Truth? No, Sir, it was not high time to speak
Truth: Yes, Sir, it was high time, and more than high time. But yet your
Brother, good man, to save you and your party, did in the month of November,
1678, offer me at Secretary Coventry's Apartment, the Bishopric of Chichester,
and also promised me the Favor of advancing me, if I would desist this
Enterprise, as he called the discovery of the Popish Plot, assuring me, that it
would not be for his Service, because of the heat it would put the people into;
and further told me, That the Parliament would forsake me, and not do any thing
for me, and if I had a Thought of complying with him, I should meet him at the
Prince's Lodgings; but I went to the Prince, and told him what the King had
said, who when he heard me give him an account of what the King had offered me,
and upon what terms, The poor man, said the Prince, does court his own Ruin
the most of any man I know: And the Prince advised me not to meddle nor make
with any thing of that Nature; for said the Prince either he will cheat or
expose you, or if he be real, there is an old Wife in the case, who will be set
on you to draw you off from the good work you have began, or perhaps to do that
which is worse, and so I refused that offer; and let me tell you farther, that
upon the discovery of the Plot, several Papers were found at the House of one
Jolliff a Tailor: I did observe that CHARLES I. of Blessed Memory, had
commissionated several of the Irish to Rise, and withal I saw the Instructions
that were given to them, to give the English no quarter; and I saw a Letter of
your Fathers to the Bishop of Casal, as near as I can remember, wherein he
promised his Catholic Subjects, that if he were driven through the necessity
of Affairs to cause a Cessation of Arms, it should not be for the Disadvantage
of his Irish Catholic Subjects, but to let them have a little time to breath,
so that they might be the better able to serve him and themselves against the
Factious English there, (if there should be any remaining amongst them) all
which were carried to White Hall, and what became of them I know not: I saw
also in those Papers, found as aforesaid at the House of the said Jollife,
several Passes given to those of the Rebels, that fled out of Ireland upon the
reducing of that Country, and notwithstanding they had shed much Protestant
Blood, they were by your Brother and you recommended to several Ministers of
the Court of Spain, and several other Princes of the Romish Religion, as
persons that had served your Father in reducing their Country to the Obedience
of the Catholic Church, and that had contributed much to the destroying of the
English Heretics, that had planted themselves in that Kingdom.

Give me leave to observe farther to you, that the Jesuits did tell me, that
the coming over of the Princess Henrietta, was in order to make way, for
restoring the Catholic Religion here in England, and that the Breach of the
peace with the Dutch was by you and her contrived, and by the late King
consented to, in order to reduce those States to the Catholic Faith, and that
it was thought fit to begin the Exercise of the Romish Religion in Ireland, and
to grant a general Toleration here, in order to which sixteen hundred Priests
of all orders were sent over from diverse Nations, and that the most of 'em were
kept here on a maintenance for secret Service, and others by your self in half
Pay, as disbanded Officers, but this being all defeated by Parliament, by your
Brothers Assent, they were much irritated against the King your Brother, and so
was your sweet self; and furthermore the Jesuits acquainted me, that the King
your Brother had dispatched an Envoy to the King of Poland, to engage him in
the Catholic League; for at that time the Catholic Princes as he said, were
resolved to extirpate the Protestant Religion, and that the French King, and
your Brother, and your self, were Heads of this League, which League they said
your Brother had not carefully kept, and observed, but had given way to his
impertinent Parliaments; but that they might not hinder this good Design, the
French King had agreed to your Request of 300000 l. per Ann. for 3 years, if by
any means your Brother might be dispatched out of the way, there being no
manner of trust to be put in him, and that he was not only unfaithful in all
his Promises, and Oaths, made to them the said Jesuits, and Catholics, but was
an Apostate from the Catholic Religion, and therefore not to be endured any
longer: This Negotiation of the money Part of the Conspiracy, and killing your
Brother was carried on by the Lord Powy's, and the late Earl of Berkshire, and
Coleman, and St. Germain the Jesuit, by, and with the advice of the Jesuits,
and those of your Council at St. James's, and your good worthy self: It will
not be inconvenient to put you in mind, that your Brother was a mortal Hater of
the Protestant Religion, and the way of Governments by Parliaments; for do but
observe a Letter of his to the French King bearing date in June 1676. in which
he says to this Effect.

That if he could be assured of a Pension that might continue, he should not
continue that way of governing, viz. by frequent Parliaments, which at the best
was but a clamorous Rabble, that took upon them to direct Kings, but as he was
resolved to be like his Neighbors in Riches and Grandeur, so he was resolved
to be like them in Religion too: This was the Effect and Substance of that
Letter that was showed to me by John Keins, and Basil Langworth; but said
Keins, the French King was too old to be cullied out of his Money, by a man that
was so uncertain: All these things I communicated to the King your Brother in
private, in the Princes Lodging in White Hall, who gave me Thanks for not
communicating these Things to the Parliament, and told me that he was now fully
convinced of the Reasons and Grounds the Papists had of taking away his Life;
and the Prince said, I pray God continue your Majesty on that Opinion, for now
you may see they are a ^ort of people, that are not to be endured in a civil
Government: Good God, said the King your Brother, is this the kindness that is
to be showed me for all the favors that I have showed that people? At which
his Majesty wept; the Prince then bid me withdraw, and sent for me the next
day, and conjured me not to communicate one word of the Discourse I had with
the King; for, says he, it will be neither safe for the King, nor you, nor any
of us, if this should be reported: And also his Highness the Prince had often
enjoined, and engaged me, that when I met with any thing that might reflect
upon the King to be sparing there, because the Publication of those things
might tend to alienate the King's Heart from the frequent use of Parliaments,
without which, the Kingdom could never rid it self from the apparent Danger of
Popery: But when the Prince saw how the Parliaments, and the whole Nation were
treated by him, and your self, and villainous Party, he heartily repented of his
Injunction laid on me, and so did I of my Promise made to him; there were three
great Reasons why it was necessary that this Plot should at that time be
discovered: 1. That the Life of the King your Brother might be preserved, if he
had so pleased. 2. To show to the World what a sort of men you herded withal,
and what we were to expect from you, when ever you should come to the Crown. 3.
To prevent, i^ possible, your coming to the Crown, since you were in your own
Nature such an Enemy of our Religion and Government. 4. For the Discharge of my
Conscience to God and my Country, and that such Malefactors might be brought to
public Justice.

(1.) That the Life of your Brother might have been preserved, if his Majesty
had been so pleased; in order to this, it was highly necessary, that the
Kingdom should be awakened to provide in all legal and due ways, for the
Protection of the person of the King your Brother; you may if you will,
remember that you had brought the Nation into such a Lethargick State and
Condition, as did not only amaze those that loved it, but encouraged also those
that hated it; they were much out who thought that your villainous Crew had
laid their Designs aside, when your Brother sent out a sham Proclamation
against Priests and Jesuits, or when the Pensioners had given Popery a broad
side in the House of Commons, in order to make their Measures come in the more
freely, or when the last Bill passed in the year 1673, though that Bill did
them no manner of Service in the World, but hurt: Alas good Sir, you and your
Villains, by these sleepy proceedings of the then Parliament, were pricked on
to be the more industrious in the pursuit of your wicked Designs, you and your
Accomplices had so stated your Case, that there could be no retreat; and rather
than you would be deseated of your Hopes, you and your Villains were resolved
to pawn your Lives and Fortunes, and your all, upon your great Adventure; for
you had labored too long in the Design, which you had brought to bear so well,
to lose in a moment the Fruits of Seven, Eight or Ten years Toils and
Endeavors; for suppose, Sir, the Protestant Party should have been so good
natured, as to have forgiven you and your Accomplices, yet you could not have
relied upon their mercy, because you had proceeded so far in this Conspiracy,
and therefore you being well fraught with such a Cargo of Guilt, what could be
expected from you, but your being desperate to the last degree? And therefore,
since you knew that not Laurel, but Hemp was the reward of Treason, your Party
were resolved not to be dismayed at the Horror of your Treasons, but were
rather inflamed to revenge your selves upon the Parliament, that sometimes
barked against Popery, and Arbitrary Power; you knew very well what you and
your Villains had deserved, and rather than ^amely to suffer the public
Justice of the Nation, you were resolved not to be without the Aid and
Assistance of a Foreign Power, and every man that was not a Stranger to
Conversation, could not but hear what large Contributions were provided for you
in all Popish Countries, upon which you and your party were notoriously
impudent, which was no sign of your Innocence, but of your Villainy, and the
Assurance you had of completing the Nations R^ine, and though they had brought
the King your Brother to that State, that he would not believe, if any
Malecontent should discover your Designs, either against him, or the
Government, both in Church and State; yet there was none but in that Day,
before any discovery was made, saw the Design in general, and that your Brother
as well as you was engaged in it, and because he had forseited his Credit with
you and your Accomplices, your Popish Party thought him not ^it to live, and
therefore since the Case wa^ so, it was then necessary that the Government
should not only disengage him from that wicked Enterprise, and that he might
not perish; it was necessary that your Designs against him in particular should
also be detected.

(2.) Another Reason of this discovery, was, to show to the world what sort of
Men they were with whom you herded, and what we were to expect from you, when
ever you came to the Crown; for you that was a Traitor to the Kingdom by those
cursed Designs of yours, when you was a Subject, would of Consequence be a
Tyrant, whenever you mounted the Throne; many that judged you a bigoted
Papist, did not conclude you a Traitor, till your designs were discovered, and
then they could expect nothing less of you, than an Arbitrary and Dispotick
Reign, when you should come to wear the Crown; hence it was, that upon the
discovery of the Popish Plot, that the Parliament voted that your being a
Papist, and the Hopes you gave the Popish Party of coming such to the Crown,
had encouraged them in this wicked Conspiracy, and though in Civility to your
Brother, they did not impeach you for your Treasons, yet they thought it
necessary to prevent your coming by a Bill of Exclusion; but on the contrary
had not your Designs been discovered, the Nation must have sunk by your
Traiterous Designs, and have been ruined without any impossibility of recovery,
but though the discovery had not its desired Effect, yet it did so much affect
you, that when you invaded the Throne by the murder of your Brother, that you
could not make that considerable Progress in your Work, for then you saw
plainly, you had received a deadly wound, of which you could by no means be
cured, for the Nation saw who they were you had espoused, and therefore they
were aware both of you and them, and made your own Conspiracy to be a Plague to
you.

Obj. But you may say, how can this be a good Ground or Reason for the
discovery of such a design? When there was but few that believed it, and that
the King your Brother laughed at the Plot, as a matter wholly Fabulo^s, and that
the Parliaments were but a parcel of Factious Men; and therefore what could the
Nation judge of those Men that I espoused, since the matter of Fact was false,
with which they stood charged? To this I answer,

1. It is well known that your Brother laughed at the Plot, and would have made
some to have believed that it was Fabulous, but he well knew that he was
engaged in every part of it, but that of his own Life, and that he was too
conscious to himself, he had disobliged you and your party by being so loose
and negligent in the performance of those promises he had made to you and your
Party; and to get a sum of Money from the Paliament, he would let the
Parliament worry your Friends; nay, rather than go without it, he would himself
give your Cause a gentle Stab; wit^ess his passing the Test Bill in the year
1673, and refusing to sign Coleman's Declaration in the ^^rs 1674, 1675, and
1676. But suppose that he did laugh at the Plot, he has laughed at the
Sacrament of the Altar, and would be witty upon the Superstition of the Church
of Rome; yet at that very time he was a Papist, and had received the Sacrament
of the Church of Rome; nay, he was many times profanely witty upon the Gospel
it self, and would speak very slightly of Religion; you know he was a witty
man, and could make a Jest of any thing in the World: But who shall we believe,
Charles Stuart or Charles King of England? Shall we take notice of what he said
in his private Capacity before what he said in his public Capacity? I tell
you, Sir, I must, and so must any man in the World, that has but a grain of
Sense, take that to be his, that he spoke in his public Capacity; and this
well considered, will satisfy any thinking man.

Ans. 2. I pray observe your Brother's Proclamation October. 30, 1678, where he
called your Conspiracy a Bloody and Traiterous Design of Popish Recusants (of
which, Sir, you were the Head) against his Person and Government, and the
Protestant Religion. Again, in his Proclamation of November the 20th 1678, did
he not declare, That the Popish Priests and Jesuits lurking within the Realm
had contrived and set on foot diverse traiterous Plots and Designs against his
Person and Government and the Protestant Religion by Law established? Again
observe, Sir, his Proclamation for a Fast, March the 28th, 1679, where he
declared, That through the impious and malicious Conspiracy of the Popish
Party, there was a Plot not only intended to the Destruction of his Royal
Person, but the total Subversion of the Government, and of the true Protestant
Religion within the Realm by Law established.

Obj. There might be a Conspiracy against the Religion and Government of
England, but not against the King's Person.

Ans. That is a Contradiction in plain terms, for how could the Religion of a
Nation and the Government be subverted, but by the destruction of its Head? See
what my Lord Chancellor says in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament Mar.
6. 1678/9, wherein he assures both Houses, That His Majesty's Royal Person has
been in danger by a Conspiracy against his sacred Life, maliciously contrived
and industriously carried on by the Seminary Priests and Jesuits, and their
Adherents, who thought themselves under some Obligation of Conscience to effect
it, and having vowed the Subversion of the true Religion amongst us, found no
way so likely to compass it, as to wound us in the Head, and kill the Defender
of the Faith. Can any one that believed the King your Brother to be a
Protestant think that a number of Men should conspire against his Religion, and
not destroy his person that was a Defender of it? And on the other hand, those
who knew him or judged him a Papist, had incurred the Displeasure of that
Party, by his notorious Miscarriage to them in his many breaches of Word and
Royal Promise; as I have mentioned before.

Ans. 3. to the main Objection, That few believed the Popish Plot: Which is as
false as any thing can be true, for the Plot was believed, as I shall show in
its proper place: And as for the Parliaments being a number of factious Men, it
was your usual Dialect, and we know what Love you had for Parliaments;
therefore what you say in that case, you may wipe your S^out and hold your
Tongue, for what you or your Party says against them passes for nothing.

So that I may again say, that there was a necessity of discovering of that
Plot, in order to show to the whole Nation what those men were with whom you
herded and were engaged, in order to our destruction; and I insist the more
upon it, because of the great Loyalty to which they pretended, and for which
they were countenanced by your Brother and you, in opposition to all Law and
Reason, whilst other faithful men, with their Families, were left to perish for
want of Bread, who had served your Father, your Brother, and you, without the
least recompense for their Service; and that the Nation might be undeceived in
that respect as well as in others, that they might see they were no
Changelings, but were full of the same Devil their Forefathers had; and if they
did conceal him, it was for want of an Opportunity, and they were about to show
what they would be at, but I was beforehand with them, and then the Nation was
fully satisfied concerning their Loyalty. What! do you grin and show your
Teeth? I am sure you cannot bite no more than your dead Dog Mumper; I pray let
us have your Thought for once; I warrant you, you have some impertinent
Question to ask; it may be you still insist upon being satisfied, why, if it
were so necessary to have it known that your Crew were not men of that Loyalty
they pretended, why then were not the Witnesses better received by the King
your Brother, who the last moment of his Life was satisfied of the Innocence of
the Roman Catholics? Truly, Sir, there were several reasons why the King your
Brother, it may be, might not receive the witnesses so well, and believe them
as he ought to have done; 1. Because he was engaged in the whole Conspiracy of
introducing Popery and Slavery, but was not privy to that part which related to
his own Life: 2. Your Brother loved to appear a Prince of Mercy and Clemency,
though he had not one dram of those Princely Virtues, but what his mere Cowardice
compelled him to: 3. The Nature of the Evidence given: 4. The Interest of the
Conspirators. These you shall have in due time, and not before, though you cry
your Eyes out.

(3) Reason, why it was necessary that your Conspiracy should be discovered,
was, to prevent your coming to the Crown; for, certainly it could be neither
safe nor proper to set a Popish Head over a Protestart Interest, especially
since you had made so many Attempts upon the Protestant Religion, to destroy
it, and in order, to its destruction made such an Alliance with France, as I
have at large already made out, in which I think you are as fully exposed as
your Heart and Soul can wish; and therefore, Sir, I think you no^ your Party
can never blame those Parliaments, that intended and attempted your Exclusion,
when you was Duke of York.

(4) That I might discharge a good Conscience, and that such Malefactors might
be brought to public Justice. It is well known, Sir, that the King your
Brother was a Favourer of the Popish Interest, as being the greatest Favorers
of Monarchy, and he was pleased himself to offer to reconcile me to that Party,
and told me, That if I would engage, upon the word of a Minister, not to bear
any Testimony against those I had accused before the Council, but would be
ruled by him, I should have Ten thousand pounds to buy me an Annuity; and if I
would, I should retire to any College in either University, and live there
quietly; urging to me, that a Parliament would never gratify me, and that it
was in his power only to show me Favor, and therefore advised me to follow his
Directions, and if I did, it would be impossible for me to miscarry. To this I
thus replied, I humbly thank your Majesty for your Grace and Favor, and I
should willingly accept of your Royal Offer, were it not the highest Breach of
Trust reposed in me by your Commons in this Parliament; besides, Sir, said I,
your Nobles in the House of Peers must, and so will all Mankind, judge me the
worst of Men, if I should so basely desert my Cause: It is plain that the
Popish Party have a Design against your Majesty's Life, and all our Lives,
Liberties, and Religion, and therefore, by the Grace of God, I will stand by
the Cause to the uttermost of my power, to the last minute of my Life. I bless
God for the Grace of Perseverance; I have discharged a good Conscience, and
though I was left by your Brother, and persecuted by you, yet your Villains were
some of them brought to public Justice, and made Examples for their many
notorious Treasons against the Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

7. I now come to show you what Evidence there was to prove this Conspiracy
that you were engaged in for the destruction of the Person of the King, and for
the bringing in of Popery and A^bitrary Power. Your Popish Traitors were so
impudent in their ways, that there was no manner of difficulty of finding Proof
against them, had but your Brother and you stood Neuters, but you were both
equally engaged with Lewis the French King, to bring in Popery and Slavery. But
that it may appear to all the World, that the Popish Plot was not short of
being duly proved, but on the contrary it was made so plain and evident, that
the Lords and Commons of England did receive the Proofs, and the Evidence upon
no terms could be contradicted; therefore now I shall produce the Evidence of
the Guilt of those who were accused to be concerned in the same.

1. The constant bloody Principles of the Church of Rome was a Testimony
sufficient to have convicted them of being guilty of such a horrid Conspiracy;
for do but remember how that Apostatical Synagogue of Satan will not bear with
any Kingdom, Commonwealth, or Community of Men that differs from them in
Matters of Religion, and declares against them as Antichristian and Idolaters,
but those who so declare are immediately pronounced Heretics, and de jure they
are excommunicated as such, according to the Council of Lateran, in the time of
Pope Innocent the third; and by an Edict of Pope Paul the fourth in the Year of
our Lord 1558; and if that be not sufficient, you may remember that we are in
the Bulla Coena Domini, which your Holy Father at Rome causes to be read every
Maunday Thursday, and there we are solemnly cursed; and thereupon, Sir, your
bloody Party and your self, and all other Papists living under the Dominions of
Protestant Princes, were not only discharged from all Allegiance to Protestant
Princes, but all of you were, and still are, bound by the strictest Bond of
Conscience, upon pain of being damned, to depose such Heretical Princes: And
Urban the third has taught you and them, that they are so far from being
guilty of Murder, that they are obliged to kill any who stand excommunicate,
and are bound to extirpate Heretics, as they would be esteemed Christians
themselves. Nay further, do but observe the Bull of Clement the tenth, wherein
you may, if you please, see plainly, that it is a Crime of the deepest dye for
a Roman Catholic to be loyal to a Protestant Prince; nay, such are publicly
cursed in the view of the World: so that it is apparent that no Protestant
Government can be safe where such a number of Men have a Being, and are in any
manner countenanced. Again, Bellarmin, your great Cardinal, tells you in words
at length, and is so impudently plain, that a man of an Irish Understanding may
know his meaning, his words are these; Heretics are to be destroyed Root and
Branch, if it can possibly be done; but if it appears that the Catholics are
so few, that they cannot conveniently with their own safety attempt such a
thing, then in such a case it is best to be quiet. (de Laicis, Lib. 3, Ep. 22.)
Lest upon opposition made by Heretics, the Catholics should be worsted. And
from hence Bannes, another of the Supporters of your murdering principles, has
no other Apology to make for the English Papists, why they do not forcibly rise
up against a King and his Subjects pro^essing the Protestant Religion, but that
they are not powerful enough for such an Undertaking, and therefore the Attempt
would be to their own prejudice and damage: So that ever since the English
Nation was blessed with the enjoyment of your happy return to England, the whole
Protestant Party only held their Lives at your Courtesy, and the Courtesy of
your Cutthroat Papists, till you were in a condition by numbers and strength
to destroy and extirpate them. I cannot, by this time, but admire your
good-natured Bloodhounds, that did for seventeen Years together forbear to
destroy us; it was because that one of our Lives would have cost three of
yours. You may remember, Sir, that in the Year 1678, you had got at several
times, from 1674 to that Year, about 20000 Men that were able to draw the
Sword, of your own Religion, to reside in and about London, who were under your
pay, to rise as soon as the word was given, which word was the Death of your
Brother the King; they being Officer'd with your Popish Crew, were to have
joined with your Army, that was encamped at Ho^nslow-Heath; and in order to
this, the French King had promised you to land an Army in Ireland, and another
in England, at the same time when you were resolved to push for it, and then we
should have tasted of the Good nature of your Popish Crew, as our Friends in
Ireland did in your Father's Reign. It is to be observed, that you wanting
numbers at home, and knowing that 20000 men were not sufficient to do the
mighty Work upon your hands, which was the extirpation of Heretics, and the
ruin of the Protestant Party, but wanting a back for your edge, you therefore
applied your self to France, for his Aid and Assistance, which you had obtained
sooner, had not that bloody Monster been engaged in a villainous War with his
Neighbors; but as soon as he had made a peace with them, then you were resolved
upon the aforesaid mighty Work, but by that time your Designs were discovered,
and the French King was obliged for that time to change his measures; and so
were all the Popish Princes of Christendom.

Your villainous party of the Synagogue of Rome did at that time judge it
convenient to draw in their Horns, and conceal these foregoing principles, or
suffer them for a season to lie dormant by them: Yet, to give you your due, you
never suffered us to be any considerable time without some Testimony of your
Good Will to us, to show us how ready you and your Cutthroats were to do th^^e
meritorious Offices of converting us with a Baptism of Blood, and of Fire: But
God, I hope, will keep this Land from the one, and London from the other.

2. This brings me to the villainous Practices of your Church and your Party in
all Ages, which are living Testimonies against your villainous Crew to this day.
I pray call to mind the vast numbers of Christians that have been butchered by
the Roman Inquisition, of which it is reported that Pope Paul the fourth should
say, That the Authority of the Sea of Rome depended upon it, and that it was
settled in Spain by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, not that which came down
from Heaven, but that which was sent to Rome in a Cloak-bag. Remember what
infinite slaughters were committed upon the Servants of Christ, by the Crusades
and Holy Wars. Authentic Authors tell us, That in France alone Ten hundred
thousand Persons were slain in the persecution against the Waldenses, and upon
no other occasion, but their dissenting from the Church of Rome. What think you
of the Parisian Massacre, by which in a few days there were murdered above
Forty thousand persons, for no other reason, but because the Church of Rome had
adjudg'd 'em Heretics? I could give you ^ thousand Instances of their Attempts
abroad, but my point is to put you i^ mind of their Attempts here at home: I
pray call to mind, that upon the Reformation of Religion, in the time of King
Edward the sixth, how many Rebellions were raised against the King and the then
Government, at the instigation of the Priests and Friars. It would not be amiss
for you to read at your leisure the Chronicles of England, that testify the
same; the number of the Rebels may be judged by the account we have of those
that were slain, and those that were taken Prisoners at some of the Defeats
that were given unto them: Of those that did rise in Devonshire and Cornwall,
about Five thousand were slain and taken Prisoners; and in the R^bellion in
Norfolk and Suffolk, about Five thousand were slain that were in Rebellion in
those Counties, besides those who were taken Prisoners; and the Rebellion in
Yorkshire, in which many were destroyed: After the death of King Edward the
sixth, you may remember that Queen Mary mounted the Throne, though some say that
she was in her own nature merciful, yet her Religion obliged her to those
Cruelties, which left an indeleble stain upon her Memory: For her sake, as well
as for your own, the Commons of England endeavored to exclude you. We remember
also, that though her Reign was but short, yet, like yours, it was very bloody;
for in the campass of three or four Years there perished in the Flames near
Three hundred; and as many, if no^ more, perished in Prison through Torment and
Famine, and all barely upon the score Religion. Upon her Death, and upon the
accession of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, Religion was again reformed, and
notwithstanding the hard usage she had met withal from the Popish Party, and
the Cruelty that had been used upon the poor Protestants, she not only buried
all resentments, but was willing to suffer the Papists to live quietly, both in
the enjoyment of their Estates, and in the private exercise of their Religion.
Surely you then cannot, but with the greatest Horror, consider by how many ways
the P^pists attempted to destroy her Person, and overthrow the Government, by
Assassinations, Conspiracies, Rebellions at home, and Invasions from abroad: In
pursuance to their bloody Designs, Pius the Fifth did not only excommunicate
and damn her and all her Protestant Subjects, but likewise cursed all the
Papists that should give any Obedience to her or her Laws; the whole Bull
proceeded upon her being a Heretic: and the said Pius, in a most holy and
reverend manner, deprived her of all her Dominions and Dignities, and absolved
all her Subjects from any Obligation of Allegiance, and included them under the
same Curse (though Papists) that should yield any subjection to her. And have not
your villainous Crew exemplified this Doctrine by their Practices, obeying the
Commands of their Roman High Priest, for I may say the Treasons against that
great Queen were more in number than the Years of her Reign, but through the
Goodness of God all their wicked Designs and Purposes were defeated, and she
died in peace, much lamented by all her Protestant Subjects. King James, your
Royal Scotch Grandfather, succeeded her, the same course they took with him;
Parsons, that impudent Bastard, endeavored by a Book, under the counterfeit
name of Doleman, by the Approbation of Cardinal Allen and Sir Francis
Inglefield, to disprove his Title to the Crown, but he being, in despite of
all the Contrivances of the Papal Vermin, established on the Throne, they
showed the First fruits of their Loyalty to him; they welcomed him with a
Conspiracy contrived by Watson and Clark, two secular priests, but wheedled
into that Contrivance by the Jesuits; but this scribbling Conspiracy of theirs
failing, the Jesuits, who were unwearied Enemies to the peace of Mankind, and
are so still, they, I say, commenced another Plot, and that was one that was to
all intents and purposes an evident demonstration of their Principles, and a
Testimony of their Good Will to the Protestant Interest in England; therefore,
that they might do all their business at once, they attempted the blowing up of
the King, Lords, and Commons, and were quickened in this Design in two Breves
from your Roman Grandsire; but you know, they were disappointed in that piece
of Villainy, the greatness of which awakened the Kingdom to provide against that
Party of Men by many wholesome Laws, made in the Reign of the said King James,
your said Grandfather: And though the whole World stood amazed at the blackness
of this Conspiracy, and many of the Papists in a most hypocritical manner
expressed their detestation of the same, and of the Principles that produced
it, (but it was indeed because it wanted the success they desired) yet the Pope
and Court of Rome took all imaginable care to have the Traitors magnified and
honored, especially Gar^et, the Provincial of the Jesuits who, though he
confessed under his own Hand, that he died for Treason, yet his Name was
inserted in the Book of their Villainous Martyrs, and precious Relics made of
his Bones, and his miraculous Picture kept at St. Omer's, and a glorious
Picture of his set over their Altars: And two other Principal Jesuits, that
escaped the Halter, were by the then Pope cares^ed with Preserments at Rome.
And when upon this occasion the Oath of Allegiance was enacted, to be imposed
upon the Subjects of your said Grandfather, Pope Paul the Fifth published
several Bulls against the said Oath, and several of the Rom^sh Communion wrote
against it, as Becanus and B^llarmin, etc. Another Instance of their villainous
practices was against your Father, who, though he had been a Bosom friend of
theirs, yet he was not thought sit to live; as you may see in Hab^r^field's
Discovery to Sir William Boswell, then your Father's Ambassador at the Hague:
And who but men of such Villainous Principles could have engaged your Mother to
have fomented that unnatural War in your Father's ancient native Kingdom of
Scotland, which was the Foundation of the never to be forgotten Civil War in
England? And when the King your Father was by the just Judgment of God brought
to Prison, because he made some Concessions, not out of Choice, but of
Necessity, against that party of Men, the Jesuits condemned him before he was
brought to his Trial; and when dead Dr. G^ffe a Priest of the Oratory,
brandished his Sword over his Head, saying, Now is the Enemy of God fallen. But
that of the Massacre in Ireland was a bloody demonstration of their Faith and
Zeal; there was no other reason that ever they could give, but that those whom
they murdered were Protestants, and that in killing them, the Cath^lick Cause
was promoted; for at no time did the Irish enjoy their Estates, and the
exercise of their Religion, with greater peace than when they broke out into
that dreadful Rebellion: Nor was that Quiet and Security they possessed the
fruits only of a Connivance, but the effects of many Acts of Grace, which had a
little before passed in favor of them. They attempted the betraying your
Brother in his escape at Worcester, and to root out your whole Family, if the
then Protector would have but given them liberty by a Law; they would have
murdered him at Bruxels too, to have obliged you with the Crown. Is not this
Evidence enough against them, that they had, in conjunction with your self
their Head, designed as well to destroy his Person as his Government and our
Religion? I pray consider this Topic, while you are in the peaceable enjoyment
of your Apartment at St. Germains, before you are forced to take up your Bed
and walk.

3. A third Witness that appeared to prove the Popish Conspiracy, is the
impudent Claims that the Bishop of Rome makes to the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland. It is no^, Sir, unworthy of your Observation what your
Bellarmine has written upon that point: The King of England, ^aith he, is
sub^^ct to the Pope by a twofold Right; first, by reason of his Apostolic
Power; and secondly, by right of proper Dominion. Sir, your Rascally Crew do
not only plead Henry the second's submitting his Crown to the Pope, but also
King John's resigning his Crown to the Pope, and receiving it again as a Fee o^
the Church of Rome. And as for Scotland, you know that Pope Boniface the Eighth
did make a Claim to that Kingdom: And at Madrid, in the Year 1677, there was a
Scotchman that was Robed, and called the King of Scotland, and he in the
Jesuits College there resigned into the Hands of James Lynce, the pretended
Archbishop of Tuam, of the Kingdom of Ireland, and took the Crown of the
Kingdom of Scotland from the said Archbishop, to revive the Claim of Pope
Boniface over that Kingdom; all which was done by virtue of a Bull from
Innocent the Eleventh for that purpose. And as for the Kingdom of Ireland, it
is matter of Fact, that Henry the third did swear Homage to the Bishop of Rome,
for that Kingdom, and did oblige himself to pay him Tribute for it, in
recognition of the Right of that Prelate. You may mimp up those Canvas Chaps of
yours, but it is certain that you promised to your Jesuits to hold the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as a Fee of the Papacy, or else
they would have made bold to have sent you the same way they designed to send
your Brother, and did at last accomplish their Design, by your gracious aid and
assistance. And had Popery been established in England in the time of your
gracious Tyranny, and had the People been brought under the Soul-sanctifying
Conduct of the Jesuits, who, as they have been true Dragoons to the Chair of
Rome in the pervertion of the Nation, we should have found how they would have
improved these Claims for the service of the Romish Antichrist. In case any
difference should have risen between him and you, your Bellarmine tells you
roundly, That these Kingdoms are the Dominions of the Church of Rome, and, that
the Pope is our natural Lord, and, that the King at best is but his Vassal. And
in the time of the Rebellion you cannot but have heard, that Innocent the Tenth
did not only claim these three Kingdoms, but did actually usurp a Royal Power
over that Nation, and accordingly gave forth all kind of Commissions, by the
hands of his Nuncio; and you know that the wi^ty Knaves about Town said, that
the late N^^c^o that was with you came to get his Countrywoman with Child; but,
Sir, to be plain with you, I cannot ^ell what secret Service there might be to
bring the Gentlewomans Milk; but this I a^ sure, that the Nuncio that was with
me in disguise, with Keins the Provincial, and Ned Petre, and trusty Charles of
Limestreet, and Ned Nevi^e, told me, That he expected to have found the Nation
disposed to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and that his main business
was, to take your Homage to the Sea of Rome, for your holding these three
Kingdoms; and that if the Nation had been reconciled, that business would have
been done. So that it was plain, that you were not only in a Plot to destroy
your own Brother, but to subjugate these Nations to the Obedience of the Sea of
Rome and France.

4. The Doctrines they publicly preach in their Churches, and teach in their
Schools to their young Students to be educated under them, for it is as plain
as the Sun at Noon day, that the Popes pretend to have a power to depose Kings,
and that no King reigns, but at the pleasure of the Pope. And from hence, Sir,
give me leave to observe two things; 1. That by reason of the Doctrine they have
taught, and do still teach, they publish themselves not only Rogues ready for
any Design against the Peace and Safety of any Kingdom wherever they shall be
admitted, but also publish themselves Traitors of the deepest dye, and ought to
have been proceeded against as such, though never convicted of any Action
suitable to such Principles, for the Principle it self is the highest Treason,
that any foreign Power should have power to depose a Prince that owes him
neither suit nor service, though there be no Overt Act for the condemning such
Villains: And it is well known to your self, that so far as the Popish Religion
has only an in^luence upon the future state of Men, it was never punished with
Death in England; it is only upon the score of those damnable Doctrines which
instruct and countenance them to overthrow the State and Government, that your
villainous Priests were justly made liable to suffer; and therefore the Priests
that were arraigned in the time of the Discovery of the Popish Plot, and were
condemned and executed without being proceeded against for any thing but their
being Priests, and their withdrawing the Subject from the Religion by Law
established, were as real Traitors as those which were executed for having a
Design, in conjunction with you, to murder your Brother. 2. Could any
Government be secured of the Loyalty of such a person, who taught such
pernicious Principles as these? No surely. I will give you a home Instance of
this: There were some Irish Papists, since the Year 1660, had in a Remonstrance
prepared for the persuading the Government, that they were persons of great
Loyalty, and owned King Charles their law^ul King, and that the Pope had no
power to depose him; you know that thereupon they were told from Rome, that
they had renounced the Catholic Faith, and that they were fallen under the
condemnation of the Apostolic See. I pray, sir, put on your Irish Yokes, and
read the Letter from Bruxels, bearing date July 21. 1662, where the Pope's
Nuncio, who wrote that Letter, tells them, how that their Remonstrance being
examined at Rome by the Cardinals and Divines, was found to contain
Propositions condemned by Paul the fifth and Innocent the tenth, an
Acquaintance of yours, and that Alexander the seventh, then Pope, was so far
from approving it, that he did not so much as permit or connive at it, and
therefore condemned, as a thing that could not be kept without breach of Faith,
according to the Decrees of Paul the fifth, and that it denied the Pope's
Authority in matters of Faith, according to the Decree of Innocent the tenth.

Sir, give me leave to tell you, and Mrs. Pugg, my quondam ^andlady, that your
Rogues went farther in their Doctrines they taught those they had under their
care and conduct in Rome, in order to be sent to England to preach the same
Doctrine; that it was not only lawful to depose Heretical Kings, excommunicate,
and declared to be Heretics, but also it would be a meritorious act to kill
such, they being unfit to live, especially if they are Apostates.

Now you m^mble about your Mouth, and slabber as if you had got a bunch of
Thistles there, and say, that this was the prate of two or three ^ash
Block-heads that knew no better: Come, come, when you go to visit the bawdy
Cardinal d' Este, now Duke of Modena, he can ^ell you other tidings, so that
you are as much out in this, as you was in marrying my old Friend his Sister;
nay, you your self can tell, if there be any truth in you, that this Doctrine
was not preached by two or three, but that it is the common received Doctrine
of your damned Synagogue of Rome, especially of the Jesuits, under whose
management you were, and are still to this day: And the little Welsh Cub^ is in
the same condition, and may improve in the knowledge of that point, unless God
provide better for him, and (...)is Heart, (as you used to say) and incline him
as graciously to return to his own dear Father's Trade. But hence I must
observe to you four things.

1st, That your Brother, who was too loose a Papist, ^ay, by them condemned of
Apostasy and Persidiousness to their Cause and Party, was as much hated by them
as if he had been the most zealous Protestant in the World, so that his person
was exposed to the Mercy of any one, that under the encouragement of meriting
Heaven will dare to assassinate him, whether in a Coach, or in his Quarters at
Newmarket* or at Windsor, or in St. James's Park, or at White Hall, by Pistol,
or Poison, or Dagger, or by Blunderbuss, or what you please, they are the main
Arguments they used to convert Princes that were Heretics to the Catholic
Faith. And why so, good Sir, why must Kings be so served, though they are
Protestants? And must your Brother be slain in this or that way, though he did
not refuse the passing the Test-Bill, or sign Coleman's Declaration for the
dissolving the Parliament? Truly there was good reason for it, said your
Jesuits, he had broke his word with the Catholics all the World over, and
therefore he was excommunicate; or if he was not, his many Miscarriages
entitled him to nothing better than a violent death; For his Life would hinder
the carrying on your design. This, I say, was not the Doctrine only of a few,
that such Princes are ipso facto excommunicate, and therefore may be destroyed;
for if you will but read, or let me send for your old Crackfart, and let him
read over the Canons and Decrees of your Church and Councils, see the Decree of
Pope Urban; We do not esteem them Murderers (says that godly Prelate) who
shall happen to kill a person that is excommunicate, out of Ardour and Zeal to
th^^r Mother the Catholic Church.

2dly, G^ve me leave to observe to you what impudent Liars your trus^y and
well-beloved Counselors and Conspirators the ^ive Jesuits were, that blessed
the Gallows in the Year 1679, and danced a singular Courant when they came to
Tyburn. They said, that there was but one Jesuit that ever maintained that
Doctrine, and that was Mariana: Truly, Sir, you knew that was an impudent Lie,
with which they jumped out of the World; and the People that saw them take
their last Leaves of old England believed them much alike in other parts of
their last words, for they that would dye with so great a Lie as that, would
not make bones of twenty more, rather than fail; for A^d^rton, the Rector of
the College of Rome, and Campton the Minister of the College, and Green the
Procurator, and Sou^hwell, that was Assistant to Father Oliva the then General,
Father Buckley, good man, that was like to have been hanged for Buggery in
Spain, not because of the Sin, but because it was made public; these, you will
say, were Preachers only, but none ever wrote for it but Mariana. Was not Tolet
a Jesuit? And I pray see what he says, he was an honest man, I assure you,
these are his sweet words: That Subjects are not bound to maintain inv^^a^e
their Oath of Allegiance to an excommu^icate Prince. Was not Bellarmin a
Jesuit, and does not he affirm, that the Pope has the same Right and Power
over Kings as J^^^j^d^ had over Athaliah? Was not Gre^^lent^a a Jesuit, and
does not he in his Writings affirm, That the Pope may deprive Heretical Kings
of all dominion and superiority over their Subjects? Was not Creswell a
Jesuit, and does not he affirm, that if a Prince be not of the Romish
Religion, he loses all right and title to govern, and that his Subjects are
discharged from all Obligation of Obedience, and that he may be proceeded
against as an ^nemy of Mankind? Was not Francis^^s Varona Constantin^s a
Jesuit? does not he in his Apology for John Chastele, who wounded Henry the
fourth of France, your Grandfather, tell us, That it is lawful for a private
man to destroy Kings and Princes condemned of Heresy? Is not this point so
evident, that de Ha^l^y, the first President of the Parliament of Paris, who
both knew the Doctrine of the Jesuits, and had seen the woeful Effects of it,
in the murder of two Kings of France, publicly avowed it to be their common
Doctrine in all their Writings, That the Pope has a Right to excommunicate
Kings, and thereupon their Subjects may with Innocence assault and destroy them.

What a sort of a weak Memory you may have, I know not; but of this I am sure,
that our English Nation (which through God's Blessing you may ^ever see more,
unless it be to a very glorious purpose) have not with your five hanged
Jesuits learnt the knack of Forgetfulness so, as not to remember that Cardinal
A^en wrote a Book to prove, that Princes excommunicate for Heresy not only
might, but were to be deprived of their Kingdom and Life. And was not William
Parry thereby provoked to kill Queen Elizabeth, which though before at Rome he
had resolved to do, yet he was hesitating in his Mind about it, till encouraged
by that Book? Do you think that England has forgotten, that Father Gifford
instigated one John Savage to kill the same Queen, upon the Bull of Pius
quintus^^ And to conclude this second Observation, it was remarkable at the
same time, that they might be the less suspected, and that Queen the more
secure, they wrote a Book, wherein they admonished the Papists in England, not
to attempt any thing against their Princess, but to fight against their
Adversaries only with Christian Weapons, viz. Tears, Spiritual Reasonings,
Prayers, Watchings, and Fastings.

3dly, Give me leave to recommend a third thing to your consideration, and that
is, Though this be a common Doctrine in the Church of Rome, yet in the years 1672,
73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78. it was more earnestly pressed than at any time before:
and inde^d they had then great occasion to put that Doctrine in practice: And
since it was with speed to be transacted, it was not sit their Votaries should
go about the Work uninstructed. Thus, when the Murder of your Grandfather
Henry the Fourth of France was determined, Father Gener^t a Jesuit instructed
John Chastele in this damnable Doctrine of your Hell-born Church; and Father
Fair did the same by Francis Veron, to dispose his godly Soul for the same
work; yea, when they were ready to perpetrate the same Villainy upon that great
Prince, the very Sermons of the Jesuits were all framed to instigate Men to
such an impious Attempt; so that Ravilliac, when examined about the causes why
he stabbed the King, answered, That he might understand them by the Sermons of
the Preachers. I pray call to mind, how that twelve Missioners, in the year
1677, were sent into Spain, and were by the Jesuits obliged to re^ounce their
Allegiance to the King your Brother, and were taught by Daniel Armstr^ng, that
the said Oath was heretical, antichristian, and devilish; and they having
resolved upon your Brother's death with you, the said Armstrong did on the 29th
of September 1677, in his Sermon to the said Missioners, declare, That Charles
the second, King of England, was no lawful King, but came of a spurious race;
that his Father was a black Scotchman, who by Trade was a Tailor, and not
Charles the first; and, that he was a Bastard. And you may remember that George
Coniers the Jesuit was ordered to preach upon the day dedicated to Thomas
Beck^t, to preach against the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and that he
should exhort the Fathers to stand by the new Provincial in the Great Work that
you and the Society had in hand. And your old Friend Blund^l had his places,
where he against the good time taught several young Men treasonable and
mutinous Doctrines, against the Interest and Person of the King your Brother.
John Keins, on the 13th of August 1678, preached a Sermon to twelve Men in poor
habits, yet Men of Quality by the whiteness of their Hands, in which Sermon he
delivered this villainous Doctrine, That Protestant and other Heretical Princes
were ipso facto deposed, because such; and that it was as lawful to destroy
them, as an Oliver Cromwell, or any other Usurper. At which Sermon, Sir, I was
present, not designedly; but by chance.

4thly, I must observe, that a Man that is not through paced in all the points
of these Villains, is in danger of being exposed to the Vengeance of their
Cruelty, for I find that though they knew you in all points to be a Roman
Catholic, yet if you had not come up to the point of killing your Brother, you
must have been destroyed as well as he; and I do believe that they never was
sure of your arriving at that pitch of Courage; for I will tell you, that there
were some of the Blackwan Papists that were for the destroying of you both, but
their Counsel was rejected, for that you were heartily engaged in that part of
the design which related to your Brother's death; but they always feared that
you would not be much capable of their Counsel and Advice whenever you came to
the Crown; but truly you deceived them all, for you (Thanks be to God) proved
as through paced a Tyrant as our Hearts and Souls could desire, and it was that,
and only that, which did deliver us from you.

5thly. Give me leave to add a fifth Observation, which is well worth your
Judicious Consideration, for I know you to be a man of great Sense and
Ingenuity; therefore it will not be amiss to put you in mind, and observe to
you, they did not only preach against all the Princes of Europe in general, but
against your Brother in particular, that he was an He^etick, and therefore
condemned, to what? to Death; by whom? By the Jesuits all over Christendom, and
the whole Church of Rome; for what cause? Because he had engaged to set up the
Catholic Religion, and had broke his word; he had received the Sacrament on
Easter Day in the morning, from Ireland your Jesuit, and then from the Church
of England at noon; he had wounded the Catholic Cause to death by the Test
Bill, therefore in the first place they declared him a Bastard, then a
Heretic, and then commanded their Young ^ry not to pay Obedience to an
Heretical Prince; and had I not been Privy to their Design, I should have
argued thus with my self, that since there are so many Protestant Kings and
Princes in Christendom, why then should they aim thus at the King of England
more than the rest of the Protestant Princes; but truly I found, that it was
but a brave Adventure: The Jesuits and you well knowing, that the rest would
follow of Course; for they used to say, that neither of the two Northern Crowns
were worth there contending for till England was gained, and if England was
once subd^ed to the Catholic Faith, the rest could not hold out against them,
therefore as a Prologue to that, the war against Holland was commenced, that
with more ease they might extirpate Heresy, and had that Potestant State been
ruined, what could the rest of the Princes of Europe do against France and
England; these were the Sum and Substance of the debates of your Councillors
at St. James's, which we had from your Servant St. Coleman, you may say what
reason had these men to propose to themselves this Advantage, whence was this?
to arise to this: I answer.

(1.) You was the next in view, after Charles the second, that was to s^cceed
to the Crown; and you being a Papist, it was no matter of surprise to me, nor
do I think that it is now to any rational thinking man, that they, to further
and hasten your Succession, should with you conspire the destruction of the
King your Brother, who was the only Obstacle in your way to the Throne. I hope
th^^ you have some about you that are not so unacquainted with the History of
England, as not to know, that your Great Grandmother the Queen of Scots was
engaged with the Popish Party in several Conspiracies against Q. Elizabeth, in
order to the said Queen of Scots coming to the Crown, she being next in descent
to the said Queen Elizabeth; and truly as long as the Scottish Queen lasted,
our Queen Elizabeth was never out of Danger: Hence it was that our Forefathers
were so sensible of the Queens Danger, which made them to enter into an
Association throughout all the Kingdom, even in an interval of Parliament, in
which Association they mutually obliged themselves, in case the said Queen
Elizabeth should be taken off, by any undue means to avenge it upon the
Papists, and they were not for this taunted at bythe Queen for a parcel of
Factious and Rebellious Rogues, but received as her dutiful and loyal Subjects,
and the Parliament passed it into a Law by the Consent of the said Queen:
Truly Sir, your Rogues well knew, that should they lose that Opportunity and
Advantage (of your being a Papist, and having Hopes of your Coming such to the
Crown) for the Re-establishment of the Popish Religion, they might never enjoy
such an Opportunity again; these your Villains perceived that the King your
Brother was in all Humane Judgment more likely to live longer than you,
therefore it was highly necessary to anticipate the course of Nature, and not
trust matters of such Consequence, as the Restoration of the Romish Religion to
such a Contingency, as your Brothers dying in a natural way before your sweet
self; nay, rather than they would be ou^, your Popish Astrologer was consulted,
and the Judgment that he gave was, that the King in the Course of Nature,
would outlive you, then you and your Party were resolved, that he was to be
cut off, that his Life might not prevent the great Glory of Englands having a
Catholic King, which would be of such Advantage to the Holy Chair, that you
and they purposed to employ such Case hardened Villains as should not boggle at
striking the fatal Blow, and though you was pleased to smile at that time upon
some that called themselves Prote^tants, yet they found themselves out in their
Accounts when you came to the Crown, they saw that they had foolishly s^attered
themselves with the vain Hopes of having high Church secured; for Sir, you well
knew, that it did not become a Man of your Religion to be a Slave to your Word
and Faith, especially to those you judged Heretics.

2. They well knew that you was not only of the Popish Religion, but that you
was bigoted to that Religion; give me leave to wipe that ^notty Nose of yours,
with a little passage of your St. C^leman: God has given us a Prince, (said
that Holy Traitor) who is become to a miracle zealous of being the Author of so
glorious a Work: Now Sir, that Work this great Saint and Martyr of your making
Points at, was the Conversion of three Kingdoms, that was the mighty Work upon
your Hands, and as you had a mighty work, so you had a mighty Zeal for the
carrying on that work: I am Sir of an Opinion, that your Cutthroats would have
been contented to have had a Papist of an indifferent Zeal upon the Throne,
provided they would but have kept him Steady, but to have such a Prince that
was converted to that degree of Zeal, as that he valued nothing in the world,
in Comparison of his Religion, was of far greater Consequence to them, than the
High Church Cox-combs at that time were sensible of; there have been Kings that
have been of the Faith of the Church of Rome, that were not of the Faith of the
Court of Rome; and therefore though they gave all manner of Encouragement to
the Romish Religion, yet by great Caution and Vigilance, they have very much
prevented the undermining the Temporal Authority they had over their Subjects:
Our former Kings of England, though they were of that Faith, and did
countenance their Subjects in that worship, yet they would not let them be
enslaved by any pretended Papal Jurisdiction, but your Villains were blessed
with a man that would not only allow the Bishop of Rome his rascally Worship,
but also allow him to enslave the Nation with a Power he challenged in the
temporal Government; this your Cutthroats were assured of, and therefore they
would not in good manners to your great Zeal, be in the least behind hand to
join with you, to hasten the Exit of your Brother, who would by no means keep
pace with them to their horrid Designs, and therefore they judged that he was
their only Let or Hinderance in completing that mighty work.

3. You was not only a Papist, but a bigoted papist, and being such, you put
your self under the Conduct of the Jesuits; this Confederacy of yours with
those zealous Sons of the Synagogue of S^than, could not be otherwise than very
fatal to the Kingdom, as to its Religion and Government, and the person of the
King your Brother; for you arriving to that Pitch of Zeal, and putting your
self under their Conduct, they in gratitude to you could not but endeavor the
hastening your Accession to the Crown, of which you were as ambitious as they
were zealous, and therefore you both joined to destroy your Brother, that was
converted to the Religion of Rome, but not zealous enough in driving on the
Jesuits Designs; had you Brother's Zeal been as fierce as yours, he might have
been cooling his Heels at St. Germains, as well as your self and good Company
there: It was not for want of good will to your Religion, but for want of a
galloping Zeal, which was no ways consistent with his voluptuous Living, that
you and these villainous Jesuits and the Popish Party conspired his death; these
were the three Advantages on which your Cutthroat Party did build their Hopes,
which made your Jesuits in the most considerable part of the Kingdom, and in
many places abroad to preach their King murdering Doctrine, the better to
prepare those of their Communion, to join with you in the Fatal Blow, that you
and your Council at St. James's had designed to give the King your Brother.

6. A sixth Testimony that appeared against you and your Party, was the
Traiterous Correspondencies that was maintained, in order to carry on a
Rebellion in Scotland and Ireland; for Scotland, your Villains took the
Advantage of the great Heats that were created in that Kingdom, by the dreadful
Tyranny of Duke Lauderdale, who acted by your Director, and used all those
Methods that might provoke a Rebellion, and your Servant Coleman who had a
great Interest in Lauderdale, was often with him, by which the Jesuits
understood what Measures to take, and a Party was appointed to incense the
Villainous Bishops of that Kingdom against the poor Protestants there, whereby
their Lives were made very miserable, and the Usage of their Ministers, who by
providence were driven upon the Coasts of England, and came to the House of
Lords, where an Account was given to the Parliament that sat in the year 1678,
in the month of December; and the Parliament took their Cause into
Consideration, and dismissed them of their Irons and Thumckins, and addressed
your Brother against Lauderdale, and as you had a Party of men, that acted
their part with the Episcopal Party in Scotland, thus to vex and torment the
afflicted Protestants in Scotland; so your Jesuits they entertained another
party of Rogues of the same Complexion, to assocIate themselves with these poor
Protestants, in order to keep up their Animositie against the Prelatique Party,
withal urging them that they at that time had a fair Opportunity to vindicate
their Liberty and Religion, and that it could not be done but by the Sword, and
whereas, that the King had received many of their Addresses, yet he was so
addicted to his pleasures, that he neither would nor could take little or no
care of redressing their intolerable Grievances, and the great Cause of their
ill Usage proceeded even from the King himself, by which Sir it appeared, their
great Design in Conjunction with you, was, to weaken your Brothers Interest in
that Kingdom, for they urged that if they did not stir in time, they would be
put under some Foreign Force, which would be more vexatious to them, and you
found your Design so well, that your Jesuits received an Account from Scotland,
dated Feb. 7. 1677, that all Diligence was used to put the Potestants in that
Kingdom of Scotland upon opposing Duke Lauderdale and his Villains, and
questioned not, but that all things should be so ordered, that a Rebellion
should be raised in Scotland, and a little before you went down to Windsor, you
knew that Messengers were sent down to Scotland to press the poor people to a
resentment of the Tyranny they lived under, by the Maladministration of Duke
Lauderdale, and such that were of the Ministry in that Kingdom, and especially
since they could not obtain the Liberty of Conscience, notwithstanding all
their humble Supplications to the King; therefore the Sword must do it, a
Rebellion at last you obtained, in order to destroy these poor Wretches; the
Consequence of which was the total enslaving that Kingdom, the better to fit it
for its Submission to the Romish Religion. As for Ireland, I have already at
large, not only in this, but in the first Memorial, laid open your Practices in
that Kingdom.

7. Call to mind Colemans Letters, and say that you knew nothing of them if you
dare; there it is said that you had a mighty work upon your Hands, no less than
the Conversion of three Kingdoms: Come Sir, deal freely, was it to be brought
about by Arguments from the Scripture; no Sir I did never find the Knowledge of
the Scriptures abound in the most learned of them all, we have scarce a
Protestant Cobbler but is able to cope with, if not to baffle a Romish Priest;
it could not be that these three Kingdoms could be converted by these sorts of
Arguments, with which your Cutthroats were little acquainted, and their
preaching is generally too silly and empty to prevail with Protestants to
change their Religion, unless some few weak Debauchees, and weaker Whores:
Well, you were to convert three Kingdom; I pray how, was not your Conversion
and Conviction by enlightening the eyes of the Protestant Party by a Faggot,
and by the powerful and irresistible Arguments of the Dagger; those Letters of
Coleman's, tell the world that the design prospered so well, that there was no
doubt, but that it would be managed to the utter Ruin of the Protestant Party:
Truly Sir, Coleman's, Letters were such pregnant Proofs of your villainous
Designs, and his Declaration drawn up and prepared for your Brothers Signature,
were testimony enough without the Addition of any further Evidence; but I will
put you in mind of some short Notes of that Saint of yours, and then set down
the Letters as they have been published for the Satisfaction of Mankind; by
which Sir it is manifest that by your order under your self, he was the great
Director of the Affairs of the Popish Party here in these three Kingdoms, as
you may see by the Correspondence he maintained with the Pope himself, by the
means of Cardinal Howard, and his Correspondence with the Popes Internuncio at
Bruxels, and Father Sheldon at Doway, and the Monks there, and with your dear
Fathers at St. Omers, to whom he gave an exact Account of the debates of your
Council at St. James's, and of the Affairs of the Government at White Hall;
^ay, let me tell you, that your Brother the King had such an Opinion, that when
you had obtained a Promise from him of dissolving the Parliament, he would have
none but Coleman to draw it up, but he being of the Opinion of Lewis of France,
that Princes by no means ought to be slaves to their Promises, the dissolving
of the Parliament was moved in hopes of gaining Money from them to supply his
Wants, he had such an Interest with Lachaise, that he did obtain the sum of
20000 l. for himself, and 300000 l. for you, and the promise of 300000 l. a
year, till you could bring your designs to bear; and an Army was through his
Solicitation promised to be landed in Ireland and England as soon as peace was
concluded between the French King, and the then confederate Princes, as being
the time that his most Christian Majesty would be at leisure to assist you in
this mighty work of converting these three Kingdoms; you know then the
dragooning Apostles were to come over to preach here, in order to convert us to
Romes Religion, and the French Government; by these ^ou were to do the work
with the Assistance of your Cutthroats at home both in England and Ireland.

Now Sir it will not be amiss, that we offer to your Consideration the Letters
themselves, with which Sir you cannot but be highly pleased, since they were
the Hopes of your Family, if the design specified in them had taken effect;
first then, here is the long Letter that this blessed Saint and M^rtyr wrote to
Father Lachaice.

SInce Father St. Germain has been so kind to me, etc.

This Letter puts us in mind, of the great Correspondence that this Villain
held with one Ferrier by your Order, in Order to subvert the Laws, Liberties
and Religion of these three Kingdoms, and the said Ferrier going to his place,
St. Germain, a notorious French Jesuit, recommended Coleman to Father Lachaice,
for to renew this Correspondence that did for some time ^^ase by reason of the
death of the said Ferrier, there are several things in this Letter that are
remarkable, as,

1. That the sending of the Troop of Horse Guards into the service of the
French King, and the Care that was taken to send with it an Officer, called Sr.
William Throgmorto^, with whom Coleman had a particular Intimacy; this was the
person that Coleman made choice of, by whom he might correspond with Ferrier:
This Throgmorton was once a dissolute Protestant, and being a person but of a
mean or a broken Fortune, was by Coleman perverted to the Church of Rome, and
as a reward for his coming over to your Church, he was made an Officer in this
Troop of Guards; but indeed, he was rather sent a Spy upon the English
Gentlemen, and when he died, Nevil Pain took that Province upon him, and gave
an Account to Court, and especially to your self, as William Throgmorton had
done before of their Carriage.

2. I observe that the recalling of Liberty of Conscience was fatal to you, and
your Cutthroats, to that you did owe all your Miseries and Hazards; and
therefore Sir, I hope that you will allow me that great Truth, which I
delivered to you, that Liberty of Conscience was the first great Step your
Brother and you made, to establish the Roman Catholic Religion here; for
nothing hurts it like the recalling of that Indulgence, and making peace with
the Dutch, provided it had been a good one, though A^^ington when he was
Ambassador there, persuaded the French King for some time, that your Servant
Coleman was much out in his Politics as well as your self.

3. That Peace was much to be desired between the French King, and the
Confederate Princes of Europe, and that nothing could procure a good one for
the French King, but the Dissolution of the then Parliament, who though they had
been laterally by you and your Rogues well bribed to give many an ill Vote; yet
at last they began like English Men to fly in the Kings Face, and roar against
Popery, especially upon an empty Pocket; and if Fortune had not sent them a
seasonable shower or two in a Session, to cultivate their Inclinations to act
according to the bent of the then Court; and till this peace was made between
the French King and the Confederates, little could be done toward the revival
of the Catholic Cause, after its recovering that fatal stroke by recalling the
Liberty of Conscience, and setting up that damnable Doctrine of a Protestant
State Purgatory, which hindered many an honest Apostolical Cutthroat from
having a Place at Court; but you will say, Why should the Dissolution of our
Parliament procure a Peace? The Reason is plain, for the Confederate Princes
had unluckily got an Interest in our the^ Parliament, as bad as it was, and
they depended more upon their Power and Interest they had in that Parliament,
than in any thing in the world, and I will give you a Reason for that, because
from them the Confederate Princes received the greatest Encouragement to
continue the War, and so that in case the Parliament were dissolved, the
aforesaid Confederates would be necessitated to a peace, upon the Terms the
French King should give, which would facilitate his joining with you in the
blessed Conversion of these three Nations, and subduing the Northern Heresy,
that had so long domineered in this Northern World, so that the Troops of
Guards, and the other Forces that were sent into the Service of the French,
were only to learn the way of converting these three Kingdoms, and also to the
end that they might join with your French Apostles in that Work, of which you
so earnestly desired to be the Author and Instrument. Of this I said before.

Coleman, by the means of the Earl of Arlington, when he did reside at the
Court of France, was much discouraged, and was forced to leave off for a time,
to argue the case with the French King, by Ferryer, and took up the post of
railing at Arlington, but railing did not do the business; then Coleman falls
to arguing again with your new Correspondent Father Lachaise, who succeeded
Ferryer in the Office of a Confessor to the French King your Ally, with whom he
so prevailed, that the French King was wholly of Coleman's Opinion and your
own, and testified it in a Letter to your self, which ^ore date June the
second* and I suppose you was so much a Gentleman, as to answer his Letter, you
being a most humble Admirer of the said French King, that you would not only
write to him, but also to his Father Confessor, in these words, as follows.

Your Letter to Monsieur Lachaise, the French King's Confessor.
THE Second of June last past, his most Christian Majesty offered me most
generously his Friendship, and the use of his Purse, to the Assistance against
the Designs of my Enemies and his, and protested unto me, that his Interest and
mine were so clearly linked together, that those that opposed the one should be
looked upon as Enemies to the other; and told me moreover his Opinion of my
Lord Arlington and the Parliament, which is, That he is of Opinion, that
neither the one nor the other is in his Interest or mine; and thereupon he
desired me to make such Propositions as I should think fit. In this conjuncture
all was transacted by the means of Father Ferryer, who made use of Sir William
Throgmorton, who is an honest man, and of Truth, who was then at Paris, and
has held Correspondence with Coleman, one of my Family, in whom I have great
Confidence. I was much satisfied to see his most Christian Majesty altogether
of my Opinion, so I made him answer by the 29th of June, by the same means he
made use of to write to me, that is, by Coleman, who addressed himself to
Father Ferryer, (by the forementioned Knight) and entirely agreed to his most
Christian Majesty, and that it was necessary to make use of our joint and
utmost Credits, to prevent the Success of those evil Designs resolved on by the
Lord Arlington and the Parliament, against his most Christian Majesty and my
self, which of my side I promise really to perform, of which since that time I
have given reasonable good Proof: Moreover, I made some Proposals, which I
thought necessary to bring to pass what we are obliged to undertake, assuring
him, that nothing could so firmly establish our Interest with the King my
Brother, as that very same Offer of the help of his Purse, by which means I had
much reason to hope I should be enabled to the dissolving of the Parliament,
and to make void the Designs of my Lord Arlington, who works incessantly to
advance the Interest of the Prince of Orange and the Hollanders, and to lessen
that of the King your Master, notwithstanding the Protestations he has made to
this hour to render him Service; but as to that which was proposed, 'twas at a
stand, by reason of the Sickness of Father Ferryer, so our Affairs succeeded
not according to our Designs^; only Father Ferryer wrote to me the 15th of the
last Month, That he had communicated those Propositions to his most Christian
Majesty, and that they had been very well liked of, but as they contained
things that had regard to the Catholic Religion, and to the Offer and Use of
his Purse, he gave me to understand, he did not desire I should treat with
Monsieur Revigny upon the first, but as to the last, and had the same time
acquainted me, that Monsieur Revigny had Order to grant me whatsoever the
conjuncture of our Affairs did require, and have expected the effects of it to
this very hour, but nothing being done in it, and seeing on the other hand that
my Lord Arlington and several others endeavored by a thousand Deceits to break
the good Intelligence which is between the King my Brother, his most Christian
Majesty, and my self, to the end they might deceive us all three, I have
thought fit to advertise you of all that is past, and desire of you your
Assistance and Friendship, to prevent the Rogueries of those who have no other
design, than to betray the Concer^s of France, and England also, and who, by
their pretended Service, are the occasion they succeed not. As to any more, I
refer you to Sir William Throgmorton and Coleman, whom I have commanded to give
you an account of the whole state of our Affair, and the true condition of
England, with many others, and principally my Lord Arlington's Endeavors to
represent to you quite otherwise than it is. The two first I mentioned to you
are firm to my Interest, so that you may treat with them without any
apprehension.


This Letter your Cattle would have to be counterfeited by Coleman, but your
Brother saw the Copy of the French King's Letter, and might have seen the
Original, if he had been as honest as I was earnest to have your Papers seized,
as well as Coleman's: But that Letter was full of very gracious Expressions to
you, and in it he blamed your Friends, for not having done the Great Work,
which that King said would embarrass all your Affairs; and what that was, a Man
might easily guess, for the Reason he gave was an explication of it, that there
was not the least Trust to be put in him.

No sooner had King CHARLES read this Letter, but he was very much startled.

Now the destruction of the Prince of Orange was pointed at in plain words at
length; and it is well known, that the French King then would not agree to the
Sum of Three hundred Thousand pounds for your Brother's Use, but for your own,
and the Pension of Three hundred Thousand pounds per Annum was settled upon you.

Now this Sum and this Pension was not the Pension that your Brother aimed at,
for this was fixed three Years before that was sought: And Coleman had his
Twenty thousand pounds, which he truly made use of for the Ends for which it
was given him, and that you well knew, and blamed Coleman for his parting with
such a sum of Money in so little a compass of time as eighteen Months; but when
he had given you (to give him his due) a true account, you ^old him, That he
had been a faithful Servant, and that he should never want such a sum of Money
to serve the Cause. And it is well known, that none lived at a more noble rate
than Coleman, considering his Quality, and well he might, he having so good a
Pension from France, and not an inconsiderable one from Rome.

The next thing I present you withal to bite upon was his Declaration Prepared
for the dissolving the long Parliament, of which I suppose you know no more
then you did of the long Letter, or of that you Wrote to Lachaise, and how that
devilish band of Pensioners, are Treated, the world may see if they will be but
as diligent in Observing as you was Vigilant in Carrying on your Cursed Designs
against our Laws, Liberties and Religion, they will find that Parliament had
very often Checked your Proceedings, nay so often, and to that deg^^e, that
they without the help of any further discovery had endangered the destruction
of your hopful Plot, and therefore it was high^ime to disband them, and none
but Coleman was thought fit to draw up this Declaration;

The DECLARATION which Mr. Coleman prepared, thereby Showing his Reasons for
the Dissolution of the PARLIAMENT.
WE having taken into our serious Consideration, the Heats and Animosities
which have of late appeared among many of our very L^yal and Loving Subjects of
this Kingdom, and the many Fears and Jealousies which some of them seem to lie
under of having their Liberties and Properties invaded, or the Religion alte^ed
and withal carefully reflecting upon our own Government, since our happy
Restoration, and the End and Aim of it, which has always been the Ease and
Security of our People in all their Rights, and Advancement of the Beauty and
Splendour of the true Protestant Religion, established in the Church of England;
of both which we have given m^st Signal Testimonies, even to the striping our
self of many Royal Prerogatives which our Predecessors enjoyed, and were our
undoubted due; as the Court of Wards Purveyances, and other Things of great
Value; and denying to our Self many Advantages, which we might reasonably and
legally have taken by the Forfeitures made in the Times of Rebellion, and the
great Revenues due to the Church at our return, which no particular Person had
any Right to: Instead of which we Consented to an Act of Oblivion of all those
ba^barous Vsages which our R^al Father and our Self had met withal, much more
F^ll and Gracious than almost any of our Subjects, who were generally become in
some Measure or other ^bnoxious to the Laws, had confidence to ask; and freely
Renounc^d all our Title to the profit which we might have made by the Church
Lands, in Favor of our Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Ministers, out of our
Zeal to the Gl^ry of our Protestant Church; which Clemen^y toward all and some
even high Offenders, and Zeal for Religion, we have to this day constantly
continued to Exercise. Considering all this we cannot but be sensibly Afflicted
to see, that the frowardness of some ^^w tumultuous Heads should be able to
infect our Loyal and good People, with Apprehensions Destructive of their own,
and the general quiet of our Kingdom; and more especially their Perverssness
should be powerful enough to Distract our very Parliament, and such a
Parliament, as has given us such Testimonies of its Loyalty, Wisd^m and Bounty,
and to which we have given as many Marks of our Affection and Esteem so as to
make them Misconster all our Endeavors, for to Preserve our People in Ease and
Pr^sperity, and against all Reason and Evidence to Represent them to our
Subjects as Arguments of Fear and Disquiet; and under these specious Pretenses
of securing Property and Religion, to demand unreasonable things, manifestly
Destructive of what they would be thought to Aim at; and from our frequent
Condescentions out of our mere Grace, to grant them what we conceived might
give them Satisfaction, though to the actual Prejudice of our Royal
Prerogative, to make presume to propose to advance such Extravagances into
Laws, as they themselves have formerly declared Detestable; of which we cannot
forbear to give our truly Loyal Subjects some Instances, to undeceive our
innocent and well-minded People, who have many of them of late been too easily
misled by the factious Endeavors of some turbulent Spirits: For Example, we
having judged it necessary to declare War against the States of Holland, during
a Recess of Parliament, which we couldnot defer longer, without losing an
advantage which then presented it self, nor have done sooner, without exposing
our Honor to a potent Enemy, without due preparation, we thought it prudent to
unite all our Subjects at home, and did believe a general Indulgence of tender
Consciences the most proper Expedient to effect it; and therefore did by our
Authority in Ecclesiastics, which we thought sufficient to warrant what we did
suspend Penal Laws against Dissenters in Religion, upon Conditions expressed in
our Declaration, out of reason of State, as well as to gratify our own Nature,
which always we confess abhorred rigor, especially in Religion, when
tenderness might be as useful. After we had engaged in the War, we Prorogued
our Parliament from April to October, being confident we should be able by that
time to show our People such Success of our Arms, as should make them
cheerfully contribute to our Charge. At October we could have shown them
Success even beyond our own hopes, or what they could possibly expect, Our
Enemies having lost by that time, near 100 strong Towns and Forts, taken in
effect by us, we holding them busy at Sea, whilst Our Allies possessed themselves
of their Lands with little or no resistance; and of which the great advantage
would most visibly have been ours, had not the Feuds we now complain of, which
have been si^^e unhappily started, and factiously improved, disunited our
People, distracted our Councels, and rendered our late Endeavors vain and
fruitless; so that we had no reason to doubt of our Peoples ready and liberal
concurrence to Our assistance in that Conjuncture: Yet Our Enemies proposing to
us at that time a Treaty for Peace, which we were always ready to accept upm
Honorable Terms, and considering with Our self, that in case, that Treaty
succeeded, a far less Sum of Money would serve our Occasions, than otherwise
would be necessary; we out of Our tender regard to the ease of Our People,
prorogued our Parliament again to February, to attend the Success of our
Treaty, rather than to demand so much Money in October* as would be fit to
carry on the War. But we soon finding our Enemies did not intend us any such
just Satisfaction, saw a necessity of prosecuting the War, which we designed to
do most vigorously; and in order to it resolved to press our Parliament to
supply us as speedily as may be, to enable us to put our Fleet to Sea early in
the Spring, which would after their Meeting grow on apace, and being informed,
that many Members were dead, during the long Recess, we issued out ou^ Writs
for new Elections, that our House of Commons might be full at the first opening
of the Sessions, to prevent any delay in our public Affairs, or dislike in our
People, as might possibly have risen from the want of so great a Number of
their Representatives, if any thing of moment should be concluded before it had
been supplied, having governed our Actions all along with such careful respect
to the Ease of our Subjects; We at the Meeting of our Parliament in February
1672, expected from them some suitable Expressions of their Sense of our
Favors; but quite contrary found our selves alarmed with clamorous Complaints
from several Cabals against all our Proceedings, frighting many of our good
Subjects into strange c^nceits of what they must look for, by their seditious
and false Constructions of what we had so heartily and sincerely done for their
Good; and surprised with a Vote of our House of Commons, against our Writs of
Elections, which we intended for their Satisfactions, against many presidents
of ours, or without any color of Law of their side, denying our power to Issue
out such Writs, addressing to us to Issue out others: Which we consented to do
at their request, choosing rather to yield to our Subjects in that Point, than
to be forced to Submit to our Enemies in others; hoping that our Parliament
being sensibly touched with that our extraordinary Condescension, would go on
to consider the public Concern of the Kingdom, without any further to do: But
we found another use made of our easy Compliance, which served to encourage
them to ask more; so that soon after we found our Declaration for indulging
tender Consciences Arraigned, voted Illegal; though we cannot to this day
understand the Consistences of that Vote, with our undoubted Supremacy in all
Ecclesiastics, recognizing by so many Acts of Parliament, and required to be
Sworn to by all our Subjects, and Addresses made to us one after another to
recall it, which we condescended to also; from hence they proceeded to us to
weaken our self in an actual War, and to render many of our Subjects of whose
Loyalty and Ability we were well satisfied, inoapable to serve us, when we
wanted Officers and Soldiers, and had reason to invite as many experienced Men
as we could to Engage in our Arms, rather than to Incapacitate or Discourage
any; yet this also we gratified them in, to gain their Assistance against our
Enemies, who grew high by these our differences, rather than expose our Country
to their Power and Fury; hoping that in time our People would be confounded to
see our concessions, and be ashamed of their Errors in making such demands:
But finding the unfortunate Effects of our Divisions the following Summer, we
found our Parliament more Extravagant at the next meeting than ^ver, Addressing
to us, to hinder the Consummation of our dear Brothers Marriage, contrary to
the Law of God, which forbideth any to separate any, whom he has joined,
against our Faith and Honor engaged in the solemn Treaty, obstinately
persisting in that Address, after we had acquainted them that the Marriage was
then actually ratified, and that we had Acted in it by our Ambassador, so that
we were forced to separate them for a while, hoping they would bethink
themselves better at their meeting in January, instead of being more moderate,
or ready to consider our wants toward the War; they Voted as they had done
before not to Assist us still, till their Religion were effectually secured
against Popery, Aggreivances redressed, and all obnoxious Men removed from us,
which we had reason to take for an absolute denial of all Aid, considering the
Indefiniteness of what was to proceed, and the Moral impossibility of effecting
it in their Senses, for when will they say their Religion is effectually
secured from Popery if it were in Danger then by reason of the insolency of
Papists. When our House of Commons, which is made up of Members from every
corner of our Kingdom, with invitations publicly posted up to all Men to accuse
them, has not yet in so many years as they have complained of them, been able
to Charge one single Member of that Communion, with so much as a Misdemeanor,
or what security c^^ld they possibly expect against that body of Men, or their
Religion more than we had given them? Or how can we hope to live so perfectly,
that Study and Pains may not make a collection of Grievances, as considerable
as that which was lately presented to us, than which we could not have wished
for a better Vindication of our Government; or when shall we be sure that all
obnoxious Men are removed from us, when common Fame thinks fit to call them so;
which is to every body, without any proof sufficient to render any Man
obnoxious, who is Popishly affected, or any thing else that is ill, though they
have never so often or lately complied with their own Tests and Marks of
Distinction and Discriminations, finding our People thus unhappily disordred,
we saw it impossible to prosecute the War any longer; and therefore did by
their advice make a Peace upon such conditions as we could get; hoping, that
being gratified in that darling Point. ^hey would at least have paid our Debts,
and enabled us to have built some Ships for the future security of our Honor,
and their own Properties; but they being transported with their success ^n
asking, were resolved to go on still that way, and would needs have us put upon
the removing of our Judges from those charges, which they have always hitherto
he^^ at the w^^ and pleasure of the Crown, out of our Power to alter the
ancient Laws of trying of Pe^^s, and to make it a Praemunire in our Subjects (in
a case supposed) not to sight against our self; nay some ^ad the heart to ask,
that the Hereditary Succession of our Crown (which is the Foundation of al^ our
Laws) should be changed into a sort of Election, they requiring the Heir to be
qualified with cer^ain conditions to make him capable of succeeding, and
out-doing that P^pish Doctrine which we have so long and so loudly with good
reason decryed, that Heres^^ incapacitates Kings to Re^gn. They would have had,
that the Heir of the Crown, marrying a Papist, though he continued never so
orthod^x himself, should forfeit his Right of Inhe^itance; not understanding
this paradoxical wa^ of securing Religion by destroying it, as this would have
done that of the Church of England, which always taught obedience to their
Natural Kings, as an ind^spensable duty in all good Christians, let the
Religion or Deportment of their Prince be what it will, and not knowing how
soon that impediment, which was supposed as sufficient to keep out an Heir,
might be thought as fit to remove a Poss^ss^ur: And comparing that Bill which
would have it a Pr^muni^e in a Sheriff not to raise the Posse Com^^atus,
against our Commission, in a case there supposed, though we our self should
Assist that our Commission in our Person, for not being excepted, is ^mp^^ed
with the other made by this very Parliament in the 14th year of our Reign,
which all our Subjects, or at least many of them, were obliged to Swear, viz.
That the Doctrine of taking up A^ms by the Kings Authority against his Person,
was detestable, and we soon found that the design was levelled against the good
Protestant Religion of our good Church, which its Enemies had a mind to
blemish, by sl^^ing in s^^^y th^se da^^nable Doctrines, by such an Authority as
that of our Parliament, into the profession of our Faith or Practices, and to
exp^se our whole Religion to the Scorn and Reproa^h of themselves* and all the
World* we therefore thought it our duty to be so watchful as to prevent the
enemy s^wing such mischiev^us Tares as these, in the wholesome field of our
Church of England, and to guard the V^sp^tted Sp^use of our Blessed Lord, from
that f^ul Accusation, with which she justly charge^ other Churches, of teaching
their Children Loya^ty, with so many Reserves and C^nditions, that they shall
never wan^ a Dist^nction to justify R^bellion, nor a Text of S^ripture, a^ good
as Curse ye Merez to enc^urage them to be Trai^ors; whereas our truly ref^rmed
Church knows no such Sub^^^ties, but teaches according to the simplicity of
Christianity, to submit ^^ every Ordinance of M^n for ^od^ sake, according to
the natural Signification of the W^^ds without E^^^vocation o^ Artificial
Turns. In order to which, having thought to dissolve that body, which we have
these many years so tenderly cherished, and which we are sure consists
generally of more Dut^sal and Loyal Members, we were forced to Prorogue our
Parliament till November next hopeing thereby to cure those disorders, which
have been sown amongst the best and Loyallest by a f^w malicious Incend^a^ies.
But understanding since that such who have sowed that seditious Seed, are as
industriously careful to water it by their Cab^ls and Emissaries, instructed on
purpose to Poison our People with discourses in public Places, in hopes of a
great Crop of Confusion, their beloved Fruit the next Session, we have ^ound it
absolutely necessary to dissolve our Parliament, though with great Reluctance
and Violence to our In^lination, but remembering the Days of our Royal Father,
and the progress of Affairs then: How from a cry against Popery, the People
went on to complain of Grievances, and against evil Councillors, and his
Majesty's Prerogative; until they advanced into a formal Reb^llion, which
brought forth the most d^re and fatal Effects, that ever were yet heard of
among any M^n, Christians, or others; and withal finding so great a res^mblance
between the Proceedings then and now, that they seem both br^th of the same
Brains, and being co^si^m'd in that conceit by observing the Actions of many
now, who had a great share in the Management of the former R^b^llion, and their
Zeal for Religion, who by their Li^es gives u^ too much reason to suspect they
have none at all; we thought it not s^fe to dally too long, as our Royal Father
did with Submissions and Condescentions, endeavoring to cure Men infected,
without removing them from the Air where they got the Disease, and in which it
still rages and increases daily; for fear of meeting with no better success
than he ^ound, in suffering his Parliament to Challenge Power they had nothing
to do with, till they had bewitched the People into fond desires of such things
as quickly d^str^y'd both King and Country, which in us would be an
intolerable Error, having been warned so lately by the most execrable Murder
of our Royal ^ather, and the unhuman Usage, which we ^ur self in our Royal
Person and Family have suffered, and our Loyal Subjects have endured by such
practices; and least this our great Care of this our Kingdoms quiet, and our
own honor and safety should, as our best Actions have hitherto been, be
wrested to some sini^^er Sense, and Arguments be made from it to scare our good
People into any apprehensions of an arbitrary Government, either in Church or
State, we do hereby solemnly declare, and faithfully engage our Royal Word,
that we will in no case Ecclesiastical or Civil, violate or alter the known
Laws of our Kingdom, or invade any M^ns property or liberty, without due course
of Law. But that we will with our utmost Endeavors, preserve the true
Protestant Religion, and Redress all such things as shall indifferently, and
without Passion be judged Grievances by our next Parliament; which we do by
Gods b^essing intend to call before the end of February next. In the mean time
we do strictly Charge and Command all manner of Persons whatsoever, to forbear
to to talk sed^tiously, slightly or ^rreverent^y of our dissolving the
Parliament, of this our Declaration, or of our Person or Government, as they
will Answer it at their Perils; we being resolved to Prosecute all Offenders in
that kind, with the utmost Rigor and Severity of the Law, and to the end that
such Licentious Persons, if any shall be so Impudent and Obstinate as to
Disobey this our Royal Command, may be detected, and brought to due Punishment,
we have Ordered our Lord Treasi^er to make speedy Payment of twenty pounds to
any Person or Persons, who shall discover or bring any such Seditious, Slight
or Irreverent Talker before any of our Principal Secreta^ies of State.

There was another Letter that was sent to La^haise, and that is as follows:

Mr. COLEMAN'S Long LETTER.
SInce Father St. German has been so kind to me, as to recomend me to your
Reverence so advantagiously, as to encourage you to accept of my
Correspondency; I will own to him, that he has done me a Favor without
Consulting me, greater then I could have been capable of if he had advised with
me; because I could not then have had the Confidence to have permitted him to
ask it on my behalf. And I am so sensible of the Honor you are pleased to do
me, that though I cannot deserve it* yet to show at least the sense I have of
it I will deal as freely and openly with you this first time, as if I had had
the Honor of your Acquaintance all my life; and shall make no Apology f^r so
d^ing, but only tell you that I know your Character perfectly well, though I am
not so happy as (...) your Person; and that I have an Opportunity of putting
this Letter into the hands of Father St. Germ^n 's Nephew (for whose Integrity
and Prudence he has undertaken) without any sort of hazard.

In order then Sir to the plainness I profess, I will tell you what has
formerly passed between your Reverence's Predecessor. F^ther Ferry^r and
myself. About three years ago, when the King my Master sent a Troop of ^^se
Guards into his most Christian Majesty's Service, under the Command of my Lord
Dur^ass; ^e sent with it an Officer called Sir William Throckmorton, with whom
I had a particular Intima^y, and who had then very newly embraced the Catholic
Religion: To him did I constantly Write, and by him address myself to Father
Ferryer. The first thing of great Importance I presum^d to offer him, not to
trouble you with lesser matters, or what passed here before, and immediately
after the Fatal Revocation of the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
(to which we owe all our Miseries and hazards,) was in July, August, and
September 1673. when I constantly inculcated the great danger Catholic
Religion, and his most Christian Majesty's Interest would be in at our next
Sessions of Parliament, which was then to he in October following; at which I
plainly foresaw that the King my Master would be forced to something in
prejudice to his Alliance with France, which I saw so evidently and
particularly that we should make Peace with Holland, that I urged all the
Arguments I could, which to me were Demonstrations, to convince your Court of
that Mischief; and pressed all I could to persuade his most Christian Majesty
to use his u^most endeavor to prevent that Session of our Parliament, and
proposed Expedients how to do it: But I was answered so often and so
positively, that his most Christian Majesty was so well assured by his
Ambassador here, our Ambassador there, the Lord Arlington, and even the King
himself: that he had no such apprehensions at all, but was fully satisfied of
the contrary, and looked upon what I offered as a very zealous mistake, that I
was forced to give over arguing, though not believing as I did but con^idently
appealed to time and Success to prove who took their measures rightest. When it
happened what I foresaw came to pass, the good Father was a little suprized, to
see all the great men mistaken, and a little one in the right; and was pleased
by Sir William Throckmorton to desire the continuance of my correspondence,
which I was mighty willing to comply with, knowing the Interest of our King,
and in a more particular manner of my more immediate Master the Duke and his
most Christian Majesty, to be so inseparably united, that in was impossible to
divide them, without destroying them all: Upon this I showed that our
Parliament in the circumstances it was managed, by the timorous Councels of our
Ministers, who then governed, would never be useful either to England, France,
or Catholic Religion, but that we should as certainly be forced from our
Neutrality at their next meeting, as we had been from our Active Alliance with
France the last Year: That a Peace in the Circumstances we were in was much
more to be desired than the continuance of the War; and that the Dissolution of
our Parliament would certainly procure a Peace, for that the Confederates did
more depend upon the power they had in our Parliament, then upon any thing else
in the World; and were more encouraged from them to the contin^ing of the War;
so that if they were Dissolved, their measures would be all broken and they
consequently in a manner necessitated to a Peace.

The good Father minding this Discourse somewhat more then the Court of France
thought fit to do my former; urged it so home to the King, that his Majesty was
pleased to give him Orders to signify to his R H my Master, that his Majesty
was fully ja^isfyed of his R. H's good intention toward him, and that he
esteemed both their interests but as one and the same; that my Lord Arli^gton
and the Parliament were both to be looked upon as very unuseful to their
interest: That if his R H. would endeavor to dissolve this Parliament, his
most Christian Majesty would assist him with his Power and Purse, to have a new
one as should be for their purpose. This, and a great many more expressions of
kindness and confidence Father Ferryer was pleased to communicate to Sir
William Throckmorton and Commanded them to send them to his R H. and withal to
beg his R. H. to propose to his most Christian Majesty, what he thought
necessary for his own concern, and the advantage of Religion, and his Majesty
would certainly do all he could to advance both or either of them. This Sir
William Thorckmorton sent to me by an Express, who left Paris the 2d of June
1674. Stilo novo: I no sooner had it, but I communicated it to his R. H. To
which his R H. commanded me to answer, as I did on the 29th. of the same month:
That his R. H. was very sensible of his most Christian Majesty's friendship,
and that he would labor to cultivate it with all the good Offices he was
capable of doing for his Majesty; that he was fully convinced that their
Interests were both one, that my Lord Arlington and the Parliament were not
only unuseful, but very dangerous both to England and France; That therefore it
was necessary that they should do all they could to Dissolve is. And that his
R. H's. opinion was, that if his most Christian Majesty would Write his
thoughts freely to the King of England upon this Subject, and make the same
proffer to his Majesty of his Purse to Dissolve this Parliament, which he had
made to his R. H. to call another, he did believe it very possible for him to
succeed with the assistance we should be able to give him here; and that if
this Parliament were Dissolved, there would be no great difficulty of getting a
new one, which would be more useful: The Constitution of our Parliaments being
suc^, that a new one can never heart the Crown, nor an old one do it good.

His R. H. being pleased to own these propositions, which were but only
general, I thought it reasonable to be more particular, and come closer to the
point, we might go the faster about the work, and come to some issue before the
time was too far spent.

I laid this for my Maxim: the Dissolution of our Parliament will certainly
pre^ure a Peace: which proposition was granted by every Body I Conversed
withal, even with Monsieur Rouvigny himself, with whom I took liberty of
disco^rsing so far, but durst not say any thing of the Inteligence I had with
Father Ferryer. Next; that a Sum of Money certain, would certainly procure a
Dissolution; this some doubted, but I am sure I never did; for I knew perfectly
well that the King had frequent Disputes with himself at that time, whether he
should dissolve or continue them; and he several times declared that the
Arguments were so strong on both sides, that he could not tell to which to
incline, but was carried at last to the continuance of them by this one
Argument: If I try them once more, they may possibly give me Money; If they do,
I have gained my point: If they do not, I can dissolve them then, and be where
I am now; so that I have a possibility at least of getting Money for their
Continuance, against nothing on the other side: But if we could have turned
this Argument, and said; Sir, their Dissolution will certainly procure you
Money, when you have only a bare possibility of getting any by their
Continuance, and have shown how far that bare possibility was from being a
foundation to build any reasonable hope upon, which I am sure his Majesty was
sensible of; and how much 300000 l. sterling. certain (which was the Sum we
proposed) was better than a bare possibility, (without any reason to hope that
that could ever be compassed) of having half so much more (which was the most
he designed to ask) upon such vile dishonorable terms; and a thousand other
hazards, which he had great reason to be afraid of: If I say we had had power
to have argued this, I am most confidently assured we could have compassed it,
for Logic in our Court built upon Money, has more powerful Charms, then any
other sort of reasoning. But to secure his most Christian Majesty from any
hazard, as to that point I proposed his Majesty should offer that sum upon that
condition, and if the condition were not perfomed, the Money should never be
due; if it were, and that a Peace would certainly follow thereupon, (which no
Body doubted) his Majesty would gain his Ends, and save all the vast expenses
of the next Campaign, by which he could not hope to better his Condition, or
put himself into more advantageous Circumstances of Treaty then he was then in;
but might very probably be in a much worse, considering the mighty opposition
he was like to meet with, and the uncertain Chances of War. But admitting that
his Majesty could by his great strength and Conduct maintain himself in as good
a Condition to Treat the next year as he was then in, (which was as much as
could then reasonably be hoped for,) be should have saved by this Proposal, as
much as all the Men he must needs lose, and all the charges he should be at in
a year, would be valued to amount to more than 300000 l. sterling. and so much
more in case his Condition should decay, as it should be worse then it was when
this was made; and the Condition of his R. H. and of the Catholic Religion
here (which depends very much upon the success of His most Christian Majesty,)
delivered from a great many frights and real hazards. F. Ferryer seemed to be
very sensible of the Benefit all parties would gain by this Proposal; But yet
it was unfortunately delayed by an unhappy and ^edious ^it of sickness, which
kept him so long from the King in the France Comte and made him so unable to
vvait on his Majesty after he did return to Paris: But so soon as he could
compass it, he was pleased to acquaint his Majesty with it, and vvrote to the
Duke himself; and did me the Honor to write unto me also on the 15th of
September 1674. and sent his Letter by Sir William Throckmorton; who came
express upon that Errand; In these Letters he gave his R. H. fresh assurance of
his most Christian Majesty's friendship, and of his Zeal and Readiness to
comply with every thing His R. H. had, or should think ^it to propose in favor
of Religion, or the business of Money; And that he had commanded Monsieur
Rouvigny as to the latter, to Treat and deal with his R. H. and to receive and
observe his Orders and Directions, but desired that he might not at all be
concerned as to the former, but that his R. H. would cause what Proposition he
should think ^it to be made about Religion, to be offered either to Father
Ferryer, or Mounsieur Pompone.

These Letters came to us about the middle of September and his R. H. expected
daily when Monsieur Rouvigny should speak to him about the subject of that
Letter; but he took no notice at all of any thing till the 29th, of September,
the evening before the King and Duke went to Newmarket for afortnight, and then
only said, that he had Commands from his Master to give his R. H. the most firm
assurance of his Friendship imaginable, or something to that purpose, making
his R. H. a general Complement, but made no mention of any particular Orders
relating to Father Ferryer's Letter. The Duke wondering at this proceeding, and
being obliged to stay a good part of October at Newmarket; and soon after his
coming back hearing of the Death of Father Ferryer, he gave over all further
prosecuting of the former Projects. But I believe I saw Monsieur Rouvigny's
policy all along, who was willing to save his Masters Money, upon assurance
that we would do all we could to stave off the Parliament for our own sakes,
that that we would struggle as hard without money as with it; and we having by
that time, upon our own Interest, prevailed to get the Parliament Prorogued to
the 13th of April, he thought that Prorogation being to a day so high in the
Spring, would put the Confederates so far beyond their Measures, as that it
might procure a Peace, and be as useful to France, as a Dissolution: Upon these
Reasons I suppose he went. I had several discourses with him; and did open my
self so far to him as to say, I could wish his Master would give us leave to
offer to our Master 300000 l. for the Dissolution of the Parliament; and showed
him that a Peace would m^st certainly follow a Dissolution *which he agreed
with me in) and that we desired not the Money from his Master to excite our
wills, or to make us more industrious to use our utmost powers to procure a
Dissolution, but to strengthen our Power and Credit with the King, and to
render us more capable to succeed with his Majesty, as m^st certainly we should
have done, had we been fortified with such an Argument.

To this Purpose I pressed Mounsieur Pompone frequently by Sir William
Throckmorton, who returned hence again into France on the 10th of November, the
day our Parliament should have met, but was Prorogued. Mounsieur Pompone (as I
was informed by Sir William) did seem to approve the thing; but yet had Two
Objections against it: First, That the Sum we proposed, was Great; and could be
very ill spared in the circumstances his Most Christian Majesty was in. To
which we Answered, That if by his Expending that Sum, he could procure a
Dissolution of our Parliament, and thereby a Peace, which every body agreed
would necessarily follow, His Most Christian Majesty would gain his Ends, and
save Five or Ten times a greater Sum, and so be a good Husband by his Expense;
and if we did not procure a Dissolution, he should not be at that Expense at
all; for that we Desired ^^m only to promise upon that Condition, which we were
content to be Obliged to perform first. The Second Objection was, The Duke did
not move, nor appear in it Himself. To that we Answered, That he did not indeed
to Mounsieur Pompone, because he had found so ill an effect of the Negotiation
with Father Ferryer, when it came into Mounsieur Rouvigny 's hands; but that he
had concerned himself in it to Father Ferryer.

Yet I continued to prosecute and press the Dissolution of the Parliament,
detesting all Prorogations as only so much loss of time, and a means of
strengthening all those who depend upon it in Opposition to the Crown, the
Interest of France, and Catholic Religion, in the Opinion they had taken, That
our King durst not part with his Parliament; apprehending that another would be
much Worse. Second, That he could not live long without a Parliament, therefore
they must suddenly Meet; and the longer he kept them Off, the greater his
Necessity would grow: and consequently their power to make him do what they
listed, would increase accordingly: And therefore, if they could but maintain
themselves a while, the day would certainly come in a short time, in which they
should be able to work their Wills. Such Discourses as these kept the
Confederates and our Male Contents in heart, and made them weather on the War
in spite of all our Prorogations: Therefore I pressed (as I have said) a
Dissolution until February last, when our Circumstances were so totally
Changed, that we were forced to change our Councels too, and be as much for the
Parliaments Sitting, as we were before against it.

Our Change was thus; Before that time the Lord Arlington was the only Minister
in Credit, who thought himself out of all danger of the Parliament; he having
been Accused before them and Justified, and therefore was Zealous for their
sitting; and to increase his Reputation with them, and to become a perfect
Favorite, he sets himself all he could, to Persecute the Catholic Religion,
and to oppose the French: To show his Zeal against the first, he revived some
old dormant Orders for prohibiting Roman Catholics to appear before the King,
and put them in Execution at his first coming into his Office of Lord
Chamberlain: And to make sure work with the second, as he thought; prevailed
with the King to give him and the Earl of Ossory, (who married two Sisters of
Mine Here Odyke 's) leave to go over into Holland with the said Here, to make
a Visit, as they pretended, to their Relations: But indeed, and in truth, to
propose the Lady Mary (Eldest Daughter of his R H.) as a Match for the Prince
of Orange; not only without the consent, but against the good Liking of his R.
H.: in so much, that the Lord Arlingtons Creatures were forced to excuse him,
with a Distinction, that the said Lady was not to be looked upon as the Dukes
Daughter, but as the Kings, and a Child of the State was, and so the Duke's
consent not much to be Considered in the disposal of her, but only the Interest
of State. By this he intended to render himself the Darling of Parliament and
Protestants, who looked upon themselves as secured in their Religion by such an
Alliance, and designed further to draw us into a Close Conjunction with
Holland, and the Enemies of France. The Lord Arlington set forth upon this
Errand the Tenth of November, 1674. and returned not till the Sixth of January
following; During his Absence, the L. Treasurer, L. Keeper, and the Duke of
Lauderdale, who were the only Ministers of any considerable Credit with the
King, and who all pretended to be entirely United to the Duke, declaimed
Loundly; and with great Violence; against the said Lord, and his Actions in
Holland; and did hope, in his absence, to have totally Supplanted him, and to
have routed him out of the Kings Favor; and after that, thought they might
easily enough have dealt with the Parliament. But none of them had Courage
enough to speak against the Parliament, till they could get rid of him; for
fear they should not succeed, and that the Parliament would Sit in spite of
them, and come to hear that they had used their endeavors against it: which
would have been so Unpardonable a Crime with our Omniporent Parliament that no
Power could have been able to have Saved them from Punishment: But they finding
at his Return, that they could not prevail against him, by such Means and Arts
as they had then tried, resolved upon New Councels; which were to outrun him
in his own Course; which accordingly they under^o^k, and became as fierce
Apostles, and as zealous for Protestant Religion, and against Popery, as ever
my Lord Arlington had been before them; and in pursuance the^eof, persuaded the
King ^o issue out those severe Orders and Proclamations against Catholics,
which came out in February last; by which, they did as much as in them lay, to
extripate all Catholics, and Catholic Religion, out of the Kingdom; which
Councels, were in my poor Opinion so Detestable, being l^velled (as they must
needs be) so directly against the Duke, by People which he had Advanced, and
who had professed so much Duty and Service to him, that we were put upon new
Thoughts how to save his R. H. now from the Deceits and Snares of those Men,
upon whom we formerly depended. We saw well enough, that their design was to
make themselves as grateful as they could to the Parliament, if it must Sit;
they thinking nothing so acceptable to them, as the persecution of Popery; and
yet they were so obnoxious to the Parliaments displeasure in general, that they
would have been glad of any Expedient to have kept it off; though they durst
not engage against it openly themselves, but thought this Device of theirs
might serve for their purposes, hoping the Duke would be so alarmed at their
proceedings, and by his being left by every body, that he would be much more
afraid of the Parliament than ever, and would use his utmost power to prevent
its Sitting: Which they doubted not but he would endeavor; and they were ready
enough to work underhand too for him for their own sakes, not his) in order
thereunto but durst not appear openly; and to encourage the Duke the more to
endeavor the Dissolution of the Parliament, their Creatures used to say up and
down, That this Rigor against the Catholics, was in favor of the Duke, and to
make a Dissolution of the Parliament more easy, (which they knew he coveted) by
obviating one great Objection which was commonly made against it, which was,
That if the Parliament should be Dissolved, it would be said, That it was done
in favor of Popery; which Clamor they had prevented beforehand by the
Severity they had used against it.

As soon as we saw these Tricks put upon us, we plainly saw what men we had to
deal withal^ and what we ^ad to trust to, if we were wholly at their mercy: but
yet durst not seem so dissatisfied as we really were, but rather magnified the
Contrivance, as a Device of great Cunning and Skill: all this we did, purely to
hold them in a belief, that we would endeavor to Dissolve the Parliament, and
that they might rely upon his R. H. for that which we knew they longed for, and
were afraid they might do some other way, if they discovered that we were
resolved we would not: At length, when we saw the Sessions secured, we declared
that we were for the Parliaments meeting, as indeed we were, from the Moment we
saw our selves ^and^ed by all the Kings Ministers at such a rate, that we had
Reason to believe, they would Sacrifice France, Religion, and his R. H. too, to
their own Interest, if occasion served; and that the^ were lead to believe,
that that was the only way they had to save themselves at that time: For we saw
no Expedient fi^ to stop them in their Carrier of persecution, and those other
destructive Councils, but the Parliament; which had set it self a long time to
dislike every thing the Ministers had done, and had appeared violently against
Popery, whilst the Court seemed to favor it; and therefore we were Confident,
that the Ministers having turned their Faces, the Parliament would ^o so too,
and still be against them; and be as little for P^rsecution then, as they had
been for Popery, before. This I under^ook to manage for the Duke and the King
of France 's Interest; and assured Mounsier Rouvigny (which I am sure he will
testify, if occasion serves) that ^^at Sessions should do neither of them any
hurt; for that I was sure I had power enough to preven^ mischief, though I
^urst not engage for any good they would do; because I had but very few
assistances to carry on the ^or^ and wanted those helps, which others had of
making friends: The Dutch and Spaina^d spared no pains nor expense of Money to
animate as many as they could against France: Our Lord Treasurer, Lord Keeper,
all the Bishops, and such as called themselves Old Cavaliers, (who were all
then as one man) were not less industrious against Popery, and had the Purse at
their Girdle too; which is an Excellent Instrument to gain Friends with; and
all United against the Duke, ^^ Patron both of France and Catholic Religion.
To deal with all this Force, we had no Money, but what came from a few private
hands; and those so mean ones too, that I dare venture to say, that I spent
m^re my particular self out of my own Fortune, and upon my single Credit, than
all the whole Body of Catholick^ in England besides; which was so
inconsiderable, in comparison of what our Adversaries commanded, and we verily
believe did bestow in making their Party, that it is not worth mentioning: Yet
notwithstanding all this, we saw that by the help of the Nonconf^rmists, as
Presbyterians, Independents, and other Sects, (who were as much afraid of
Persecution as our selves) and of the Enemies of the Ministers, and
particularly of the Treasurer; who by that time had suppl^nted the Earl of
Arlington, and was grown sole manager of all Affairs himself, we should be very
able to prevent what they designed against us, and so render the Sessions
ineffectual to their Ends, though we might not be able to compass our own;
which were, to make some brisk step in Favor of his R. H. to show the King,
that his Majesty's Affairs in Parliament were not Obstructed, by reason of any
Aversion they had to his R. H 's Person, or apprehensions they had of him, or
his Religion; But from Faction and Ambition in some, and from a real
dissatisfaction in others, that we have not had such Fruits and good Effects of
those great sums of Money which have been formerly given as was expected. If we
could have made but one such st^p, the King would have certainly have restored
his R. H. to all his Commissions* upon which he would have been much greater
than ever yet he was in his whole Life, or could probably ever have been by any
other Course in the World, than what he had taken of becoming (...), etc. And
we were so very near gaining this Point, that I did humbly beg his (...) ^o put
the Parliament upon making an Address to the King, that his Majesty (...) be
pleased to put the Fleet into the hands of his R. H. as the only Person likely
to give a good (...) of so imp^^tant a Charge as that was to the Kingdom; And
showed his R. H. such Reasons ^^ ^^rswade him that we could carry it, that he
agreed with me in it, that be believed ^e could. (...) others telling him ^ew
great a Damage it would be to him, if he should miss in such a^ undertaking
(which for my part I could not then see, nor do I yet) he was prevailed upon
not to venture, though he was preswaded he could carry it, I did Communicate
this Design of ^ine to M^^nsieur R^^^lgny, who agreed with me, that it would be
the greatest advantage imaginable to (...) Master, to have the Dukes Power and
Credit so far Advanced as this would certainly do, if we could composs it: I
showed him all the Difficulty we were like to meet with, and what helps we
should have; but that we should want one very matterial one, Money, to carry on
the W^^k as we ought; and therefore I do Confess, I did shamefully beg his
Masters Help, and would willingly have been in ^verl^sting Disgrace with all
the World, if I had not with that assistance of Twenty Thousand Poun^s
Sterling, (which perhaps is not the tenth part of what was spent on the other
side) (...) is evident to the Duke, that he could not have missed it. Mounsieur
R^uvign^ used to tell me, that if he could be sure of succeeding in that
Design, his Master would give a ve^^ much larger Sum; but that he was not in a
Condition to throw away money upon Uncertainties. I (...) that nothing of that
nature could be so infallibly sure, as not to be subject to some possi^^lities
of ^ail^ng; ^ut that I du^st venture to undertake to make it eviden^, that
there was as great an assurance of succeeding in it, as any Husbandman can have
of a Crop in Ha^vest, wh^ se^s his Gr^^nd in its due Season; and yet it would
be counted a very imprudent piece of wa^iness an any Body, to scruple the
venturing so much Seed in its proper time, because it is possible it may be
totally lost, and no benefit of it found in Harvest; he that minds the Winds
and the Rains at that rate, shall neither Sow nor Reap. I take our Case to be
much the same as it was the last Sessions: If we can advance the Duke 's
Interest one step forward, we shall put him out of the reach of Chance for
ever; for he makes such a Figure already, that Cautious Men do not care to Act
against him, nor always without him, because they do not see that he is much
out-powered by his Enemies; Yet is he not at such a Pitch, as to be quite out
of danger, or free from opposition: But if he could gain any considerable new
addition of Power, all would come over to him as to the only steady Center of
our Government, and no body would contend with him further: Then would
Catholics be at Rest, and his Most Christian Majesty 's Interest secured with
us in England, beyond all apprehensions whatsoever.

In order to this, we have two great Designs to Attempt this next Sessions.
First, that which we were about before, viz. To put the Parliament upon making
it their humble Request to the King, that the Fleet may be put into his R. H's
Care. Secondly, to get an Act for general liberty of Conscience. If we carry
these two, or either of them, we shall in effect do what we list afterward;
and truly, we think we do not undertake these great points very unreasonably,
but that we have good Cards for our Game; Not but that we expect great
Opposition, and have great Reason to beg all the Assistance we can possibly
get, and therefore, if his Most Christian Majesty would stand by us a little in
this Conjuncture and help us with such a sum as 20000. l. sterling (which is no
very great matter to venture upon such an undertaking as this) I would be
content to be Sacrificed to the utmost Malice of my Enemies, if I did not
Succeed. I have proposed This several times to Mounsieur Rouvigny, who seemed
always of my Opinion; and has often told me, that he has Writ into France upon
this Subject, and has desired me to do the like: But I know not whether he will
be as Zealous in that point as a Catholic would be; because our prevailing in
these things would give the greatest Blow to the Protestant Religion here, that
ever it received since its Birth; which perhaps he would not be very glad to
see; especially when he believes there is another way of doing his Masters
Business well enough without it; which is by a Dissolution of the Parliament;
upon which I know he mightily depends, and Concludes, that if that comes to be
Dissolved, it will be as much as he needs care for; proceeding perhaps upon the
same manner of Discourse which we had this time twelve months. But with
submission to his better Judgment, I do think that our Case is extremely much
altered to what it was, in Relation to a Dissolution; for then the Body of our
Governing Ministers (all but the Earl of Arlington) were entirely united to the
Duke; and would have Governed his Way, if they had been free from all Fear and
Control, as they had been, if the Parliament had been Removed. But they having
since that time Engaged in quite different Councels, and Embark't themselves
and Interests upon other Bottoms, having declared themselves against Popery,
etc. To Dissolve the Parliament simply, and without any other step made, will
be to leave them to Govern what way they list, which we have Reason to suspect
will be to the prejudice of France and Catholic Religion. And their late
Declarations and Actions have Demonstrated to us, that they take that for the
most Popular way for themselves, and likeliest to keep them in absolute Power;
whereas if the Duke should once get above them (after the Tricks they have
played with him) they are not sure he will Totally forget the Usage he has ^ad
at their hands: Therefore it imports us now to Advance our Interest a little
further, by some such Project as I have Named, before we Dissolve the
Parliament; Or else perhaps, we shall but Change Masters (a Parliament for
Ministers) and continue still in the same Slavery and Bondage as before. But
one such step as I have proposed, being well made; we may safely see them
Dissolved, and not fear the Ministers; but shall be Established, and stand Firm
without ^^y Opposition; for every Body will then come over to us, and Worship
the Rising Sun.

I have here given you the History of three years, as short as I could, though
I am afraid it will seem very long and troublesometo your Reverence, among the
multitude of affairs you are concerned in: I have also shown you the Present
State of our Case, which may (by God^ Providence and good Conduct) be made of
such advantage to Gods Church; that for my part, I can searce believe my self
awake, or the thing real, when I think on a Prince in such an age as we live
in, converted to such a Degree of Zeal and Piety, as not to regard any thing in
the World in comparison of God Almighty's Glory, the Salvation of his own Soul,
and the Conversion of our poor Kingdom; which has been a long time oppressed, and
miserably harrast with Heresy and Schism. I doubt not but your Reverence will
consider our Case, and take it to heart, and afford us what help you can; both
with the King of Heaven, by your holy Prayers, and with his Most Christian
Majesty, by that great Credit which you most justly have with him. And if ever
his Majesty's affairs (or your own) can ever want the service of so
inconsiderable a Creature as myself, you shall never find any body readyer to
obey your Commands, or faithfuller in the Execution of them, to the best of his
power, than

Your most Humble and Obedient Servant


By all this we may see that you were deeply engaged not only in the Plot in
general, but also in the particular design of the great work, for the not doing
of which you were much blamed by Lewis the French King, this much affrighted
the King, your Brother, who himself by that great work Judged you engaged with
Coleman, and the Jesuits to destroy him, and was once of Opinion, that it was
necessary to have secured you, but his Opinion was altered, and you escaped,
but i^ that the two last Years Letters of Coleman had not been by you Stif^ed
you would have then let the world have seen Four main Points.

1. That the Life of your Brother the King, was by you and your Cutthroats
Judged to be the main Obstruction to the completing your Designs, and whilst
he lived, all your Affairs would be Embarassed, if not Defeated, for against
his Promise and his Alliance made with Lewis the French King, he had recalled
Liberty of Conscience, passed the Test Bill, made Peace with the States
General, and refused to Comply with his own Word and Promise of Dissolving the
Parliament, by which the French King would have gained a more Advantageous
Peace, and would sooner have been in a Condition to have let you have had his
Aid as well as his Purse, well then it seems your Cutthroats did in some
measure appear, as despairing of carrying your Point during his Life, can you
Imagine then, that we must not Conclude without the breach of good Manners,
that you and they were hastening his Death, this therefore made the Life of the
King more dear to his People, and it ought to have made him more careful of his
own Safety, but that Prince that God designs to destroy is delivered up to
strong and strange delusions, to the end he may be destroyed for not receiving
the Truth that rela^^s to his own Peace and Safety.

I remember in a Letter of this Colemans to Lachaise, upon the Marriage of the
Prince of Orange, he says thus, That the Catholics of England are sorry for
the Match, but if things were so managed that he may be removed that stands in
the gap, the Catholic Religion must needs flourish again in England, for as
much as his Masters Stedfastness and hearty-Zeal of Accomplishing that great
Work, was not a whit abated, and that he did not question but to remove the
main Obstacle in time, nay he gave such an Incomium of the Queen's Zeal for the
Catholic Religion, that she would be brought to any thing, and plainly said
that it was more than time, That the French King should Conclude a Peace to
join in with them, this Sir is no laughing Matter, this very Passage gave your
Brother such sad Apprehensions in the Princ^s Lodgings, that I thought he would
have dyed away; but the Prince gave him such Advice as might have saved him, if
he had pleased to have taken it, for Sir, it was Evident that your being a
Papist, was the Fountain of all the At^empts of your Popish Cutt^roats upon his
Life, and the main rise of all those dangers to which his Person was Exposed,
and not only so, but you, it appeared from that Letter, was heartily engaged in
the said Design, to Remove the great Obstruction that delayed your Work, the
mighty Work upon your Hands to Convert three Kingdom, and Sub^^^ the Northern
Heresy; truly it was a mighty Work, for that which you and your Cutthroats
called Heresy, was then not only the Religion of the Kingdom, but it was
become a great par^^^ the Policy thereof, and an essential ing^ed^ent of the
Constitution of our legal Government, and therefore Sir, it would have been
Impossible for you and your party, to have supplanted our Religion, which was
and is still our legal Right, without overthrowing all those Laws which s^cure
it to us: So that having you on their side, were the King once dead, their
Religion would be exal^ed to its greatest Grand^ur and Flourish, in these
Nations, as much as at any time since the Conque^^, is in effect to say, that
our whole Government should be overturned, and all our Laws subver^^d, which
i^^itled us to the Protestant Religion, truly when these Things were dis^^vered
to the Parliament, it was thought that your Brother and his Parliament would
have m^^e Provision in order to the Nations Security, bu^ this I must s^y, That
if in the aforesaid Letter there was any thing worthy of Considerati^n, i^ does
app^^r, that if there had ^^en any such Provision made, you and your
Acc^mplic^s did (...) design any ^en^fit to Acc^u^ to us, but on the other
Hand, the (...) of our Laws, and the removal of the Obstruction of all your
Designs.

2. No^withstanding your desp^ir of being able to Establish your Romish Faith
and Worship as long as ^our Brother lived, by reason of his Unsteadiness, and
what not, yet your Secretary was consid^nt of seeing all this Accomplished, you
had never greater hopes since your Queen Mary's Time, than at that Juncture,
you might as well have told u^, That you were res^lved to Remove him, but you
and Coleman in the two last years Letters, were P^^in and Pithy, and there you
tell us, That you were resolved upon the Point, Nay Coleman was so sure of his
Point, That he told Godfrey, that is was out of the Power of M^n to Baffle the
Design, and laughed at the Discovery as a very Vain undertaking, but this and
other Hints at several Times, cost Jus^ice Godfrey his Life, for if he had
lived, he could have testified very much of what he had revealed to him, and
had promised to make a considerable Discovery of your Sirs Proceedings in his
Correspondences and Nego^iations abroad.

3. If that we had the Benefit of the two last years Correspondency, we should
have found how Strong and Powerful your Conf^deracy had been against the
Protestant Religion, and Interest within these Kingdoms, for it could not be
the Jesuits alone, nor your foreign Combination, that could give you the hopes
of such a Change in the Government, or had you not intended the Death of the
King your Brother, and Coleman himself owned in one of those Letters, that all
his former Correspondency was but fooling till they came to resolve of removing
the main hinderance, to the effecting their Design; it is true, you had the
Engagement of the most Eminent Persons of the King^om, that were of that
Communion, but they were not a foundation sufficient for you to build your
hopes upon of Establishing Rome's Religion, and French Slavery, till you had
destroyed the King your Brother, for as long as he lived, he did through his
Cunning and Cowardice put many Remoras in your way, he was good at undertaking,
but when any thing came to be put in Execution, then he commonly quitted the
Pit, as loving to sleep in a whole skin, whether with or without his Whores,
nay rather than he would have the least Trouble, he could part with the Popish
Religion which he loved most of all.

4. That though your Brother was of your Religion, and had been a Dog in a
String to you in all your accursed Plots and Conspiracies, even to merit the
greatest care and duty from you, yet because for the lucre of 1250000 l. he had
m^de Concessions against your party that pleased you, not therefore like your
self, you were filled with Rage, and vowed to revenge your Self upon him, all
which we should have seen in word^ at Length* the old Lord Anglisey had them in
keeping, but you had wheedled your Brother to take that Paladium out of his
Costody, and to put it into Sir Philip Floyds, in Order to preserve them for
the Parliaments Consideration then sitting, but there were so many Passages
that would have Exposed you to the Censure of a Parliament, even to the Hazard
of your Head, and many of your Brothers Faults would have been Published in the
said last two years Correspondence, that it was rather thought fit to Commit
them to the Flames, or otherwise to Stifle them, than that they should be made
Public, we had Sir Philip Examined before the Commit of Lords that then sat
in the Lord Privy Seals Lodgings, and then he promised to give Them and the
House of Peers Satisfaction, concerning the said Letters, bu^ the Parli^ment
was dissolved and through your Procurement the use of Parliaments laid aside,
then I and my Friends persued the Villain^ to the Council, he was so Gui^ty in
that Affair, that the then Villainous Council did think him fit to be removed,
and he was for some time suspended, but you never left your Brother till he was
restored, and so all was lost, and the Nation could never have the Benefit of
the Discovery those Letters had made of your villainous Undertaking, in
Relation to your Brothers Blood, but you d^d the business at last, and invaded
the Crown, and held it till you run away, so that at long (...) you made us an
amends for all the Villainies you had Committed.

7. A seventh Testimony was the Lord Barkshires Letters, they were so Plain,
that the said Noble Lord thought fit to Rub of, as not being able to S^and the
rest of them, and upon his Deathbed did Confess the Design that was then
carrying on by you and your Accomplices for the Great and Fatal Blow: I
Challenge all the World that heard those Letters read in the Commit of Lords
then sitting in the Lord Privy Seals Lodgings, whether there could be a (...)
Demonstration of your Con^piracy, I am sure all that heard them pre^ended at
(...) time to be fully s^tisfi^d, and (...) Confiden^ were your Brother now
alive he would no^ (...) the world, that (...) Letters hastened the Pro^ogation
and Dissolution of the long Parliament, and of the sending you into Flanders,
(...) the S^orm that threatened you was blown over; for no sooner your Brother
had d^coyed a Parcel of honest Lords into his Council, and had exposed them,
for their go^d will to preserve his H^nour and Reputation wi^h his People, if
it had ^een p^ssible, but your party grew st^ong upon us even to that degree,
that no flesh was ab^e to bear it, as for my Lord Barkshires Letters, I had not
the opportuni^y of seeing them, and therefore I must re^er my self to them that
are yet alive, that were of that Commit, when it was first Constituted if
there be any such.

8. Testimony that Justified the truth of the Popish Plot was the Murder of Sir
Edmund Bury Godfrey, whom you and your Villains got sent into another world to
tell Tales there, for you and your Cutthroars resolved, that he should tell
none in this, of which as I said before you got some way or another, (I know
not how for your deeds were deeds of darkness) that Coleman should have notice
of his being Secured which certainly did much allay the Poor Rogues Melancholy,
and prevented his Evidence just then turning against your self, of which you
were much afraid, and began to smell in your Harness, and all your
Bloodhounds began to Stink for fear; you may remember that you and your Blood
hounds had for several days been Contriving the dispatch of that Magistrate, at
last you know that a Letter was sent by some of your Crew, to Engage this
Gentleman to meet several Persons of quality at a place that was well known in
those days, where he staying somewhat la^e, and having some business at another
house was forced to go by Somerset house; he was decoyed in by those rogues of
yours, that were afterward; your Executioners, who told him there were two men
a fighting, and he was by them desired to appease the Quarrel, no sooner being
entered within the Yard, but they got him Seized, and immediately Strangled him,
and then they Carried him into the House of Bael, where some of the Mu^derers
were merry with the dead Body, whether Mrs. Morley and her Kennel of Whores
pissed upon him I cannot say, and others they Spitt upon him as the Story goes,
but no more of that, I am fully assured he was basely and villainously
Murdered by your contrivance, and by the Contrivance of your Bloody
Cutthroats; for do but Observe, first you know that his Body was Carried to Dr.
Goddens Lodgings, a Bloody Rogue, that would have been talked withal, had he
been within the reach of the Law; after that he was Carried to Greenbury-hill,
where he was found with his Sword run through his Body, but the relations of
this Gentleman missing him, they applied to the Council then sitting, for at
that time your Brother and you, and so^^ other of the Court were at Newmarket,
and a Proclamation was Ordered, but care was taken to deceive an honest English
Nobleman who through his Credulity of a rascally Cabinet maker comes, and tells
the Council that Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey was Married to the Widow Offley, and
was found in Bed with her, this Device put off the Proclamation for one Council
day, and by the next your Villains had got his Body conveyed to the Place where
it was found, which being brought home, and a Coroner sent for, and a Jury
impanelled to Consider how he came by his Death.

But Sir, It is worthy of your Consideration, and therefore I pray observe
this, That this poor Gentleman being found in this Condition, the thinking sort
of Mankind were all much Concerned, and Multitudes went to see the dead Body,
but your Villains with a wide Mouth gave out, that he was a melancholy Man,
and that it was incident to his Family to make away with themselves, but the
Gentleman's Brother and Friends, knew the falsity of that Story and disproved
it, and were resolved to look narrowly into the thing; and accordingly took so
much Pains to have the Truth found out, that you were much offended at it, yet
for all that, they let his Body lie Exposed for several days; when his Body was
found, you had a good Natured Villain that sent for One of Sir Edmunds
Brothers, and spoke with him concerning his Brothers Estate, Mr. Godfrey came,
tho full of Confusion and Trouble, and m^^ with the Spark, who told him he was
heartily Sorry for the loss of his Brother, but withal told him he was a
melancholy Man, and out of Friendship and Respect he bore to Sir Edmund, he
would be so much a Friend to his Relations, as to endeavor to save his Estate,
and find a way to Prevail upon the Coroner to return him Distracted, that the
Estate might not be forfieted to the King, or he would beg the Estate of the
King for him, and his Relations; this was the Sum and Substance of the Rogues
discourse with Mr. Godfrey, but Sir, you may Remember that this Villain had
agreed with you, that Colonel Leg should beg the Estate, and accordingly did
beg the Estate of the King your Brother, and the Estate was given to the said
Leg, upon Condition the Coroners inquest returned Justice Godfrey a Pelo de
se, and that was the Game you played to the utmost of your Power, so that as
you and your Villains had robbed him of his Life, his Estate also must go to
maintain the Luxury of One of your Minions.

Well then, how did Mr. Godfrey Carry himself in this Affair? Truly he was much
Concerned at this white-liver'd Devil, and his diabolical Suggestions, and
honestly despised the Offers made him by this filthy Suborner. Nay, if the Duke
of Buckingham himself had been in his Place, he could not have showed a greater
Abhorrence of this Devil incarnate, and therefore more fully he was resolved to
pursue his Point, and did with the utmost Vigor, and you was graciously pleased
all this time not to be Idle, and you had good reason Honest Man, therefore you
joined in with Mrs. Remarkable his Spouse, and abroad you send your Rogues who
were extremely busy with the Coroner and Jury, whom you could Bribe, as well
as your white-liver'd Spark could Suborn, and between the one and the other,
you gave your selves great hopes of a return of a Felo de se, and were mighty
Merry at the Chopps, as if Gallows Wood had been all your own, but the Coroner
and his Jury finding his Neck broke, and the Shoes on his Feet clean, with
other apparent Proofs, which were so Manifest that all the Tricks you and your
Villains had used to smother this Murder, were to no Purpose, for the Jury
brought it in a Barbarous Murder, and so Leg went without the Estate, and you
were defeated of your Expectations, he was solemnly buried, and all Mankind but
the Conspirators believed that he was Murdered by the Papists, and the Council
Issued out a Proclamation to Discover the Murderers.

But how do you Strut and Vapor like a Pig in a Sty, that has had two
breakfasts in a Morning, and say I, how does it appear that the Papists
Murdered Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey? And how does it appear that I was Concerned
in it? Before I answer these Questions I must put you in mind of one Thing,
since you could not be Content to Murder him, but you also endeavored to
Stifle his Murder, and not only so, but you would have Murdered his
Reputation when Dead, for your main Business as I told you just now, was to
have him brought in a Felo de se, but you failing in that, and found that the
People were in a great rage against you as a Principal, and the then Queen
Consort, as a wicked Abettor, of this Horrible Murder, there was by you and
your Party great care taken to lay this Noise, by giving out that it was
impossible, that he should be destroyed by the Papists, for, said they, he was
an entire Friend to the Papists, and that he had performed the u^most Service
in their behalf, that friendship it self could suggest, truly Sir, your Rogues
might as well have said, that Sir Edmund was a Papist, as that he was a Friend
to Papists, or the Popish interest, but what can be said to this Matter more,
than to tell you that your party were a provoking Generation of Rogues, and
your Villainous Aspersion of the Name of that worthy Magistrate did, I say,
abuse the Patience of all that knew that Gentleman, and were Masters of Sense
and Honor, when ever the black Mouths of your clamourous Rogues thus opened
against Justice Godfrey, who that he was a Protestant no Man gave greater
Demonstrations than himself, so that he was far enough from being Enrolled in
the number of the Friends of your Villainous Crew: I must needs say of that
poor Gentleman, That he little thought that a professed Member of the Church of
England. and a bold Assertor of the Protestant Doctrine, and a constant
Reliever of those of the Reformed Religion, not only so, but One that Expected
to be the first Martyr under the Popish Rage, should be to Posterity marked as
a Cordial Friend to those avowed Enemies of his own Religion, what Impudence!
Had your Rogues to call him a principal Confident of your Hellborn Crew, that
were Enemies to our Laws and Liberties for the Preservation of which, he was a
watchful Magistrate.

Sir to be Plain with you, what Truth, or what thing like Truth, could we
Expect from you, or your Villains, who after you had Murdered in a most
barbarous Manner an Innocent Gentleman, you were not Contented with that, but
by a second Assassination, you did Endeavor to Murder him in his Credit and
Reputation, I cannot forbear to admire the Wisdom of our good God to the
Nation, that gave you and your wicked wretched Party up to vent your Lies that
were so Palpable, that the Credulous Party of Mankind might the better be
prepared and fortified against those other Reports, which then your Devils,
such Liars in one thing, they were not by them to be Credited in any other
thing, unless they brought better Proof then their bare Testimony, now Sir, I
will Answer you two Questions, that you just now Huffed and Bounced withal.

1. How it did Appear that Godfrey was Murdered by the Papists, you cannot
have Forgotten that he was a very Useful and an Active Justice of the Peace,
and that he had taken more Examinations of the Popish Plot, than you were
willing the World should be blessed withal, and was very Diligent in finding out
those who had been Active in this Plot of yours, and from the Sixth of
September to the day of his Death, he had employed much of his Time in serving
the Public in Relation to that Conspiracy, some of the Priests and Jesuits and
eke your sweet self foreseeing your own Danger, and the overthrow of your
blessed Design, you and they had been Carrying on for so many Years, your
Council at St. Jameses had several Consultations with you, how to prevent the
Discovery, and as you and your Party did never use to stick at Blood, but
rather counted it Meritorious to shed it, though never so unjustly, when your
Cause and Church might be Profited by it, you did resolve to secure your Self
and Party, by the taking away his Life, and in order to this your Popish
Priests and Jesuits, and others had several meetings, where they debated the
necessity of taking away the Life of this worthy Gentleman; therefore,

1. Let me observe to you what Sir Edm. Godfrey told me, and to introduce that
Discourse, you may remember, that upon the Sixth of September 1678, I did go
before Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, and there upon Oath, I gave in several
Depositions, after that the said Godfrey had sworn me upon them, he delivered
them again to me, and after that I had taken two or three Copies of those
Depositions, I went on the 28th. of the same Month again to Sir Edmund, and Sir
the 28th, at Night all those Depositions were laid open, and made out before
the then Council, and I was Examined by the King your Brother the 29th of
September, and upon Monday the 30th of September he told me, that several
Persons of Quality had Threatened him for being so Zealous in the Discovery of
the Popish Plot, and also told me, that others who were well wishers to the
Discovery, did think he had not been quick enough but too Remiss, and that they
would Complain of him in Parliament, which was to sit the 21st of October
following, at which he was much concerned, but I told him that I knew how
diligent he had been, and that he need not fear a Parliament^ and the Week
before he was missing he came to me, and told me that the day before you went
to Newmarket, that you had severely Threatened him, and several others, some of
whom were shut up in the Tower (for that Grace in your Church, which we call
high Treason in ours,) and asked him what he had to do with it? In a Word, he
told me that he went in Fear of his Life, by the whole Popish Party, and that
he had been Dogged several days, upon which I Advised him ^o get a Stout Fellow
to Attend him, but he valued not a Man's waiting upon him, but said he Feared no
Man if they came fairly to Work, but Sir, that was not the business of your
Cutthroats, they were to do him a Mischief, and that in the most bass and
cowardly Mannery they could, for if they had gone fairly to Work they would
have spoiled all, for they as well as you knew he was a Man of Courage,
therefore it was the more easy to lay a Trap for him.

2. I pray call to mind the Evidence that Sir Thomas Robinson chief
Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas gave who had been Acquainted with Sir
Edmund Bury Godfrey above Forty Years, and was with him brought up a
Westminster School, and continued in his Acquaintance all along till the
breaking out of the Civil Wars, and after the Restoration their Acquaintance
was again renewed, and were for many Years in the Commission of the Peace
together, both for the City of Westminster and County of Middlesex, these two
Gentlemen met upon the 7th of October, which was upon a Monday, and Dined with
the head Baily, it being the Quarter Sessions for Westminster, where Sir Edmund
and this Sir Thomas Robinson had some Discourse of your Popish Plot, Sir Thomas
told Sir Edmund that he understood that he (Sir Edmund) had taken several
Examinations about the Popish Plot, to which Sir Edmund Answered, that he had,
but thought he should have little Thanks for his Pains, and further told the
said Sir Thomas, that what he did, was not with that forwardness which was
generally thought, being more willing that any body else would have done it
rather than he, but Sir Thomas told him, he had done no more than his duty, and
was very Curious with Sir Edmunds leave to have seen the Examinations, but at
that time you, or your whiteliver'd Tode had them in keeping, and so he could
not pleasure his old Friend but Sir Thomas did testify his Zeal for having the
bottom of the Plot Discovered: Truly Sir Edmund was much Afraid, for his
Friend always said, That he should be the first Martyr, he being asked whether
he was Afraid of himself, he said no, he did not Fear them if they came
fairly, for that he should part not with his Life tam^ly, Sir Thomas gave him
the same Council that I had done, and would have him get a Man to go with him,
but Sir Edmund did not approve of it, judging a Man to be but a Clog to him,
tho'a whole coiled Cable was not one to you.

3. A Third witness that I shall offer to you wa^ Mr. Chetwin, who will tell
you, that he was for the most part of the Summer, 1678, in the Country, and
about the 29th, of August came into Staffordshire, at that time a Gentleman one
Mr. Sanbidge who was a Kinsman of the Lord Astons, and well accquainted with
the Family where he then was as a guest, which was half a Mile distant from the
said Lord Astons, used to come and play at Tables with Mr. Chetwin, at one
particular time in October the said Sanbidge came and told him, that a Justice
of the Peace in Westminster was Killed, to which Mr Chetwin did say, that he
had received Letters from thence the very last Post, which gave him no account
of it, then he told him that Mr. Dugdale had reported it: Now Sir I pray
Observe on Saturday your Villains did murder him, that very night they gave
notice to their friends, he was missed the Sunday and Monday, and we knew not
what was become of him till Thursday, now this Tuesday was the Tuesday after
the Saturday, on which he was Murdered; so that it was plain to all the world
that you^ Villains in the Country knew of his being Murdered before it was
known here in Town what was become of him, but take this along with you, you
would not let Mr. Chetwin be Examined at the Trial of these Murderers, or to
bring in the witness that could have Confirmed what he said in relation to that
Villainous Murder.

4. The Fourth Witness that I shall put you in mind of was Mr. Dugdale, who
said the same thing that Mr. Chetwin had before restified, concerning the news
of Sir Edmund Bury Godfreys Murder, he received a Letter from your old Friend
Harcourt, who gave his Brother Ewers this Account in these words, this night
Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey is dispatched, which when Dugdale saw he was much
discontented and said, this would spoil all the business, and upon the Tuesday
he went to an Alehouse that was near his Lords House, and reported the same, by
which means Mr. Chetwin came to have the news of the Murder of Godfrey on the
Tuesday, and we in London knew not what became of him till the Thursday
following, but you took all the Care you could that as little Testimony as
might be should be produced at the trial of the Murderers, for Dugdale was
omitted and his Testimony of that Murder lay dorment till the Trial of the
five Jesuits.

5. A Fifth Witness that I shall produce in the point under Consideration is
Mr. Prance, he was your Demetrius that made your Silver Shrines for the House
of Baal, and the Brass Screws and Antependiums that he fitted up for the
Service of Baal, rendered him a man much noted amongst your Villainous Crew, but
before I tell you what he spoke to this matter, give me leave Sir, to Relate
one Story of Sir Edmund Bury Godfreys Murder which I never saw but once in
Print, and I rather insert this Story, because that firstborn of Impudence and
Falseness, Lestrange so ridiculed Prance his Testimony, because he recanted in
your Brothers Closet, all that he had been Examined and Sworn to about the
Death of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, which he again Recanted after he came to
Prison, you Remember he was a Papist, and was a Silver-Smith, and used to make
Trinkets for the Priests about Town, and was assisting at that Murder, some
^ime after that Murder was Discovered some of Prance's Neighbors having
observed that Prance did not come to his house for several days, they
Represented it to some Members of the House of Commons, that they had a great
Suspicion that Prance had a hand in the Murder of Sir Edmund, and thereupon
they got an Order to Seize Prance, and bring him before the House, which they
did, and the House Ordered Sir Richard Everard, and Sir Charles Harbord to
Examine him, but what answers he made to those two Justices I cannot tell, but
before the Court of Kings Bench he gave this Testimony: He tells the Court how
long it was before they could parswade him to Consent to the Murdering a Man,
he then tells the Court by whom he was enticed, which made his story more
Probable, and that was by Gerald and Kelley two Priests, and he further told
the Court, by the Doctrine of your Villainous party, it was no sin, but rather
an Act of Charity to kill a man that had done, and was like to do, them more
Mischief, now Sir I pray Observe, that if we consider the persons that Preach
to them, and the Doctrine they Taught, it carried a great Show and Presumption
of Truth in it self, I Suppose Sir, you have not forgotten their meeting at the
Plow, which some of these Murdering Rogues of yours had denied, but was most
manifestly proved by the Master of the House, and the Boy, that Prance would
have kicked down Stairs, and the times these Villains wished for came at last,
for they were to watch an opportunity, and Prance was to help them, and
therefore he was to be at Home, or to be within ^all, that his help might not
be wanting at the Critical Minute; Prance confessed that they were to do the
work that Day, on which it was done; you may Observe that Sir Edmund Bury
Godfrey had complained both to Sir Thomas Robinson and my self, that he had
been Dogged several Days, and Prance said that he had Dogged him, and that
Gerald the Priest, had Resolved to Dog him to his own Door, and to have Killed
him in the Lane that leads to his own House, this was one of the Priests of
your Church who counts it an Act of Chari^y, to Murder a Christian, to
Propagate Christianity, but to the Point, they waylaid him, and watched his
coming from a Place, which Prance could not tell, but I can, it was Sir you
know from the Duke of Norfolks, on whom you would have laid the Murder,
because he was not of the French Interest, though of Rome's Religion, and the
said Justice Godfrey coming from the Duke of Norfolks, was to pass by
Sommerset-House alias Godfrey-Hall, or the Pope's and your Slaughter house,
into which place they enticed the Poor Innocent Gentleman, pretending that
there were two men fighting, and that he being a Justice of the Peace would
with much greater ease keep the King^ Peace than another could, truly Sir, if
they had been of your Immediate Council at St. Jameses they could not have
found out a better way for it, knowing that this Gentleman was according to his
Office and Duty ready to do all Acts of Justice as any one then in that Post,
and as little afraid of the Persons of Men as any of his Office, for he had
said if any man did him a Mischief they must do it basely, for he did not fear
the best of them all upon fair play, therefore you will do well to observe that
when his Friends in faithfulness desired him to get a man, he slighted their
advice, and all that knew him, knew, that he was a man of singular Courage, and
therefore your Villains were not at much trouble to lay a trap for him.

Well Sir, they got him in, and what was the next intention, Hill flings the
Cravat about his Neck, and was assisted in that Pious Work by Gerald the
Priest, and the rest of the Murderers that were there, and so the Gentleman was
Strangled, and least he should come to life again, which they feared, from the
motion that his Body made, Green Twisted his Neck round, and you know the
Chirurgions did testify his Neck was Broke, and that none of the Wounds which
were in his Body were given him, whilst he was alive, then his Body was Carried
to Hills Chamber, and your Murderers helped, and left his Body there, and then
to Consecrate the Villainy he was Carried into Baals house where the Mistress
and her Maids made themselves Obscenely merry with his Body on the Sunday
Night, for you know the better Day the better Deed, Prance further said, that
he come on Monday Night and found the Body in another Room hard by Hills
Lodgings, and some thing thrown over his Face, but nothing over yours, for you
and your party were as impudent as so many Carted Whores, having no sense of
the Murder you Committed; come on then, upon the Tuesday Night following they
removed his Body to Hills Lodgings, where it lay till Wednesday Night, your
Friend Prance said he saw him there that Night, for he was the man that helped
to carry him out, Prance and Gerald carried him first, and Green and Kelly went
before, and took him up afterward, he Confessed that they set him on Horseback
and Hill behind him.

From all which Sir, you may Observe that Pranc^ tells the whole Story from Top
to Toe, and nothing was Objected against Prance but these two things, first,
that he recanted his Testimony that he had first given, this Sir was no
Argument at all of his Falsehood, but of his Fear, for you must needs Know that
it was no good Argument to say he was not to be believed because he denied what
he once said, for he then had not his Pardon from the King, and the Horror of
the Fact had caused a dread and consternation to have seized upon his Soul, I
say the blackness of the Fact it Self, and the fear of being destroyed by his
own Party, and the loss of his Trade and Livelihood by them, was enough to
have Affrighted a better Man than Prance out of his Wits, you know that his
denial was short, and so his Recantation of that denial was on the otherhand as
quick, the former without an Oath, and the latter upon Oath, for when he had
retracted his Evidence he was no sooner got to Prison with his Keeper, but he
fell on his Kn^es to his Keeper, and begged of him for Gods sake to carry him
back to the King, Protesting that what he had said at first was true, and that
his denial was false, and his Keeper gave the Court to know, that after this
Prance was pardoned, that he was Quiet and Sedate in his Mind, and all this was
not forced from Prance by Torture, as that Villain Lestrange would Suggest, and
all by the Assistance of an old white-liver'd Baals Priest, was of another
Opinion till a new measure of the Holy Ghost fell upon him in a rainy Morning,
he was a false Witness and helped to stifle that Murder, for which he received
the Wages of his Villainy, and since has been Advanced, for nothing as I know
of, but being an impudent false Prophet.

6. A Sixth Witness that I shall present to your Consideration, is Mr. Bedlow,
who tells you, That before the Murder, Lefever, Pritchard, Keins, and other
Priests treated with him to be Assisting in the Murder of Mr. Edmund Bury
Godfrey, but He (tho he promised) relented, and did not come till Monday Octo.
14th, he met with Lefever in Red Lion Court, who charged him with not keeping
his Word, but charged him the said Bedlow to meet him at Nine of the Clock at
Night, and there told Bedlow, that though he was not Assisting as he had
promised at the killing Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, yet if he would be Assisting
in the carrying him off, he should have a considerable Reward, whether it was
2000 l. or 4000 l. I do not well remember, he then desired ^o know of Lefe^er,
whether he might not see the Body, who told him yes, which ^^low did, and then
they advised about the Disposal of i^, and Bedlow advised the ^inking of the
Body in the River with Weights, which was not agreed to, but in see^^g the
Body, Bedlow s^w Prance there in Company, but did not know him before; you may
remember that Bedlow says, he was troubled in Conscience, having twice taken
the S^crament to conceal the business, and went to Bristol, where God put it
into his Heart that some Murders were past, and greater were to come, for the
prevention whereof he was convinced that it was his duty to come to London, to
reveal the wickedness which he did, you know, to as much purpose as ever any
Man came.

I pray Sir, for your Edisication and Comfort, be pleased to take notice, that
Sir Charles Harbord, and Sir Richard Everard, having examined Prance, and the
House being set, left Prance to the ca^e of the Constable of Covent Garden, who
brought him ^o the Lobby of the House of Lords, where Bedlow was, who when he
saw Prance, ^^ough he had never seen him but in Sommerset-House, when Bedlow
was admitted to the sight of the dead Body, he commanded some of his Guards to
seize Prance, for that he was One of those he saw at Sommerset-House, where the
Body of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey lay, and by the same token he had then a black
Peruke, but when in the said Lobby none, hereupon search was made, and the
Peruke was found; now by the way it is convenient to make you a remark or two
that may give you some Comfort in this hour of your distress. First, Observe
the Strangness of the Discovery of Prance by Bedlow, who had never seen Prance
but once before, and that by Candle Light, and in a Peruke, should upon the
first sight of him again known him without a Peruke, the other Remark I make,
is the Clearness of Sir Edmund Godfrey's being Murdered, and the murdered Body
being at Sommerset-House upon Monday Night, after the Murder on the Saturday
Night before, and from hence it was, that Prance became an Evidence in this
discovery.

7. I have to present to you the Evidence of Henry Berry, who was One of your
murdering Crew, and he gave in this Testimony before the then Marquess of
Winchester now Duke of Bolton, wherein he said, that he had orders to tell all
Persons of Quality, that the Queen was Private, and that they were not to come
in, and it seems the Queen was private for two days, nay so Private, that the
Prince when he came to make that good Lady a Visit, he was not admitted to come
in, and being refused he returned back again; Now it seems Sir, he never had
any such Orders before, what was the Reason why the Queen was to be Private:
Truly there was good Reason for it, for the thing of its own Nature required
Privacy, and it may be her sacred Body might also be much wearied with the
Sunday Nights Cou^ant over the dead Body, and so could not be at Liberty to
receive Visits, and truly it was not fit, that a Person of her Quality should
be disturbed in the doing such a charitable Work, as that was, which was
performed on the Sunday Night, but it may be, you and your Crew at St.
Germains, do not like to have that gracious Lady reflected on in such a way,
why I pray you so Angry? Why so much out of Humou^? Either Berry had Orders, or
he had none, if he had Orders, why was the Queen to be more private at that
time than another, unless some such secret piece of Service as this was to be
done, which every Body was not to know, or if he had none, then he made use of
the Queens Name to obtain such a Privacy, and truly you ought neither to blame
him, nor the Queen, for it was both their parts to come off as clear as they
could, or how could you have been brought off with honor, but as a specimen of
this Privacy, my Lady Sanderson, the Mother of the Maids, and the Protestant
Maids of Honor, could not be Admitted, no not to perform their Place and Duty
to their sacred Mistress, whilst this fit of devotion lasted, it being a work
claimed by your Church as its inherent Right, nay that good Queen sent her
Gentleman Usher-Slaughter, to walk in the Court that Night, not to gaze upon
the Stars I suppose, but to observe how the Squares went, but the Puppy went
too far, and asked the Captain of the Guards, whether he did not hear a busle,
but the Captain not understanding the business, said, he thought once he did
hear a busle, but according to his Place and Duty he had not sense enough to
take notice, and the very Night the dead Body was brought to the back Stairs,
the Queen was graciously pleased to Sup with a Person of Quality that Night;
upon the whole Sir, what think you of the business, I think it a strange sort of
Privacy, and very unusual, and those that did sometimes ^ think, thought very
strangly of it, since those three days of her said Privacy, very few or none
but Papists were admitted to it.

8. I must mention another strong presumptive Testimony, And that is the going
of Hill to Sir Edmund Godfrey's House, which Hill would have denied, but Sir
Edmunds Maid Swore it expressly upon him the said Hill, who (said she) first
came to him, and went up Stairs, and then came back again, and that she found
him still there, and this the Maid Swore positively, that she knew him again at
his Trial by his Face, and by the Clothes that he then had, which were the same
Clothes, that he had on at his Trial, and that this was the Man that was with
her Master, and this Mr. Hill could not disprove, and so it was a vile
presumption of his guilt, for Sir, what had he to do there at Sir Edmund Buries
House, he would have done well to have told the World, but that he could not,
and therefore he faintly denied the matter, which was proved by the said Maid
Servant, but the Maid proved that Point upon him as well as Prance, the maid's
Name was Elizabeth ^urtis and had no hand in her Masters Murder.

9. I have one pregnant Testimony more of this villainous Murder, and then I
shall have done, There was a Gentleman whose Name was Spence, that did much
resemble this worthy Magistrate, and about a day or two before this horrible
Murder was Committed, had an occasion to pass by Sommerset House by the
Watergate late in the Night, this Gentleman was seized, and drawn in to that
Place by a parcel of Villains, whose Faces he knew not, and when they had
viewed him, they said it is not he let him go; the Gentleman wondered at the
thing, not knowing the meaning of it at all, let the thing pass, taking them
for a parcel of rude drunken Fellows, but when Justice Godfreys body was found
murdered, he then began to recollect with himself the Usage he had met withal,
and went and gave in Information of the Matter, and those that saw him never
found any resemble the said Godfrey more than he, I have seen the Gentleman,
and have startled at him, for neither of Sir Edmunds Brothers that did survive
him, was more like him as I then thought; let the World say what they will,
this I am sure, had this Witness been produced, it would have gone a great way
to have proved the Design that was in hand, the mighty Work, that mighty
Charity that your party intended for that Gentleman, and that the Charity,
might not be Public, that their left Hand might not know what their right Hand
did, it was to be done with all manner of Privacy, no Visits to be received at
Sommerset-House, whilst this Royal Work of Charity was on foot.

What say you Sir to all this, how can you bring of your Party from the guilt
of this magistrates Blood, was Prance bribed by any Man to give that Testimony
he gave? was there any Reward ever proposed to him? if there was, who proposed
it? What was the Reward to be? It Is true there was a Reward of 500 l. but he
was so far from laying hold of that Reward, that he denied all, till the fear
of the Justice of the Nation, and lying under the Conviction of a guilty
Conscience; he had also fears that he should not be pardoned, and threatened,
that he should be ruined, which indeed did make him deny what he had Sworn;
which brings me to a second Objection, that in the time of your Reign he
retracted upon Oath that, and all his Testimony, and pleaded Guilty to and
Indictment of Perjury which is testimony enough that all he said was false,
this is the greatest Objection that can be made, and you have all given you for
granted, but I pray observe:

1. That Prance (when he saw the Discovery of the Popish Plot was run down, and
having nothing but the prospect of utter ruin) fled into Holland, where he for
some time continued, but the truth of it is, that Prance through some
imp^udences of his in his deportment, and the Folly o^ some of our Friends
there, he lost much of their value and esteem, that they ought to have had for
him, he grew weary of Holland, and had some thoughts of returning for England,
not with any intent of retracting what was by him before testified, and
believing himself not to be considerable enough for the revenge of any of your
Party, and upon that account he imagined he might escape, but before his
departure, least he should be put upon the denying of what he had sworn, he in
the presence of several, some of whom I think are yet alive, did make a
Protestation of the Truth of what he had sworn in relation to the death of Sir
Edmund Bury Godfrey, and the Popish Plot was true, and whether he did not leave
something of that nature under his hand I cannot tell, but I have received an
account of the former, that he did make such a Protestation; since it is so
then, that nothing can be more plain,

2. This Prance had a Wife that was a Papist, and this base false Woman had, at
the instigation of several Priests and J^suites, assured this Prance her
Husband, that you had pardoned him, and that he might return to England with
Safety, now Prance having ourliv'd his reputation with our Friends then in
Holland, and finding himself slighted by them, he was the more easily prevailed
upon by the importunity of his said Wife, and especially since she had given
him such an assurance of his escaping the rage and fury of the Priests, and
your other crew of the Synagogue of Satan, but his Wife betrayed him; for he no
sooner arrived in England, but he was shopt, and severely threatened.

3. This Prance not having Principles strong enough to support him, and his
Wife lying at him day and night, and the Popish Party raging against him, and
that Villain Jefferies roaring at him in the Council, and the poor wretch
fearing you would have his Blood, he did give way, and pleaded guilty to an
Indictment of Perjury, and did retract what he had said, and truly a Man in
that day stood in need of a great measure of courage and resolution, yea and of
conduct too to preserve himself, all which Prance wanted, but when you had done
what you pleased to Prance, I dare be bound to kiss your Fingers at St.
Germains, or elsewhere, if you did not reward Prance, or some body for you; for
I observed the great care that you took to have him discharged, and to set up
his Trade again.

4. All these proceedings of yours against Prance, did you no manner of
service; for the matter was so fully and plainly proved beyond Exception, that
I need not say much more in the case, for it was impossible that a man of
Prances mean Capacity, should invent a Story with so many Circumstances all so
consistent, if there had been no truth in it, nay let me tell you, that he was
so fortified in every Circumstance, in so much that your compelling of Prance
to retract what he had said, rather convinced more of the truth of Godfreys
being Murdered by your wicked Crew at Sommerset-House, than staggered any ones
belief, for those who found his Body, the Chi^urgions that viewed it, and all
that stood by and beheld him, are still of the same Opinion, that he was
murdered, and that by the Popish Party; all the Efforts of that Villain
Lestrange to the contrary notwithstanding; and what tricks that old Rogue has
used to bafle the Discovery of that Murder, let all the World judge, in a word
you will do well to get some body to make us believe Transubstantiation, and
then you may make us believe, that Godfrey, after ^e had broke his own neck,
run his sword through his Body, and that he walked to Greenbury Hill without
fouling his Shoos.

2. I now come to answer your second Question, Was I concerned in this Murder?
Lord how you strut, as if you might not have a hand in this Murder,
notwithstanding your being at Newmarket, for your Wi^e and charitable Council
sat duly at St. Jameses, notwithstanding your being at Newmarket, alas! alas!
that poor Gentleman's Death was determined some time before, it is well known,
that Chevins, that infamous Pimp, Villain and Thief, was sent to be a Witness
against Prance by your Brother, and you, and by you severely reprimanded, for
saying no more than he did against Prance, how melancholy was you when
Godfrey's Murder was detected, and your Rogues convicted, and condemned, that
were Actors in that bloody Tragedy, and what ^uit you made for their Pardons,
and put them in great hopes of having their Pardons; had you not been concerned
in this villainous Murder, what need had all those Arts been used by your self
to stifle it, what needed such Orders, and such Warrants by you, when you
usurpt the Name of a King, to such a prostitute Rogue as Lestrange, I appeal to
one then in your Ministry, you were so zealous that all wise Men cried shame o^
it, what had you a mind to raise the Gentleman from the dead, to tell how you
threatened him, for being so much concerned in the discovery of your Villainy,
and another of your Crew told him, he had better have sopt his Bread in a Turd,
than have meddled in the thing, did you not tell Sir Edmund, that you would
reckon with him for his forwardness, and laid your hand upon your Sword; again
did you not project all those who were concerned in the Murder, and helped them
in their escape beyond the Seas, what made you so zealous above other Men to
have the Jury return a felo de se upon the murdered Body, and withal you were
much angry with Prince Rupert; for saying, That it was impossible, that Godfrey
had murdered himself, because his Neck was broke, before his Sword was run
through his Body, nay your good Brother the King, saw you so earnest, that he
was ashamed at your Zeal, which made the Prince swear to the D. of Buckingham,
that you carried your self with that heat, that a small Evidence would make
him, if you were brought to a Trial, to find you guilty of the said Murder,
Sir, your behavior in that particular was so nauseous, your actions so plain,
and yet so pernicious, that I stand amazed that your hand stopped there, in short
Sir, the Sense I have of your guilt in that base Murder has hardened my Heart
against you, and your villainous party, for the many Insolences, that they at
that time did offer, and the secret Murders they Committed, and were by you
countenanced, that all Men cried shame, and stood more amazed that you were not
called to an Account for that Murder, than they did at the impudence of the
Murder it Self, though God he knows, that that Murder was of it self
astonishing enough: but to conclude this Head, I pray take two things along
with you, which I shall leave you as my Legacy.

1. What greater Satisfaction can the World have of your Guilt in this Affair,
if the Sons of Men will but give themselves a little time to consider these
Circumstances, that I have laid before you; had I been so unfortunate as to
have been privy to the Murder, I would have been no more afraid to have
charged you with it, than your murdering Crew was to strangle that innocent
Magistrate; you will do well now to acquit your self of it, if you can, it is
true, you are now out of the reach of the Law, and since it is so, I pray God
keep you so during your Life; but this I will tell you, that these
Circumstances entitle you to the Guilt of that Fact, and whilst this
Gentleman's Blood lies upon you, I cannot forbear observing to you, that in
what you did to him, you gave the world a Specimen of what you would have done
to others, and made many Men believe, That the Earl of Essex came to his end by
that way of Charity, so that we have had great Testimony, that for promoting
your Cause, you would not stick at the Protestants Blood; you began with that
honest Gentleman, and you did not end in the Earl of Essex, you killed Godfrey
in his Person, but the whole Nation in him was murdered in ^ffigie, your hands
were imbrued in his Blood, but your black Hell-born Soul was dipped in the Blood
of us all, and since we are convinced, that you murdered him and Essex, I
cannot but be convinced, that you poisoned your Brother, and had you had but
time you would have made all away that stood in the way of your damned
Religion, you would have converted us with Blood, and baptized us with Fire,
your nature and actions testified the one, and London in a dreadful manner felt
the other.

2. Let me observe to you the Folly of your murdering this Magistrate,
certainly Sir, it was one of the greatest pieces of Folly, that you and your
Party could be guilty of, for what could be your end in it, did you think, that
if Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey could not escape your murdering Crew, that we could
not find one in his room, yes Sir, to your great comfort, there was a Gentleman
that succeeded him, that Harazed your Rogues to as good purpose as a Man's heart
and soul could wish, and if a Man could but have seen into your cursed Soul, we
might have found, that you had the same Grace and Favors for, and intended the
same act of Charity to him, as you did to Justice Godfrey, but he escaped your
Blessing, and is yet alive to give you an Account of his Stewardship in Print,
if he pleases, and of some of your Royal Misdemeanors into the bargain.

I pray Sir, how do you? And how do you like your self by this time? how will
you come of? Therefore to conclude all, Is there not here a monstrous Evidence
of your whole Popish Plot? For in truth, we cannot prove it better than by such
Practices as these, that this Man was killed, why, either he knew, or had
discovered to him something, that you and your Villains would not have him
tell, or you did it in defiance of Justice, and in Terror to all them that then
durst execute it upon them, which I say is a great Evidence in its self, I
leave it with you, after you have mumbled over your Mattins, you may consider
it, whilst you have opportunity and leisure.

9. I shall in proof of your Popish Plot offer to your consideration the Oral
Testimony that was given, so that you may see that we were not overhasty in our
Proceedings upon those Malefactors, that were charged to be in that villainous
Conspiracy; therefore I will give you their Names in order as follows.

1. You have Richard Gastrel of the Grange in Gloucestershire, I pray look upon
him, and see how you like him, well sit down and hear what he says to you in
an Examination taken before the Lord Bishop of London (a zealous Protestant I
assure you and a Justice of the Peace) so that you may see, we had more good
Justices besides Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, and this Richard Gastrel's
Information was as follows;

THIS Deponent says, That in the year 1675, he traveled to R^me, and being
there he was by many arts and persuasions inveighled into the Romish Religion,
after which he was entertained by Cardinal Barbarini, as one of his Gentlemen,
where after he had continued about five Months, he was pervailed withal by
several English there, and by the said Cardinal to put himself into the English
Seminary, where after he had continued about two years and a half, he returned
home, but whilst he continued in the said College, viz. in Lent last, he
disc^ursed with Gerrard Ireland and William Dormour Priests now in England, the
said I^eland told him that the Catholics of England had expected long enough
from his Majesty without Effect, and that it was in vain to expect any longer,
That the King had been much obliged to the Catholics, and that he had now
forgot their Kindness, That he did no Good in England, nor did deserve to be
King, but was a shame to all Princes, and that it was no Sin to Kill him, to
which one Sergeant a Scholar replied, Why? The said Ireland answered, because
it would be for the Good of the whole Church, if the King were Dead, the
Catholic Religion would soon be brought into England. And discoursing further
of their going into England, the said Ireland and Dormour said, they hoped each
of them to get a good fat Parsonage there, this D^ponent further says, That
having an Audience of the Pope in the company of ^our Priests and another
secular Gentleman, all Students of the same College, the Pope understanding
they were going for England, and being desirous to know their several States
and Conditions, and having demanded of Father Campian who conducted them to the
Pope whether they were all Priests, and understanding by the said Campians
answer, that two of them were Seculars, he asked of the said two their design
of going into England, whether they intended there to be Soldiers, for that
they were very ^it for the same, this Deponent further says, that in the
beginning of May last, a few days before his coming away from Rome, he waited
on Cardinal Barbarini, whom he found sick on his Bed, he bid the said Deponent
at parting (the Rector being present) to take care to be True and Faithful, and
serve the Duke of York, which the Rector also desired him to bear in Mind, the
Cardinal afterward applying himself to the said Rector, said that if the
Catholic Religion were brought into England, notwithstanding his great Age, he
would go thither Lega^ de Latere.

This Information was taken by the Bishop of London, upon the 20th of December
1678, and there is contained in it many things worthy of your Observation; 1.
That your vi^lainous Party had waited upon the King, your Brother, till they
were weary of writing, and that I doubt no^ in the least, and I question not
but you labored under the same Di^ease; for without all doubt he had given
them his Royal Word and Promise of restoring their Religion, or at least of
making them to all intents and purposes easy in their Worship, by such an
Indulgence as should be a fair step to the restoring of their Religion and
Worship to be the National Way of Worshipping God. 2* That because your Brother
had forfeited his Credit with them in that point, they thought it no sin to
destroy him, and truly you was much of their opinion, when you was privy to the
deadly Dose that was given him; for if you had been of the Opinion, that it was
a Sin to destroy him, you would have brought that impudent Whore that gave him
his Bane to Public Justice, and would rather have protested against it
publicly, than have consented to the poisoning of Short, that was (to give him
his due) disgusted at the death of that poor Prince, who to serve you had for
several years before his death abandoned himself to be destroyed. 3. That there
was little hopes of restoring the Catholic Religion till he was dead, and why
then, truly you knew who was to succe^d him, and you being a Papist, and their
hopes of your coming such to the Crown, raised their pious Zeal to hasten his
Destruction, in order to make way for the restoring of your damned Religion
here amongst us: Again 4. This Gastrel was to take Care to serve you, and be
faithful to you, and he and his Companions were fit to be Soldiers for your
Service, you were to have an Army, and it was necessary, that it should be an
Army fit for the business, for the mighty Work that you had upon your hands,
even the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and the subduing the Northern Heresy.

Truly Sir, I did never hear, that any Objection was made to the Testimony of
this Man, the Bishop of London is yet alive, and can give a better Account of
him than I can do at present, but this I will say for him, (if I am not much
out) that he gave the then Bishop of Ely such a warming bout, for treating him
coursly for leaving the Church of Rome, that I thought the old Villain of a
Priest in some danger of being beaten, but had I known what villainous Popish
Principles that base Fellow held, I should never have appeared for him in the
case of Sedway, but I confess then, that Gastrel told me, that Gunning was a
Man of very rotten Principles in relation to our Reforming from the Church of
Rome; but he was your Favorite, dear Sir, and that was enough to have
published him a well-wisher to the Romish Mathematics, once he told me, that
he thought the Church of God had no loss by the death of Edward the Sixth; but
this by the way, I hasten to a second Witness.

2. The Deposition of Thomas Crowder, one of the Soldiers of Chepstow Castle
made Oath before William Floyd your old Friend, sometimes Bishop of Landaff,
then One of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Landaff, the Three and
twentieth day of January, 1678/9, is as follows, This Deponent says upon his
Oath, That being in Captain Francis Spalding 's Chamber at Chepstow Castle,
about the Eleventh of November last past, he this Deponent heard the said
Captain Spalding say, That if he had been at home, when William Bedloe was in
the Town, he would have secured the said William Bedloe from discovering of the
Plot.

Upon which Sir, you know, That the said Captain Spalding was ordered to be
committed to the Kings Bench Prison, but that you may remember the case of this
Villain Spalding, that was both Knave, Coward and Traitor all at once, and
therefore the more fit for your Service, and the better to serve your wicked
Designs and Purposes, he was planted a Chepstow to maintain a Correspondence
with the Popish Party about Wales, which was tran^mitted to Sir ^olitick
Fringe, that bore a mighty sway in those Parts, and Sir Politic transmitted it
to your good Worship; old Sir Trevor and some others were once much obliged to
him for several singular Favors, and so was the late great Morgan of
Tredeghan, the Traitor grins his Chaps, much like your self, and says he is a
Protestant, but I will no more take his word in that case, than I did in the
Affair of Comb Abbey; for tho he says, he is a Protestant, yet it is well
known, that he has been an Instrument in your hand to seduce the People of the
Country, and nothing in the day of your power and his would serve him but the
Blood of whole Families, that did not comply with your and his villainous
Principles and Practices; for his Popish Priests that he always had about him,
were his great Incouragers to ruin Families of Gentlemen, and especially he
having not only your countenance, but your especial direction in the case, for
by the means of this Villain Spalding your Sir Politic Fringe (that grins upon
a Man's Face though he be resolved that moment to cut his Throat) had a
Character of every Gentleman in and about Wales, being much assisted in that
blessed Work by one Herbert, a Justice of the Peace, another true blew
Protestant, one of Sir Politick's Agents; this Sir, was your Spalding, a Spy
for you upon many Families, in order if possible to their ruin, by your means
this Spalding got his Enlargement, and was taken care of by you as a main Prop
of your Cause and Conspiracy in the Welsh Counties, but Sir, why should I
wonder at these Practices of yours, and of your good Sir Politic, since both
of you have been taught, and do still believe, that it is but a Deed of Charity
to ruin any Man that stands in either of your ways, the Doctrine you have been
taught will induce any thinking Man to believe your Practice; and both your
Practices, and his, do sufficiently prove the Damnableness of the Doctrine you
have received.

3. A third Testimony, that I shall urge in this case, is the Evidence that was
given in by William Johnson and Joseph Wright upon the Fifteenth day of May,
1679, before the Lords Committees, sitting in the Lord Privy Seals Lodgings,
who say, that one Jonathan Smith a Papist, supposing these two Informants to be
of the same Religion, said, that he knew the King was a Papist, and the rest of
the Nobles of the Kingdom also, and that there was scarce one of them, but that
had Romish Priests in their Houses, this Smith also declared, that he had his
Maintenance from the Lord Stafford's House, that Mr. Smith the then Steward to
the Lord Stafford was his Uncle, and believed, that several Priests were in the
Lord Stafford's House.

Upon which the Lords Ordered to search the Lord Stafford's House, and to seize
all dangerous Papers and Persons, but notice being given to the Conspirators,
the Priests and Papers were conveyed to St. Jameses, to be graciously disposed
of as you should think fit, and when the Lords had notice of it, there could be
nothing further done in the Affair, because your Brother the King (to give the
Rogues a Taste of his Royal Favor) raised the Parliament, and sent them home,
when they were in the midst of their Work in Discovering the horrid Villainies
of your self and Party.

4. That Evidence that Mr. Prance gave in to the then Marquess of Winchester,
now Duke of Bolton, on the Nineteenth of March 1678/9, The said Marquess being
then One of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex,
and City and Liberty of Westminster.

THIS Examinant says, That he and Mr. Maddison a Barber in Holborne, and Mr.
Staley were Drinking at the Cross Keys Tavern over against Staleys House, about
a Fortnight before the said Staley was taken, where complaining of the great
Persecution that the Papists lay under, and if that they did not take some
speedy course to destroy their Enemies, they should be ruined, the said Staley
and Maddison resolved to Kill the Earl of Shaftsbury, as the ring leader of the
Mischief that would fall upon them, Maddison said, that he would engage three
to wit Adamson a Watchmaker, and Prosser a Silversmith, and Bradshaw an
Upholster, and the said Maddison coming afterward to this Deponents Shop,
showed the Deponent a Pistol he had prepared for that Purpose, this Deponent
further says, That meeting the said Adamson at one Pettleyes at the
White-posts in Veres-street, and discoursing of News, Adamson said, they should
be undone if they did not look about them, therefore they were resolved to Kill
the Lord Shaftsbury, he also speaking the same thing to this Deponent at the
Grid-iron in Holborn, this Deponent further says, That the aforesaid Prosser
told him he was undone, and that he intended to Kill the Lord Shaftsbury, for
he with other of the Lords intended to undo the Lord Arundel of Wardour, who
was one of his best Customers, the said Prosser telling the said Deponent
another time, That he was to be an Ensign under the Lord Arundel, this Deponent
further says, That Bradshaw in discourse with him says, that he would make no
more to kill a Protestant than to kill a Dog, or a Cat; and that he was
resolved to Kill some of the busy Lords, but the first should be the Lord
Shaftsbury, and the said Bradshaw also showed him the Deponent a Pistol at the
same time, this Deponent further says, that he the Deponent, and Mr.
Messenger, Prosser, and Maddison, were at Bradlies in Holborn, about five weeks
before Staley was taken, where the said Messenger was complaining of the
severity of the Laws against the Papists, and much fearing they would be put in
Exe^ution against them, by some that were no lovers of them, and particularly
by the Lord Shaftsbury, who did most busy himself about them, said, that there
must be speedy Course taken to prevent it: And this Deponent further says,
that some time after, the said Prosser told him, that the said Messenger, was
the Person that Promoted the killing the Lord Shaftsbury, the Deponent further
says, That Mr. Goseen told him both in Covent Garden and in the Deponents
Shop, that the King and Parliament would undo them, and that if he were to kill
a Man he would as soon kill the King as any Man, and if he had him in Spain he
would have killed him ere this; This Deponent further says, that about six
Months since, he heard Mr. Matthews the Lord Peter's Priest say, that his Lord
and the Lord Belasys with some other Lords, would have a great Army, and that
he hoped the Catholic Religion would be settled in England; This Deponent
further says, That about a Year since, he heard Mr. Singleton, a Priest, say,
in the presence of Mr. Hall, that he hoped he should be settled in a Parish
Church before a twelve month, and that he did not fear but that the Catholic
Religion would Reign in England, and that he would not make any more matter of
Stabbing forty Parliament Men, than to eat his Dinner; This Deponent says,
that he has also heard Mr. Byflet, and Dr. Guilding say, several times that
they turned diverse People from the Protestant Religion, and that they hoped
they should turn many more, the Deponent also believes, that the said Hall
knows where the said Singleton, Byfleet, and Guilding are, for that they used
to be always at Halls house, and the said Hall always received the Money for
the said Singleton, which was to be distributed for Masses for the Dead; This
Deponent further says, that Mr. Groves told him that this was no Plot, but a
Plot of the Protestants own making, and when his Uncle was Condemned, he said
they were all Rogues that Swore against him, the Deponent then asking him what
he thought of the four thousand Men, which he knew were to be raised, the said
Groves replied that might be in Jest, the Deponent further says, that Mr.
Ridley a Chyrurgeon at the Lord Baltimores house in Wildstreet, told him
several times, that he hoped to be Chyrurgeon to a Catholic Army in England,
and that the Lord Belasis would stand his Friend in the Concern; This Deponent
further says, that the Lord Arundel of Wardours Butler, told him, that Mr.
Messenger was to kill the King, and that he was to have a good Reward, if he
saved his Life, and if he were killed, the said Reward should be distributed
amongst such Friends as he should appoint by the Lord Arundel, the Earl Powys,
and the rest of the Lords that were in the same Plot; This Deponent further
says, that meeting with Mr. Messenger, after that he asked the said Messenger,
why he would kill the King; the said Messenger answered, who told you of it,
the Deponent saying your Brother, the said Messenger replied, we are off that
thing now; therefore he desired me me not to speak of it to any body,
afterward the said Butler came to this Deponent 's Shop, and told the Deponent
that he had received great Anger, in that he had told the Deponent of what
Messenger was to Attempt; This Deponent further says, that some what above
half a year since, he heard Mr. Walliston Paston say, that young Sir Henry
Beddingfield of Oxburrough Hall in Norfolk, was to have a Commission form my
Lord Arundel for a Troop of Horse in the Army to be raised by the Papists.

Also about the time that the four Lords that were in the Tower, that is the
Duke of Buckingham, my Lord Shaftsbury, the Lord Wharton, and the Lord
Salisbury, that one Mr. Knightly came to me, and greatly rejoicing at their
Imprisonment, said, that now is the time for promoting the Catholic Religion,
because of the difference that was amongst the Lords, and that if the Duke of
York did but follow the business closely, which the Catholics had ground to
believe he would, they did not doubt but that it would be settled in that
juncture of time.

Your Friend Mr. Prance gave in another Information on the 22. of March, which
is as follows,

IN the Month of August 1678, I having occasion to write to a Friend in the
Country, but could not tell well how to send, I went to Mr. Pastons, who lodged
at one Bambers a Tailor in Duke-street, who gave me an Account where to send to
him and we immediately fell into Discourse concerning the present posture of
Affairs, and he bid me not to fear, for we should suddenly have better times;
for in the first place, he said, that the King was a great Heretic and that
the Lord Bellasis, and Lord Arundel, and Lord Powis, and the Lord Petre would
have a very good Army for the Deposing of the King, and the suppression of the
Heretics, and then the Catholic Religion should be established, and flourish
in this Nation, he also said, that the above named Lords had given out
Commissions already to some Gentlemen in the Country, whom he named to me; who
were Mr. Talbot of Longford, and Sir Henry Beddingfield of Oxborow Hall in
Norfolk, and one Mr. Stone, who lives within four or five miles of Kingston
upon Thames: Also about two years ago one Townley of Townley in Lancashire came
up to London with his two Sons, whom he was carrying over to Doway, he also
brought along with him his two Brothers to keep him Company, they took Lodgings
at Ayries house in Drury Lane, where Fenwick lodged, and in a short time two of
them went over to Doway with the two Lads, and left the other here, who in the
absence of his Brothers declared very often to my Wifes Brother, and to
Adamson, that when his Brothers came back again from Doway, they expected
Commissions from the above named Lords for the raising of Men for the Carrying
on the Catholic Cause, this my Brother and Adamson often told me at Pettleyes
in Veres-street, where we had a Club very often of none but Papists.

Now Sir, we have given you an account of what Mr. Prance swore before the
Parliament concerning the Popish Plot, in which you may see your self engaged;
for you had a business upon your hands, and that business was to be followed
closely, and then the Catholic Religion would flourish, and you know to what a
degree of Zeal and Piety you were converted, as not to regard any thing in the
world in comparison of God Almighty's Glory, and the Salvation of your own, and
the conversion of this poor Kingdom, which has been a long time oppressed, and
miserably harassed with Heresy and Schism; nay, your Zeal was such, That
Coleman could s^arce believe himself awake, when he thought on it, I will now
put you in mind of what he discovered upon Oath concerning the said Popish
Plot, at the Trials of several of your Villains; I begin with the Trials of the
five Jesuits, where the said Prance did with all cheerfulness declare, That
Harcourt the Jesuit, and one of your Counselors at St. Jameses told Prance,
that there was a design of killing the King, and St. Ireland, Fenwick and
Grove, who was one of your Popish Messengers, and Firers of the Borough of
Southwark told him of 50000 Men, that were to be raised for the carrying on of
the Catholic Cause, and to settle the Catholic Religion, which Affair was to
be managed by the Five Lords, that were for that Conspiracy committed to the
Tower, who as well as Whitebread were to grant Commissions for Officers, nay,
had actually granted several, and to encourage this Prance (who though he had
but a little Sense, yet he had so much as to dread a Civil War) told him, that
he need not fear he should have Church Work enough.

It will not be unnecessary to make some Observations upon Mr. Prance his
Testimony, before we come to another, and in it here are five or six things
worthy of your Consideration; 1. Here is expressly sworn, That Popery was to be
introduced* which you know is High Treason, your Priests all expected to see
the Romish Religion settled, and that then all things would do well, and your
Priests should have fat Parsonages, and then all things would go right. 2. This
Religion was to be brought in by an Army, you know, that your Dragooning
Apostles here might have planted Religion in as an effectual way as they ruined
the poor Protestants in France. 3. Here is the King your Brother declared an
Heretic, and therefore by your Popish Army to be deposed, and by Messenger to
be destroyed. 4. Here is your sel^, having a work in hand, which you were to
follow closely. 5. Here are your Popish Party all engaged, and you at the Head
of them. 6. Here is all the Encouragement in the World to prevent them from
fainting in the Cause for fear of a Civil War, they should have Trade enough,
what can be plainer, let all the World judge.

4. A Fourth Witness, that proved the Popish Plot was the Testimony of Mr.
Robert Jenison, the manner of his coming in was thus, upon the 15th of June
1679 Mr. Chetwind of Westminster, who had some Discourse with one Mr. Griffith,
a Gentleman of Grays Inn, about the five Jesuits, that had been condemned on
the day before, and their attempt ^o prove William Ireland alias Ironmonger
executed some time before for High Treason to have been in Staffordshire, and
on his Journey thither from the fifth of August 1678, till the seventh of
September following, and not to have been within that time in London, as I had
with others sworn him to have been there between the eight and the twelfth of
August, and to be returned again thither on the beginning of September,
whereupon Mr. Griffith told Mr. Chetwynd, that Sir Michael Wharton of Beverley
in the County of York, then a Member of Parliament told him, since the
Execution of Ireland, Mr. Jenison, a Gentleman of Gray's Inn, who was a Papist
till about January in the Year 1678/9. affirmed, that Mr. Ireland was in Town
about the middle of August, and that he was with him then at a Scriveners at
the Sign of the White Heart in Russel Street in Covent Garden, which relation he
confirmed with several other notable circumstances, Mr. Chetwind having heard
this, went to Whitehall, and there attended on the Earl of Shaftsbury, then
Lord President of your Brother's Privy Council, and acquainted his Lordship
with what Mr. Griffith had told him, the said Earl told Mr Chetwind, that it
would be very considerable if it could be made out, Mr. Chetwind being thus
encouraged by the said Earl, went upon the 16th following to find out Sir
Michael Wharton, and coming to the Coffee-house in Covent Garden, where Sir
Michael used to be when in Town, he met with Mr. Ralph Marshal, who is now One
of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for Middlesex, who upon Discourse told
Mr. Chetwind, that Sir Michael lived at Hamstead that Summer, Mr. Marshal
understanding somewhat of the Matter, for which Mr. Chetwind inquired after Sir
Michael, he said Sir Michael had often related to him, and he was sure he would
justify it, that Mr. Jenison of Grays Inn told him the said Sir Michael
Wharton, in the presence of several other Gentlemen of Quality, presently after
the death of Ireland the several following Particulars, which they had hitherto
taken no care to discover, because they expected not that the Evidence given in
against him the said Ireland would after his Execution, come into question or
debate; the Particulars were these,

1. That in the Month of August 1678, when the King your Brother was at
Windsor, Mr. Jenison going to Windsor on the 17th. of August, and returning the
19th, immediately upon his return, that night he went to give Mr. Ireland a
Visit, and found him at the Sign of the Heart in Russel street in Covent Garden,
and after a Salute Mr. Ireland asked him many questions, as what News from
Windsor? How the King spent his time? what Recreation he followed? and whether
he walked abroad much? and how guarded? To which Mr. Jenison answered, that the
King delighted much in Hawking and Fishing, but most in the latter, which he
followed early in the Morning with some few Persons attending him; upon which
Mr Ireland replied, that he wondered, that the King was no better guarded, he
was easily to be taken off, whereupon Mr. Jenison replied, and said, God
forbid, which made Ireland stop his Discourse, Mr. Marshall reporting this to
Mr. Chetwind in the presence of Mr. Ash, and Mr. Spicer, Mr. Ash replied, he
was the night before this Discourse in Company with Mr. Griffith and Mr. Booth
second Son to the then Lord Delamere, where he heard them discourse this
matter, Mr. Booth saying, that he heard Mr. Jenison speak the same things,
whereupon Mr. Marshal undertook to go that very day to Hampstead to Sir Michael
Wharton, and give Mr. Chetwind an Account of it the next Morning, and Mr. Ash
and Mr. Spicer also before Mr. Chetwind, and they parted having promised to go
to Mr. Booth, they met him, who justified every Syllable of what he said, and
withal remembered very well, that when Sir Michael took some particular notice
of it, Mr. Jenison seemed to be surprised, and was sorry he had uttered those
words, but Mr. Bows who was present, said, Jenison you cannot retract your
words, for I have a Letter under your hand, which will put you in mind of the
time, and he said Mr. Bows repeated the very same thing.

Upon the 20th of June 1679, Mr. Booth and Mr. Bows met with Mr. Jenison, and
discoursed the Matter with him, who then owned all the questions that Ireland
asked him; namely, what News at Windsor? and how the King spent his time? but
Mr. Jenison desired a days time to consider, that he might be exact as to the
time when they were spoken; for that several had told him, that Mr. Ireland had
been in Staffordshire from the fifth of August to the seventh of September, and
therefore he resolved to be serious in thinking upon the time, when he had this
Discou^se with Mr. Ireland in London; these Gentlemen above named appointed to
dine together on the 21st. of June, where met Sir Michael Wharton, Mr. Jenison,
Mr. Bows, Mr. Booth, Mr. Griffith, and Mr. Marshall, where by Mr. Bows, Mr.
Jenison's Letter was showed, which he acknowledged to be writ by his own hand,
and further told them, that upon the 15th. of August, he returned to London
from Tunbridge, and on the 17th. day he went to Windsor, and returned on the
19th, and either that night or the next day, he had this discourse with Mr.
Ireland, at the Sign of the Heart in Russel street in Covent Garden; Mr. Jenison
was pleased further to relate, that upon the fourth of September following, he
went from London into the North, and returned back to London in November
following, and from thence he removed to Reading, from whence he wrote the above
mentioned Letter to Mr. Bows, this Confession of his Mr. Marshal took,
incerting at that very time, when they dined together, all of them being
present as also a true Copy of his Letter he wrote from Reading, which he
brought to Mr. Chetwind, who carried the same on the 22d of June to the Earl of
Shaftsbury, then Lord President of the Privy Council, and communicated them to
several of the then Council, and on the 23. Mr. Chetwind brought Mr. Bows and
Mr. Marshal to the Lord Shaftsbury, who produced to his Lordship the Original
Letter, before whom also the said Mr. Jenison acknowledged the Letter to be his
own, all which was taken upon Oath by a Justice of the Peace for the County of
Middlesex and Liberty of Westminster.

2. That this may be clear, I shall offer Sir, to your Consideration the
ensuing Informations of these persons named under the first Head, taken by a
Justice of the Peace, which will be a sufficient confirmation of the whole
Matter, by which you will be left without Excuse, as to the clearness of that
point of Ireland's being in Town, which was one of the points, which I did
deeply suffer against all Law and Justice in the time of your Usurpation of the
Crown, therefore observe the Information of Sir Michael Wharton Knight. who says,
That about the month of February last Mr. Bows and Mr. Burnet of Grays Inn and
my self, where Mr. Jenison, an Acquaintance of Mr. Bows, accidentally came
into the room, so that we dined together, and upon general Discourses at Diner
we were talking of Mr. Ireland's Trial, or Execution, whereupon Mr. Bows begun
the Discourse of a Letter he had from Mr. Jenison, which he thought if he had
received timely enough might have very much cleared the point of Mr. Ireland's
being in Town in August last, Mr. Jenison owned the Letter, and continued the
Discourse, some time after I saw the Letter, and by the Reading judged it might
have been very Material, the Matter of the Letter being perfectly owned by Mr.
Jenison, which Information Sir Michael Wharton signed with his own hand, and
the same was attested by George Booth Esquire June 26. 1679, and Mr. Burnet, Mr.
Bows to whom the Letter wassent, and Mr. Marshall did give in their
Informations, as I have said before.

3. The Letter it self writ by Mr. Jenison to Mr. Bows, in the next place is
worth your Observation, it bears date Dec. 19. 1678, from Reading in Barkshire,
and is as follows.

Mr. Jenison 's Letter from Reading in Barkshire upon his Return from -- to
Robert Bows Esquire Son to Sir Francis Bows, (Mr. Jenison being then a Papist.)
Reading Dec. 19. 1678.
Sir,
YOURS I have, ^^ari^g da^e the 15th instant, and have not missed a Post I
could send to you, I am not ignorant of the Offer made by his Majesty's
Proclamation, and lay hold on nothing bu^ Pardon for concealing that
circumstance I have known so long, y^^ I did not altogether conceal it neither;
for I told my Cousin Smith of it within two or three days of the breaking out
of this damnable Conspiracy, which how much it w^igh^ I am not a ^it Judge of,
and I would not, were it to gain a Mill^on, ^^y a Million of Wor^ds, if
possible, draw the least drop of Innocent Blood upon me; for I know it is a
crying Si^; therefore I pray God avert it from me; all that I can tell you, as
I hope for the Forgiveness of my Si^s and Eternal Salvation is (if you will
distinguish between the ^ime*) what follows;

Being come from W^nds^r, where I promised my self the happiness and
satis^action of seeing you, That I might take my leave before my Journey for the
North (which to the best of my mem^^y was about the latter end of August) I
went to do the same to Mr. Ireland, whom then (with all the rest) I did believe
to be a Man of the best conversation and life in the World (^or you know the
Law does presume every man good, until it be proved otherwise) after my Salute,
and I had told him I had been at Windsor, hi^ Interrogatory or question was,
what News? my Return was, the usual one, no News, but good; then he proc^ed^d
to ask me to ^^e best of my m^mory, how his Sacred Majesty and the Court were
diverted, I replied that his Majesty took much delight in Hawking and Fishing,
but chi^fly in the latter, which his Majesty follow^d early in the Morning, as
I heard, accompanied with two or three L^^ds, or other Attendan^s; I wonder,
said Mr. Ireland, why his M^j^sty should be so thin Guarded, he were easi^y
taken off, or removed, or some words to that purpose, so sounding God forbid ^
return^d n^, subj^yns he I do not say it is lawful, and something else, I cannot
c^ll to mind, that did qua^^fy the former Word^, that I did then think his
meaning was, he was then sorry, that his Majesty should go so weakly guarded, I
then took it by that handle, having no other reason; for I did believe him a
Saint, never hearing him, or any of them, as I hope for everl^sting Li^e,
defend or maintain in the least, that dam^^ble Doctrine of Deposing Kings; but
now I know that Passage may be taken by the other handle, and I am not ^it to
judge how far yet, you know words are to be taken in the milder S^^s^, unless
they are positive, which these with their qualifications, as they were sp^ken
were not; I suppose, there is clearer Evidence from Mr Oats, that better knew
i^ th^n ^; there is only another thing (and I have cleared my S^u^^hath ^un in
my fancy (...) since this ever to be detested Immergency happened, which
app^y^d to these has an (...) with it, you know whom I accuse now, viz. Tho.
Je^^son, but other times i^ capable of a good construction, he had some
busine^s to acq^aint me with, and ^his for two or three times at our parting;
f^^ I did not see him above ^our or five times, as I remember, while I was in
L^^don, onc^ I urged ^im to tell me the business, he replied, he would take
some other occasion; now I did believe, he meant something about my settling in
the World as a Match, having propound^d one to me of a Knights Daughter, and
it is capable of that construction, still if there be no clearer Evidence to
give a luster and a great Light on the other side, we have a good Author, that
commands us, to give unto Caesar, that which is Caesar's, and unto God, who is
Truth it self, what belongs to him; which I would do to the dividing the
minutest A^om, in the presence of that Truth which made me; but I can now
remember no more, if I were to gain Heaven, unless my Cousin Smith put me in
mind of a word or two more relating to one or two of these passages, that I now
don't remember, which I will own if I said it, otherwise not, for I will have
nothing to do with their Blood further than what I can with a clear and safe
Conscience swear, which I am ready to do, if sent for, as far as I have
declared, I am in the mean while,

Sir, Your assured Friend and Faithful Servant Rob. Jenison
This be pleased to show to Coll Tempest, our Knight of the Shire, or whom you
please to acquaint with it.


POSTSCRIPT.
I hear since I have writ this, that four of the Jesuits are condemned, which
if the included two be in, this might be spared, only for your Satisfaction I
send it, and what I have said in this Letter is all I can justly swear, except
my Cousin Smith remember a word or m^re ab^ut one of these Passages, the
former, I mean, as for the latter, all what I have said i^, by all that is
Sacred (and I hope it is no offense to swear to the Truth) all and the Sum, I
say, of what I know, if it were the last moment I have to live, I could say no
more.




4. You have here several of his Informations upon Oath of the same Import,
taken upon O^th by E^mund Warcupp Esquire who then was a zealous Magistrate, and
encouraged the Di^covery of the Popish Plot, what a To^le he was since I appeal
to his own Conscience* (...) is for ^is good S^rv^ces Sir Edmund, but of them
in their proper place; but he, I say, took no less ^han ^our Inform^^ions of
this Mr. Jenison upon Oath, where to please you I have here set them down in
Words at length.

1. Was taken upon Oath, June 26. 1679, and is as follows,

The Information of Robert Jenison of Grays Inn Esquire Son of John Jenison of
Walworth of the County Palatine of Durham Esquire taken upon Oath this 26th Day of
June, 1679, before me Edmund Warcupp Esquire One of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace in the County of Middlesex.
THis Informant says, That he went from London to see Windsor, and to Midd. ss.
meet Mr. Robert Bows, on or about the 17th of August last past, and returned
back to London the 19th of the same Month, on which day in the Afternoon, he
made a Visit to Mr. William Ireland alias Ironmonger at his Lodgings in Russel
street, who was this Informants Relation, at which time and place he (this
Informant) had the Discourse with the said Mr. Ireland mentioned and contained
in this Informants Letter to the said Mr. Bows, and now showed unto him, being
all of this Informants hand Writing, dated at Reading in Barkshire on the 19th
of December last past, and this Informant does very w^ll remember, that he went
from London into the North in the York Coach on the 4th of September last past,
and came back thence to London in October following, from thence he went to
Reading in Obedience to his Majesty's Proclamation from whence he wrote the
Letter aforesaid to Mr. Robert Bows, and further at present says not.

Jur^die and anno supr^dict. cor. me Edmand Warcupp. Rob. Jenison.

2. Was taken the Second of July 1679, and is as follows,

The further Information of Robert Jenison of Grays Inn Esquire taken upon Oath
this 2d. day of July 1679, before me Edmund Warcupp Esquire One of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, in the County of Middlesex.
THis Informant says, That he being returned from Windsor, upon the 19th Midd.
ss.
day of August last, he went to Mr. Ireland's Lodging in Russel street in
Covent Garden to visit him, and passing through the Entry, that went directly up
two pair of Stairs to the said Mr. William Ireland's Chamber, the door whereof
being somewhat open, he entered and found the said Mr. William Ireland, whom
this Informant having told, that he just then came from Windsor upon a
Hackney-Horse, hired at three Shillings per day, which had much tired him, the
said William Ireland replied, that he was then newly arrived from Wolverhampton
in Staffordshire by Post, and that he was not weary, upon which this Informant,
that he thought that Scholars, as he was, had rather choose to ride ambling
Horses than to ride Post.

And this Informant further says, that he very well remembers, that about the
Beginning of October last past, Sir Edward Smith came to Walworth in the County
Palatine of Durham, and then read a Letter, newly come from London, purporting
the Discovery of the Plot, and that the King was to have been killed at
Windsor, which made this Informant call to mind the Expressions of the said
William Ireland on the said 19th of August, viz. why his Majesty should be so
thin Guarded, he was easily taken off, or removed, or words to that sounding,
and thereupon this Informant did the next day after the Reading of the said
Letter, relate all the Passages between this Informant and the said Mr. Ireland
to this Informants Father, and the said Mr. Smith, as they are contained in
this Informants Letter to Mr. Bows, dated on the 10th day of December last,
and so the said Mr. Smith has lately signified by Letter to the said Mr.
Bows, and this Informant further says, that in the Year 1678, several Papists
have in this Informants hearing, declared, that they doubted not but their
Religion would shortly be uppermost, or to that effect, and further at present
he says not.

Jurat. coram me Ed. Warcupp. Rob. Jenison.

3. Was taken on the Second of August, 1679, and is as follows,

The further Information of Robert Jenison of Grays Inn Esquire taken upon Oath
this Second Day of August 1679, before me Edmund Warcupp Esquire One of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County.
THis Informant says, That it being generally reported, that the Evidence
Midd. ss.
against Sir George Wakeman was full, he this Informant was not so careful to
recollect the further Discourses he had with Mr. William Ireland before the
said Trials, as he has been since; and upon the most serious examination
thereof, he does very well remember, that in the Month of June 1678, the said
William Ireland did say, that it was an easy matter to poison the King, and
that Sir George Wakeman might easily do, having a great opportunity, by being
the Queens Doctor, which Discourse this Informant does verily believe the said
Ireland used to this Informant to induce this Informant to his further
Intentions, being, as this Informant believes, assured of this Informants
secresy from Mr. Thomas Jenison his Brother, and from some Obligation the said
Ireland had laid on this Informant by lending him Twenty Pounds, which he said
was the St. Omerian Money, and this Informant further says, That upon the 19th
day of August following, he the said William Ireland, at his Chamber in Russel
street, did earnestly press this Informant by various Arguments, to be
instrumental in bringing in the Catholic Religion, urging how meritorious it
would be, and how much to the Glory of God, and thereupon offered to cause the
said Twenty to be remitted to this Informant, if he would be assisting to the
taking off the King, and would be one of those that would go to Windsor about
it; but this Informant did answer, that he would not for twenty times twenty
Pounds have a hand in the death of the King, whereupon the said Ireland
replied, will you do nothing to bring in the Catholic Religion? To which this
Informant did say, that he did not believe, that ever would come i^ by Blood;
upon which the said Ireland replied, what would you not have Religion to
flourish again, whereto this Informant answered, if it were done (meaning if
the King were taken off) so, and well, but this Informant said, he would have
no hand in it; but the said William Ireland, not being satified with this
Informants Answers, pursued thus, do you know of any Irish Gentlemen of our
Religion, that are stout and courageous, upon which this Informant replied, the
Irish Gentlemen were commonly so, and did name Mr. Lavallyn,, Mr. Thomas
Bra^ale, Mr. Karney, three Irish Men, and Mr. James Wilson, being all Gentlemen
of Grays Inn, of whose Names the said Ireland took particular notice in writing
to the best of this Informants remembrance, and this Informant did then tell
the said Ireland, That he believed, no Men of Estates would be concerned in
that Affair, and especially Captain Lavallyn, who was an Heir to a good Estate,
unless the Pique he had to the King might induce him to it; and this Informant
further says, That being with the said Thomas Jenison and another Gentleman
about the latter end of April, or beginning of May, 1678, (whose Name he now
remembers not) in the said Ireland's Chamber, there came one in, who after some
private Discourse with Mr. Ireland, and after he was gone, the said Thomas
Jenison told this Informant, 'twas one Mr. Oats, who had been a Parson, but was
come over to them, and that he was a brisk, jolly Man, and well worth his
Acquaintance, and he further says, that about the time that some Regiments
were drawn together upon Hounslo-Heath; the said Thomas Jenison told this
Informant, That he had a Matter of great consequence to impart to him, adding,
that there was a Design on foot, so laid, as it could not be discovered, in
which most of the greatest Catholics in England were Embarked, and that it
would be of great advantage to this Informant to Embark with them, and that he
c^uld not be in greater danger than they, and that he would acquaint the
Informant with the Particulars, after he had received the Sacrament of Secresy,
which he engaged this Informant to do upon the next Holyday at Sir Philip
Terwit's House in Bloomesbury; but this Informant, neglecting so to do, he
missed the opportunity of being further informed: And this Informant wishing he
had a Commission in the New Levies, the said Thomas Jenison replied, that he
would get him a Commission from the Duke of York; whereunto this Informant
replied, returning Answer, how can that be, since all the Commissions are now
granted, and full; the said Thomas Jenison answered, I will tell you that
hereafter; therefore let me know, how I shall send a Commission to you into the
Country with Safety, he knowing this Informant intended suddenly to go into the
Bishopric of Durham, and this Informant very well remembers, there happening
some Discourse about the said Parson, that lately came over to them, the said
Thomas Jenison said, that that Parson was engaged in the design, whereto the
Informant objected, that a reconciled Enemy ought no more to be trusted than an
upen Foe; But the said Thomas Jenison answered, they were sure enough of him,
and that once reconciled, they were the more resolute and trusty, to which
opinion this Informant submitted, instancing Dr. Gooding and Dr. Baily, as
being zealous Catholics, although they were Protestant Converts. And this
Informant further says, that he was in Shinfield Parish near Reading in
Barkshire about the time of Coleman's Trial, where he met with Mr. Cuffel, a
Romish Priest and Jesuit, who then much blamed the said Coleman, saying, he
believed he was infatuated to suffer his own Papers to be taken upon the
Discovery of the Plot, when as he had given notice to Mr. Harcourt and Mr.
Ireland and the rest of the Jesuits to burn or secure theirs. And he very well
remembers, that amongst other Discourse, this Informant spoke against the
Opinion, that Bellarmine, Mariana and Suarez maintained, touching the Power of
the Pope to Depose Kings; upon which the said Mr. Cuffel mentioned a Sentence,
which, he said, Bellarmine quoted out of the Scripture for that Opinion. And
this Informant also very well remembers, that Mr. Thomas Jenison and himself
discoursing of the Popes Power about Deposing of Kings affirmed, that Doctrine
was not laid aside.

Jurat. coram me Edm. Warcup. Rob. Jenison.

4. Was taken on the Sixth of August, 1679, and is as follows,

The further Information of Robert Jenison of Grays Inn Esquire taken upon Oath
this Sixth Day of August 1679, before me Edmund Warcupp Esquire One of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex,
THis Informant says, that after he had upon much Importunity of M. William
Midd. ss.
Ireland, upon the 19th Day of August 1678, named unto him Captain Lavallyn,
Mr. Kerney, Mr. Brahale and James Wilson to be stout courageous Gentlemen, as
in this Informants former Deposition is contained, the said William Ireland did
ask or require this Informant to go down with the said Gentlemen to Windsor,
to be Assistant to them in taking off the King, which this Informant refused,
saying, that he would not have any hand in the death of the King, saying, no
Men of Estates would Engage therein, as this Informant believed. And the said
William Ireland did approve of the said four Persons named as aforesaid by
this Informant, as fit for the design, and declared that he knew Mr. Levallyn
and Mr. Kerney before this Informant had named them, by which this Informant
did apprehend, that he might have communicated with them of the said Design for
Windsor before the nomination aforesaid. And this Informant further says,
that upon the day that this Informant received the twenty Pounds lent unto him,
this Informant, as in his former Information is mentioned, went with his
Brother to Mr. William Harcourt's Chamber in Dukes street, to return Thanks
for the Obligation in consenting to lend the Money. And Mr. Thomas Jenison did
let fall some Expressions to the purpose following, viz. if C. R. (meaning the
King) would not be R. C. (meaning a Roman Catholic) he should not be long C.
R. meaning Carolus Rex, and further added upon Discourse, that the King being
deposed, he was no longer King, and it was no Sin to take him off, and if it
should be discovered, two or three might dye for it, but denying the Fact, the
matter of Fact, the matter would soon blow over. And he further says, that
much about the same time discoursing of the design, wherein the greatest
Catholics of England were embarkt, the said Mr Thomas Jenison did name my Lord
Arundel of Wardour, my Lord Bellasis, my Lord Powis, and two or three others,
whose Names this Informant does not now remember, that were to be great
Instruments in promoting the Catholic Cause, and that they had often attempted
the L. T. and had at last made him theirs. And he further says, that upon the
19th day of Augest 1678 aforesaid, Mr. William Ireland did ask this Informant
for the Twenty Pounds lent unto this Informant upon Bond, as aforesaid, though
the same was not then due; and further said, that he wanted Eighty Pounds,
having then occasion for that Sum, but this Informant answered, That his
Allowance from his Father was but 80 l, per annum, and that he could not spare
much out of it; and he further says, That the Commission, which the said
Thomas Jenison promised to obtain for him from the Duke of York was delayed,
and not to be sent unto him, until such time as the taking off the King was
accomplished, as this Informant did understand from the said Thomas Jenison;
and this Informant knows* that Mr. Kerney and Mr. Coleman were well acquainted,
and this Informant does humbly beg Pardon of his Majesty and the Kingdom for
concealing thus long the Treasonable Practices against his Sacred Life and
Government, and the Protestant Religion, which this Informant does say was
occasioned by reason he this Informant was unwilling to impeach his own Brother
Mr. Thomas Jenison, and as unwilling to accuse himself, being descended of a
Loyal Family, but Remorse of Conscience has now prevailed upon him to give the
Accounts contained in this, and his former Informations, which with what shall
further occur to his Memory upon Discourse with some to whom this Informant
Communicated formerly the same, this Informant will be ready upon all occasions
to prove for his Majesty's Service, and further at present this Informant says
not.

Jurat. coram me Edm. Warcupp. Rob. Jenison.

From which Informations and the foregoing Account of Mr. Jenisons coming in,
there are these particulars worthy of your Observation.

1. That it is a remarkable instance of Divine Providence, that this latent
Evidence accidentally discovered to Mr. Chetwind, should be thus recovered by
him, and that in his pursuit thereof so many worthy Persons likewise unknown to
him as also Mr. Jenison, should accidentally occur to him and Contribute their
Assistance, but this Observation may be of little use to you, because you and
your Priests know little of that Doctrine of Divine Providence.

2 The aforesaid Mr. Jenison, at the writing of the aforesaid Letter to Mr.
Bows, was of your own Sinagogue, and in Obedience to the Kings Proclamation
for Banishing Papists out of London, he retired from London to Reading, so that
the Discovery made by his Letter, could not rationally be imputed to any other
inducement or incitement, save only the power of Truth, especially Considering
Mr. Ireland was nearly related to him.

3. The whole Popish Plot is evidently Confirmed, not only by the Papists
expecting some great Change and Alteration mentioned in one of the Informations
by him given, but also of the four Irish Russians, and that which related to
Sir George Wakeman in another, but also by those suspicious Questions proposed
by the said Ireland to Mr. Jenison, upon his return from Windsor to London,
what News from Windsor? How is the King guarded? And especially by those
dangerous Words, then he may be easily taken off, or to that effect, which do
sufficiently Argue, and not only so, but manifestly prove, his not only being
privy to the Plot, but also of being an Hell-born instrument therein.

4. There are Circumstances of Time and Place, that are worthy of your
remembering, That the King your Brother went to Windsor the 13th of August, as
appears by Sir Thomas Dolemans Testimony, That Mr. Jenison returned from
Windsor the 19th of August, and went into the North the 4th of September
following, which was proved by the Book of Entries of Passengers, for the
Northern Coach, his going to Windsor is proved by Mr. Burnet, who met him on
the 17th of August, as he came from Dotchet's Horse-race, do but observe that
Mr. Jenison writes in his Letter to Mr. Bows thus, Being come from Windsor, I
went to take leave of Mr. Ireland, before I took my Journey into the North, and
Mr. Ireland asked me what N^ws from Windsor? How does the King pass his time?
etc. Which proves that the King was at Windsor, and also that it was after Mr.
Jenison came from Windsor, and before he went into the North, b^tween the 19th
of August and 4th of September, it implies it was imediately after Jeniso^^^
co^ing ^^om Windsor, by the Question what News from Windsor, it seems also
(...) ^ma^e that Mr. Ireland had ^o^ be^n long in London, as being eager of
News from Windsor, which at th^^ time ^e might if resident in London, have had
every 2d, day b^ B^dd^^ fields, and other (...) again this time does nearly
agree to the Evidence th^^ Sa^^h Pa^ne ^^ve at Mr. Ireland*s Trial, who Swore
she saw Ireland here in London ab^u^ (...) the King went to Windsor, and there
was not above six days difference; ag^^n Ireland w^^^yed the 17th of December,
1678. and Mr. Jenisons Letter was w^^^en (...) 19th following, and it is clear
by the Letter, that Mr. Jenison had no notice of Irelands being tried.

5. Then notwithstanding your villainous Pro^ecution of me, by your rascally
Judges, and other Tools appointed for that purpose, it appears that Mr. Ireland
was in Town between the 8th, and the 12th, of August, and thence taking a
Journey into Staffordshir^, he returned, and was seen in London, and discoursed
by Mr. Jenison, on the 19th, of the same Month, from whence its probable, that
having managed some of your villainous Designs then in hand in the Country, he
might immediately return, especially his Zeal would prompt him, since Sir he
was joined with you in so mighty a work, as the Conversion of these three
Kingdoms, which could not be effected without a Cargo of Royal Blood, the
urgent necessity of which might bring a much better Man than Mr. Ireland to
Town: Therefore Sir notwithstanding the bold Asseverations of that Traitor,
there was four point blank Witnesses against him, nay Hintons Books make a
fifth, and nay I shall add a sixth, there was Mr. Prance which was as home as
could be; but to conclude the Testimony of Mr. Jenison, I will lay down these
six things than adien Mr. Jenison.

1. Mr. Jenisons Informations, are here Exhibited to you in Parcels, partly for
the relief of his Memory, and partly because his Consent to these Matters being
not Voluntary, but in a sort Constrained, he was the less concerned to charge
his Memory, so as to observe any Method in giving the same, whereas if he had
been a Contriver in this Design of yours, he would have observed a better
Method without the least interruption, and therefore Sir, I must conclude that
these frequent Fractures, which Mr. Jenison made, did sufficiently Argue, that
he was not One of your Council at St. Jameses, no not so much as a Wildhouse
Engineer in this Matter, therefore when it was discovered to him, his
concealing the Treason was rather his Guilt than his Activity in the same.

2. And a Second thing is to be observed, that he had reason to discover, for
there was a thing called Self Preservation, which was a prevailing argument
with him, especially in the case of the four Russians, for a Gentleman of his
Acquaintance informed him the very next day after the Trial of Sir George
Wakeman, that one of those four Ruffians was come into the Commit of the then
Council, and had confessed his Guilt, and upon hopes of Pardon, had offered to
Discover his Accomplices, this wrought upon Mr. Jenison because he was
conscious to himself, that he had nominated those four Rogues to Mr. Ireland,
and considering that his discovery (if made) would reflect upon him, and
therefore he thought it best to Consult his own Safety, and to Anticipate the
discovery of this Russian, of which Jenison was afraid by making his own; this
Passage is not much for Mr. Jenisons Credi^, in relation to his Merit, for it
savours much of his human Frailty, and Timidity, and therefore it did take off
much from the Honor of this Service that he then undertook, yet behold the
integrity of this poor Gentleman, that chose rather to expose his own
Infirmity, than to Conceal any part of the Truth, to which he was by Ireland
made privy.

3. You may observe (if you think fit) that notwithstanding the Importunities
of his Brother, Aunt, and Cousin, when he was sensible of what great Obligation
there lay upon him to his King and Country, his resolution was not a whit
abated, he had base Relations that did then pursue to ruin him, and indeed did
at last accomplish it, so that the poor Gentleman is reduced to extreme want,
which is a strange reward for a Man that had faithfully served his Country, as
Mr. Jenison did in this Point, and truly Sir, he stands much Obliged to you and
your damnable Crew for it; I trust the Government that now is, will cast a
favorable Eye upon that wretched Person, and not let him perish for want of
Bread.

4. You may Observe the particularity of that Discourse, that passed between
Mr. Ireland and Mr. Jenison upon the 19th, which shows to the World what a case
hardened Villain Ireland was, when he at the Gallows was pleased to say, That
he returned not from Staffordshire till the 14th of September, and that he was
out of Town the Month of August, but the Evidence not only of Mr. Jenison
showed the Nature of the Man, but the poor Wench Sarah Pain, made it out by a
better Circumstance, by which Scroggs himself was satisfied that Ireland was in
Town, for the said Pain swore she went to live at the Lord Arlingtons on the
week after the King went to Windsor, and she saw Mr. Ireland the week before
she went to the Lord Arlingtons, for which piece of Service your Brother and
you forbid the Lord Arlington to retain the said Sarah Pain in his Service,
and therefore the Lord Arlington turned her out of doors to Starve, if it had
been in his power, that this Sarah Pain knew Ireland is notorious, for she was
Servant to John Grove one of your Fire Merchants, and used to carry Letters to
Mr. Ireland, that were directed for him, to her aforesaid Master John Grove
that was Hanged with Ireland.

5. You may see the Zeal you and your Party had for the Propagation of your
Religion, you cared not what you did to advance Holy Church, it is true you were
strangly converted; and therefore no wonder if you did not make it your
business to Ruin all that stood in your way: So Mr. Jenison's Zeal to have the
World to beware of your Zeal was as great, and durst never to flinch from his
Cause, though you made him to fly his Country, and engaged his Father to
disinherit him of his Birthright, and to give it to a Son that yet remains a
Member of your cursed Synagogue, but as for Mr. Jenison here concerned in this
Testimony, he is still alive to make good what he has said, and I am sure he
is of Age to speak for himself, and can tell how he has been treated by your
Party for this his Zeal.

6. His Brother Mr. Thomas Jenisons activity in these Affairs, is also worthy
of your Remembrance, and Mr. Jenisons impartiality was such, that he would not
spare him, though he had a tenderness for him, as he was his Brother, which
made him delay the Discovery of them, yet he did at last Discover them, though
to the exposing of his Brother, he was willing to save his own Brother, yet he
was unwilling to endanger the Government, but at last you see he came to a
Resolution, notwithstanding the many Fluctuations of his Mind, of showing
himself a true English Man, and he appeared, and gave the aforesaid Testimony,
and i^ any thing be to be objected against it, I suppose you have Rogues enough
ready, but let them be great or little Rogues, let them come forth, and they
shall be heard; but in the mean time, I pray Sir how like you all this, is it
not Plain that you had a design to levy War upon the People, for Jenison was to
have a Popish Commission from you by the means of his Brother the Jusuit, but
of this in its proper place.

5. I come to a Fifth Witness, and that was Mr. Dugdale, who fully declared the
great Design that your Father Whitebread had, of destroying the King your
Brother, he was one that was engaged in your mighty work, and by this
Whitebread was Dugdale employed to choose out Lusty and Courageous Men for the
Work, the mighty Work, that you all had of killing the King, they were to be
hardy and desperate, as befitting their Apostolical power, by which the Nation
was to be converted, nay rather then fail, there was to be a Masacre to root
out the Protestant Religion, and truly Sir, you were much in the right, for it
would have been a thing impossible to have rooted out the Protestant Religion,
without destroying the Protestants, this was the use you were to make of your
Hardy, Stout and Desperate Apostles, which Dugdale was to find out, and it
seems those who could not Convert the Nation by their handy Labor, they were
to Exercise their Tongues, therefore you had a set of Tongue Padds to stir up
your Popish Party to be active in this glorious Design of yours, Mr. Dugdale
was not only engaged by your wicked Jesuits to destroy the King, but he was
also entrusted with their Traiterous Correspondences both Foreign and
D^mestic, and further considering his State and Condition, he had largly
contributed to them, but here I shall observe to you these three things.

1. The Impudence of your Apostolical Men, who were to Assist you in your
mighty Work that you had upon your hands, that in their Common Post-letters,
they should write in Words at Length, that the King was to be destroyed, but
Sir, the Post Office was yours, and so they might be the more bold, and you in
the Design, and who was it at that time durst open their Letters, who were Men
of such Value with you, that on them the hopes of England did depend, but your
Villains made strange of it, but it was not more Strange then True, for they had
as good a Salvo for that, as they had for the Fire of London, viz. to ^hrow it
upon the Protestants, which brings me to a second particular.

2. That it was impossible for you and your villainous Party to do any thing
toward the Advancement of your Cause without Murder, your Church is founded
upon Blood, and therefore your design was written in Characters of Blood, so
plain that any Man might run and read them, this was the way that you were to
subdue the Northren Heresy, that had so long domineered in this Part of the
World, it was for this, that you had such a mighty Zeal, that it made your
Servant Coleman to question, whether he were asleep or awake, when he thought
on it, your Father had his Irish Apostles in his time, and you were to have had
not only Irish but French Dragoons, that were to teach our English Nation the
Articles of your Roman Faith, truly this was, and still is the Method of the
Whore of Ba^ylon, by which she converted the Kingdoms of Europe to her
Obedience, and in recompense for the same she has made their Kings and Princes
drunk with the Blood of the Saints of God.

3. You were to charge this upon the Protestants, as you did the Fi^e of (...),
for which eight Men were hanged, the ninth was lustily promised but (...) ^y
(...), ^ pray remember, that it was in the Month of August 1678, that the ^^^d
(...) ^^s taken and committed for High Treason, and you had two Villai^^ (...)
him out of his Life, just before I discovered the Plot, and when (...), your
^^pish Witnesses disappeared, and Clapool in January or February following was
(...), I have said pretty much of that business in my first Part, to which
(...)*

4. Give me leave to add another Particular, and that is you did no^ (...) true
blew Church of England Protestants, that were aiding and ab^tting you^ Popish
Crew in the Country, of which there might be many Instances given, (...) not
too much burden your Sacred Soul, I will only mention this One, (...) out by
Mr. Dugdale, against Sr. Thomas Whitgrave of Bridgford in the County of
Stafford, who was a Person applied unto on the Papists behalf, to evade the
Pena^^i^s and Punishments of the Penal Laws against Papists, as a Justice of
the Peace in open Sessions assisting the Papists on all occasions, particularly
directing Presentiments against Papists to be omitted, which he had to the
Knowledge of this Dugdale practiced for ten Years together, and also he was one
that labored with the Inhabitants of the Town of Stafford to choose the Lord
Stafford for their Steward, and further acquainted the House, that this
Whitgrave received Money of the Lord Aston for his said Practices on the behalf
of the Papists, and not only so, but that he the said Whitgrave had for some
time before the Discovery of the Popish Plot, fraudulently purchased diverse
Papists Estates to the value of 40000 l. and upwards, to defraud the King and
that he was acquainted with the Secrets of the Papists, and with the Orders and
Decrees of the Popish Priests, as he was told, and could if he might have been
heard, have proved the same.

6. The next Witness that I shall use, is John Smith, this Man upon his Return
to England was planted as a Priest in the House of Mr. Robert Jenison before
mentioned, who w^^^he fourth Witness, and in his time there was a great
Collection of Money on foo^ amongst the Popish Party, to the promoting of which
Collection the Assistance ^^ Mr. Smith was desired, but he did not only refuse,
but dissuaded Mr. Jenison and (...) ^amily, where he then was from contributing
Money upon any occasion, it is true ^^ ^retence for which this Money was raised,
was the Repair of the English Col^^ ^^ ^oway, but the Collection was so
universal, and the Sum collected so great, that (...) could not believe, that
such a Treasure could be all sacrificed to the repair of a C^^^ge, but feared
that there was some design on foot, for the carrying on of which so large a Sum
of Money was raised, but the thing dyed with Mr Smith, and revived not till the
Discovery of the Popish Plot, then Mr. Smith did not only acquaint the
Parliament with this Passage, but gave in an Information, that tended mightily
to corroborate Mr. Jenison's Evidence, which is as follows,

Part of the Information of John Smith of Walworth in the County Palatine of
Durham Gent. taken upon Oath the 8th day of September, 1679, before me Edmund
Warcupp Esquire One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County and
City.
THis Informant, that Mr. Robert Jenison came to his Fathers Midd. ss.
House in Sept. 1678, where after he had been some Days, Sir Edward Smith came
to Walworth, and produced a Letter, signifying a Discovery of a Popish Plot in
London, and upon Inquiry, who were in it, Ireland and Whitebread were named;
about three or four days after which Mr. Robert Jenison before his Father,
Sisters and this Informant said, That he believed, there was something of a
Plot; for that he had heard Mr. Ireland say, it was an easy matter to take off
the King, whereupon this Informant asked, what that Ireland was, who answered,
that he was a Jesuit, and his Cosen and Mrs. Katharine Jenison his Sister,
asked when he saw Mr. Ireland? Who answered a little before he came out of Town
at his Lodging in Russelstreet, which was on the day that himself came from
Windsor, and the same day that Mr. Ireland came post out of Staffordshire, and
that he then found him pulling off his Boots, Mrs. Katharine Jenison asked him
how her Aunt in Staffordshire did? Who replied Mr. Ireland said, she was well,
and that he had been with her in Staffordshire at that time. This Informant,
then asked him what a kind of man Mr. Ireland was? Who answered that he was a
fine Countenanced smiling man, and Swore if he be Guilty of this Plot, I will
never trust a smiling man again; thereupon this Informant asked him what he
thought of him? Who answered I doubt there is some Guilt in him, because he had
inquired of him when he came from Windsor, how the King diverted, and how he
was attended, whereunto he answered in Hawking and Fishing, attended only with
three or four Persons, Mr. Ireland replied he would go so slenderly guarded, he
were easily taken off, and then he paused, but sometime after Mr. Jenison
repeated that he feared there was something in that Plot, for that Mr. Ireland
had said to him at another time, That there was but One in the way, and were he
removed, the Catholic Religion might flourish again in England, whereupon this
Informant said, those were damnable suspicious things which Mr. Ireland had
spoken about the King, thereupon old Mr. Jenison rose up and swore Mr. Ireland
was a Rogue, and so left the Room, and determined the discourse at that time,
but sometime after in this same Month this Informant walking on the Leads with
Mr. Robert Jenison discoursing of the Jesuits being in the Plot, the said
Robert Jenison told this Informant, that Mr. Ireland had at another time told
him that Sir George Wakeman was a fit Person to Poison the King, being the
Queens Physician and a Papist, upon which this Informant said, he hoped the
King would not take Physic of any Papist in regard they might be Jesuitically
inclined, and the Jesuits were against Monarchy in temporal Princes though
appointed by God himself, upon which the said Mr. Robert Jenison, asked, are
the Jesuits against Monarchy, whereto this Informant replied you may easily
Judge that, by their taking off many Kings and Princes, and by their holding it
lawful for the Pope to deprive Kings of their Kingdoms; and to dispose of them
at his pleasure, so that though a King be the Anointed of the Lord, and One
that should not be touched with violent Hands, yet not only his Kingdom, but
his sacred Life lies at the Popes Pleasure; Mr. Jenison answered, does the Pope
allow of this? This Informant answered yes, they have often practiced it in
this and other Kingdoms, and thereby brought more Schism and Division into the
Church than ever was, before such damnable things were practiced by the Pope
and his Emissaries, whereto Mr. Jenison, replied you Seculars are generally
against the Jusuits, and in many things against the Pope, whereunto this
Informant replied, if you please to consider the Frauds and Devilish Artifices
the Jesuits use in their practice and teaching their Politic Interest, and
industrious Self-seeking, all under the Hypocritical Zeal, and Characters of
Religious, though none so Irreligious, you would not wonder why all secular
Priests are against them, and the Pope for upholding them, and their Practices
and Principles: Mr. Jenison replied thereunto, he believed they were crafty
Men, upon which this Informant asked him, how he came now to say they were
crafty Men, having formerly spoke so much of their Sanctity? He replied,
because he had considered several odd and suspicious Expressions Mr. Ireland
had spoken to him; whereupon this Informant replied, you will only give the
King and Country Satisfaction in declaring the odd and suspicious Expressions
of Mr. Ireland, who is now imprisoned for the Plot, but also discharge the Duty
of a Christian and Obligation of a Subject, urging many other reasons to
persuade Mr. Jenison to make a full discovery to the Council, whereunto Mr.
Jenison replied, he doubted the Jesuits would prove as black as their Habits,
adding that his Brother Mr. Thomas Jenison the Jesuit, told him, there was a
design in Hand, in which if he played his Part, he might with ease and safety
raise his Fortune, and that he answered his Brother, he would use all lawful
means, and that he thereupon replied the means were not only Lawful but
Meritorious, otherwise their Body and the chief Catholics in England would not
herein be concerned as now they were, whereupon this Informant asked him, what
he understood by his Brothers discourse, and whether he did not understand that
the Jesuits and Papists had some Design against the Protestant Religion, who
answered he might well understand and suspect they had some such Design in
hand; and thereupon this Informant again pressed him to make a full discovery
to the Council when he came to London, if his Evidence were judged material:
And this Informant told him, that he held himself bound in Conscience to
Discover all that he heard from him, if he omitted to do it himself, urging
that his Evidence would at leastwise be fortifying to others Testimony; and
this Informant very well remembers, that coming about a week afterward with
Mr. Robert Jenison from Mr. Fenwicks House at Beywel, Mr. Bows met them, and
drew Mr. Jenison aside, and discoursed Mr. Jenison sometime, after which Mr.
Jenison singled out this Informant, and told him he believed his own Brother
Mr. Thomas Jenison would be hanged, and several other Persons of Quality, who
were concerned in this horrible Design, thereupon this Informant asked why? Who
answered a handful of Jesuits could not carry on such a Design without the
assistance of Persons of Note and Power, and the Pope himself must be in,
because of his Purse, and he believed the Plot was Universal because his said
Brother had told him the greatest Catholics in England were concerned in that
Design, wherein he would have had him to have played his part, declaring, he had
reason to believe it was to destroy the King and Government, whereunto this
Informant replied, can you swear it, who answered I will not swear it now, and
therefore this Informant repied Will and Can, are two things; Mr. Jenison
further added he was once in Company of five or six Jesuits, and that all their
discourse was then tending to the destruction of the King and the Government,
all agreeing to the self same end but himself, but that he had not contradicted
them in regard he was Young and Inferior in Scholarship; and this Informant
asked him what he meant by Persons of Note and Power engaged in the Plot, he
answered, the chiefest Catholics in England, but would name none, saying, in a
Passion, do you think I am Privy to it, but added by God they will have about
with the Duke; whereby this Informant believed there was a Hellish Plot, and
that the greatest Catholics of England were in it, and that Mr. Robert Jenison
knew more of it than he did at any time lay open, and this Informant speaking
something of the Popish Emissaries engaged in the Plot, meaning Jesuits and
Monks, Mr. Jenison asked him, whether he was not a Popish Emissary? whereunto
this Informant replied no he did abhor the Name, and that he was a Preacher
after the Ancient Apostolical way which teaches all Men to Fear God and Honor
the King, and to be Obedient to all Superior Magistrates, to which Mr. Jenison
replied, the Jesuits hold it Lawful to Depose^ and Murder any Heretic Kings,
and to dispose of their Kingdoms; and this Informant further says, That Mr.
Jenison told him also at Walworth, that Mr. Ireland had lent him Twenty Pounds,
which he desired the Informant to send him to London to pay Mr. Ireland again,
and further says not*

Jurat. coram me Edm. Warcupp. John Smith.


There are in this Information several things worthy of your Observation in
this Evidence of Mr. Smith, and if you will cast but those Orient eyes of yours
upon this Account given in upon Oath, and not glout upon it, as the Devil did
upon the Chimney Sweeper, but let it have your gracious Consideration.

1. This account strongly Corroborated Mr. Jenisons Testimony, for all these
Dicourses past between this Mr. Jenison and Smith, whilst Jenison was a
Papist, before ever he entertained a thought of changing his Religion, or
telling his knowledge of your Plot, and truly after this, that Man must be
impudently incredulous, that would not believe Mr. Ireland was in Town in the
month of August, and at that part of the Month to which I did Swear, since Mr.
Jenison that conversed with him, had acquainted so many Credible Witness within
so few days after, and that which is most remarkable, all this was declared to
his Father, Sister, and Mr. Smith, when that neither he nor any Man alive,
could apprehend that ever there would be an occasion of bringing that Matter in
doubt, and the Controversy upon the Stage, this being so pl^inly made out,
none but such a Bigot as your self, and your rascally Conspirators would either
endeavor to persuade the World to question the Truth of this Conspiracy, or to
give Credit to your villainous Party in any thing they say, nor could there be
a greater Evidence of that Plot to destroy our religious Laws and Liberties,
then that rather than their Design should miscarry, they would Sacrifice their
Souls and Consciences in the Justification of a most palpable Lie; but the
Truth is they had a Virtuous King, and a Pious Duke to save, and rather then
they would Expose them, they would venture their eternal State on your behalf.

2. Though you had wedded your self to that faction of the Roman Synagogue (the
Jesuits I mean) yet they never forgave your appearing a Protestant, for they
were resolved upon your Ruin as soon as they had fixed their business, and had
settled the French interest and power, unless you would to all intents and
purposes go through with them in those Designs of theirs, that might tend to
the fixing of their Religion upon such a sure Foundation, as should not be in
the Power of any number of Men to destroy, and in good sooth Landlord, you was
resolved to keep pace with these Villains, rather than you would hazard the
destroying an old rotten Carcass by any remisness in obeying the commands, and
following the Councels of your Ghostly Hell-born Crew.

3. That your Prosecution of me for Perjury upon that Point was most illegal
and unjust, and could never have been contrived against an English Gentleman,
but by a parcel of Villains, that valued neither what they said or swore, and
encouraged by your self, that had vowed a revenge against me for discovering
and breaking the neck of so fair a Design, in which you and they were engaged,
but God has pretty well rewarded you for your Grace and Favor to me in that
point in this World, what he may do in the next he knows best; you would do
well to sit down; and consider with your self the charge and pains you were at
in that Affair, and if you would have turned but a Jew for half the Money with
the help of your lewd Priest, that prates in the Neighborhood of that
Religion, you might have convicted me of being a circumcised Mahumetan.

7. Another Testimony that I shall produce is Mr. Oliver de Fequett, and
Francis Verdier, concerning Colombiere a Jesuit, and Preacher to Mrs. Modena,
your old Comrade, who acquainted the Parliament, that he had communication with
Coleman, who endeavored to pervert Fiquett to the Popish Religion, saying,
that he knew the King to be a Catholic in his Heart, and that the Parliament
should not always be Master, but in a little time all England should change;
and furthermore he diverted Fiquet^ from going to Oxford to his Study,
promising to recommend him to Father Lachaise, the French Kings Confessor; he
further testified, that you, good Sir, expressed much satisfaction in it, at
which this Fiquett was much surprised, but my old Landladies Priest told him,
that he ou^ht not to wonder at that, seeing you were a Roman Catholic, and often
received the Sacrament, which was confirmed by this said C^lombiere his Servant
with many other Particulars, and Verdier was persuaded to become a Roman
Catholic by the saying, that the King was a Papist in his heart, this Evidence
was given to the House of Lords by these two Men.

8. Another Testimony, that was produced to prove this Devilish Design of
yours, was Captain William Bedloe, who testified that several of your Jesuits
with Coleman and others, were in frequent Consultations about the introducing
of Popery, and he named several Jesuits, as Whitebread, Ireland, Fenwick,
Harcourt, all which he charged home, and your Servant Coleman in a most
especial manner, for whom he carried over a Packet of Letters to Father
Lachaise, to which he brought an Answer; this Coleman did say in the hearing of
Mr. Bedloe, that he would venture any thing to bring in the Popish Religion,
and that if he had a ^undred Lives, and were to go through a Sea of Blood, he
would venture all to further the Cause of the Church of Rome, that it^ Religion
and Worship might be Established here in England, and that he valued not the
destruction of one hundred Her^tical Kings, and if the said Bedloe had lived,
he would have given the World an Account of a Consult held at Sommerse^ House,
at which were several Persons, which would have turned up your Plot by the
roots, you know there was a little Woman concerned there as well as you, but a
Word is enough to the Wise.

But since it pleased God to take the poor Man out of the World, its fit but
you should have an Account of what that villain of Chief Justice (S. Francis
North I mean) was pleased to bless us withal, but as it is I pray take it, he
tells you, that at his first coming to one Mr. Rumsey's House, where he was to
lodge at Bristol upon Monday 16. of August 1680. in the afternoon, being the
first day of the Assizes, Sir John Knight came to the Judge, and said, that Mr.
Bedloe lay dangerously ill of a Feavor, and had little hopes of Life, and
desired him that he would give him a visit, that he might impart something of
great Consequence before his death, and the Judge ^^ld Sir John, that he would
give Mr. Bedloe a visit that night after Supper about nine of the Clock,
provided that he might be Satisfied of two things, 1st, that there was no
infection in his Distemper, 2ly, that the time would not be Inconvenient, but
that Mr. Bedloe might discourse him the Judge without prejudice to his
Condition, after some time two Physicians came to the Judge, and assured him
that there was no danger of infection, and that the time he had appointed,
would be most proper, for commonly he took his repose in the Afternoon; and at
nine a Clock he would in all probability be refreshed, and fit to discourse
with him, thereupon the Judge declared his resolution of going, and desired the
Company of the two Sheriffs, and his worthy and trusty Brother Roger North, and
ordered his Marshal William Janes to go with him, as these Persons were upon
the way Mr. Grossman a Minister in that City acquainted this Judge, that Mr.
Bedloe desired him to wait upon the Judge to this (Mr. Bedloes House) the Judge
said it was very well, he should be glad of his Company, whereupon they went
altogether, and being come into the Room where Mr. Bedloe lay, the Judge
saluted him, and said that he was extreme sorry to find him so ill, assuring
him, that he came to visit him upon his own desires, and did Imagine that Bedloe
might have something to impart to him, as a privy Counselor, and therefore if
he thought fit the Company might withdraw, but Bedloe told the Judge that
needed not yet, for he had much to say that was proper for the Company to hear,
and having saluted the Sheriffs and Mr. Crossman, he discoursed to this effect,
or purpose.

That he looked on himself as a dying Man, and found within himself, that he
could not last long, but must shortly appear before God to give an Account of
all his Actions, and because many Persons had made it their business to baffle
and deride the Plot, he did for the Satisfaction of the World there de^lare
upon the Faith of a dying Man, and as he hoped for Salvation, That whatever he
had testified concerning the Plot was true, and that he had wronged no Man by
his Testimony, but had testified rather under than over what was Truth, and
that he had nothing that lay upon his Conscience upon that Account, he said,
that he had many Witnesses to produce, who would make the Plot as clear as the
Sun, and that he had other things of great importance ^o discover.

These dying Words of Mr. Bedloe did go a great way with all true Protestants,
and indeed some of your own Crew could not well tell, what to say to it; but to
conclude this Head, I will say, that he had an Orthodox Villain to take his
last Words, or we might have had a better Account of Mr. Bedloe.

9. a Ninth Witness, that I shall produce is Honest Ned Coleman, what you don't,
know him? Look upon him, and let my old Landlady look upon him, and take notice
of what he says, you know that the Lords that Examined him had a mighty mind
to bring you off, hoping that you would mend your Manners, and therefore
instead of charging Coleman with Treason, they charged him with Forgery, and
asked him why he forged Letters in your Name, truly Coleman thinking that
Treason being the nobler Sin of the two, told them, the Letters were not
Forged, therefore when he was by them showed a Letter^ that was to be sent to
Father Oliva the General of the Jesuits, which Coleman Frankly owned to be his
hand, but like a Coxcombe c^^ld not forbear accusing my old Landlady and said,
That it was prepared by Order of her Royal Highness: So my Dame was brought in
for a snack, the good Lords finding that Ned was but a lacky Secretary, and
therefore they would go on with their show, and upon that Resolution they
showed him a Letter from you to Father Lachaise, which he showed to you, which
they would have had him say, that you rejected it, but Coleman thanked you for
that piece of Civility, and never said any such thing, then the said Lords
asked him, whether he had not delivered you a Letter from Father Ferier, to
which Coleman was pleased to Answer, that Sir William Throckmorton brought a
Letter to you from Father Ferier, which he delivered to you, and confessed,
that you were acquainted with and privy to your Correspondence with the said
Father Ferier, and St. German; well, what became of his Correspondence with
Father Lachaise, the Lords could prove, that he the said Lachaise had received
a Letter, and a long one too by Colemans receipt of an Answer thereunto, and
here Coleman could not deny, but that he had sent an Account of his
Correspondence with Ferier, to which you was privy, and did likewise Confess,
that you was privy to that long Letter.

But Sir, here was another Farthing upon the score, and that was Colemans going
over to Bruxel^, and he had no more Manners then to tell the Lords that
examined him, that you sent him over, and that ^he Lord Arundel of Wardour knew
of his going over, and that you knew the sum and substance of his
Correspondence with the Popes Internuncio there, which you may take a short
Relish in these few Words, contained in the Correspondency, wherein he says,
August 21st, 1674, that the Design prospered so well that he doub^ed not but
the business would be managed to the utter ruin of the Protestant Party, so
that you being acquainted with the Correspondence, you could not be
unacquainted with the Designs prospering so well, and you also could not but
expect, that in some short time the business would be managed as Coleman
intimated to the said Internuncio.

In a Word, there was another sharp question asked Mr. Coleman, why he had so
great a desire to speak with the King your Brother, and your Sel^, when Coleman
was ordered to attend the Lords, to which Coleman most gravely Answered, that
it was to know how he shall carry himself, as to naming of you, now Sir, what
can a Man think of all this, truly, your Friend Prance does tell us, that you
had an opportunity of doing your busines^, when the four Lords were sent to the
Tower, Coleman was in a strait how to Name your Name, and you in a strait till
Coleman was Hanged, alas good Sir, what could you do less then get rid of such
a Fellow, but to conclude this Head, I will put you in mind of three things.

1. That Coleman was sensible that at the very board there sat some who were
acquainted with the Design, that prospered so well, and therefore when he
appeared, he stru^ted and hectored like an Emperor, and told the Council that
in accusing him they shot at you, and truly if they had shot at him in good
Earnest, they could not well have missed you, for they reading some of Colemans
Papers, they thought if they meddled with him, you could not escape, and gave
him many a Curse, for not keeping out of the way, and truly if he had I should
have made but a sorry Voyage of the Plot, though through your grace and goodness
and the kindness of your Rogues, I have no great reason to Bragg of my gettings
to this day.

2. Coleman accused you home for being Privy to the Correspondency, that he
held with Ferier, and Lachaise, and the Popes Internuncio, which all the World
must conclude was Traiterous enough, nay though the two last years were
embezled, yet those that were found were so plain that when they were read, Sir
John Whitelipps himself bepist his Breeches for fear, and had not one Word to
say for his fellow intelligencer, and thought to have escaped upon the score of
his interest in you, but alas Coleman had so fairly brought you and Gammer
Modena as partakers of his Crimes, insomuch that had there been but Virtue
enough in the Government, you must have mounted the Stage and have been made a
partaker of his punishment.

3. I did not wonder at your excessive Joy, when Coleman was Hanged, for then
you was in all probability out of danger from Coleman, and when Peter Talbot
was sent into another World, and Dick was forced to Abscond, you had none that
could do you much hurt, though you was very Jealous of poor Plunket, I know not
for what reason, yet your good Brother maintained your ground so well, that
there was not that necessity of hanging of Plunket, unless it were that he
would have nothing to do with Talbot, in giving Evidence against you, but your
Gratitude was great to that poor Teague, and so it was to your good Brother,
that saved you from the Gallows, but what says the Proverb? Save a Theif from
the Gallows, and he will be the first that will cut your Throat, in a Word, get
over this Confession of Coleman before the Lords that were appointed by
Parliament to Examine him, and you will do the best thing you ever did in your
whole life, next to your running away, and your admirable gratitude to your
Brother.

10. I must bring up the Rear, and put you in mind of what I did deliver in
upon Oath against your Conspirators, as for the Jesuits they were but a
rascally Crew, and you were content, that they should be charged, and that the
Parliament should be told of the Plot of the Jesuits, and no more, there was
not a word of the Plot of James Duke of York and Albany, against the
Government, and the Religion of these three Kingdoms, Oh! no have a care of
him, I pray don't bring him in, least two of a Family should be brought to
public Justice within the Memory of Man, that would be an unpardonable Fault,
but what could not be done in 78 was done in 88, and so it is all one in the
Original, only a parcel of honest Men were murdered to please your good
Worship, that you might not bid England Farewell with dry Lips, but Sir, some
of your Ignorant Crew might ask, why you would consent, that it might be so
much a Plot of the Jesuits; truly Sir, the necessity of Money to pay your
Popish Army, and Sir John Whitelips thought you would do well to consent to
that, or else you could not have found a Cripple in all Westminster, no nor in
White Hall, or the Cockpit, and a Cripple you must have, or not one Penny would
be given, therefore the Project was tried to see what a Cripple the Popish Plot
would make, therefore when your Brother had opened, old Veracity with his
Lockram Jaws began to tell the Parliament of a Plot, ay, and a Plot of the
Jesuits, and the old Coxcomb made such a Stir with the Plot, as if be were
resolved, that the Plot was to be a Cripple for nothing else, but to
countenance you and your Cattle in some further Roguery, or to get Money at
least; but the Parliament instead of resolving upon Money, they join together
with the Lords, and resolved, if possible, to get to the bottom of it, and
turning it over and over, they found my Testimony to be very full against five
of your Popish Lords, and the Earl of Barkshire's Letters made a Sixth
notoriously Guilty, but he did in 1678 fairly rub of; for he was as much
afraid of being called to an Account by the Government, as you in 1688 was, of
being called to an Account by the Prince of Orange, notwithstanding your being
born free, your Popish Lords were the Viscount Stafford, the Lord Arundel of
Wardour, the Earl of Po^is, the Lord Petre, and the Lord Belasys, against these
I was a witness; and therefore I shall put you in mind of what I testified
against those Impudent Traitors, and I will give you a Particular of the Charge
I gave in against every one of them.

As for Stafford I will not trouble you with any further matter against him,
but put you in mind, that he was to have been your Paymaster General of your
Popish Army, and no doubt but he might have been as dexterous in that Affair,
as your old Greasy Guts was, who, I think, is famous to this day for nothing
but his cheating of three Kings, and to give him his due, I think there is no
great hope of his being better, unless his young Mistress's Pranks can do any
good upon him, as for old Stafford you had dipped him in, and the poor Fellow
has paid the Debt due to his Faults, and therefore I shall say no more of him.
(...)

1. The said Lord Arundel in a Memo^ial of his to Thomas Whitebread, that was
hanged for this Conspiracy, which was to be turned into Latin, and sent to the
Memorial of the Jesuits, wherein an Account was to be given to the said Father
General of the Progress, that was made in the Affairs of England for the
carrying on of the Design, or the mighty Work you then had upon your mighty
Mind and mighty Hands, which Memorial consisted of these nine Particulars.

1. That he with others of your Council at St. James's, had procured several
zealous Protestants, who Persecuted the Papists, to be turned out of the
Commission of the Peace in Wiltshire, and several other Counties in the
Kingdom, and that care would be taken to clear the Commissions of such Men as
should not stand well affected to the Catholic Party. 2. That the Laws made
since the coming in of the King your Brother relateing to Religion, excepting
the Test Bill, did rather tend to the disadvantage of the Phanatiques then
Catholics. 3. That the Lord Powis had endeavored to procure several
Governors in and about Wales, and had procured some to deliver up their
Government into the hands of Catholics, when others in the Dominion of Wales,
by giving them several Sums of Money, and that he did not Question but that he
should procure the Interest of the Isle of White and Portsmouth, because that
Sir Robert Holmes would appear in any Circumstance his Lordships humble
Servant, and a word was enough to the Wise, and to Encourage them he was
pleased to tell them that he was so sure of Portsmouth; that there would be no
resistance when the French Fleet should come. 4. That most of the Justices of
the Peace then in Commission, especially about the North, were Men easy to be
drawn on to Countenance the Proceedings of the Catholics. 5. That the General
of the Jesuits should be assured that Sir William Godolphin your Ambassador in
Spain, had been very true to the trust Committed to him by the Fathers of the
Society of the Kingdom of England and Ireland. 6. That the Lord Arundel would
venture his Life and Fortune to Satisfye the expectations of the General of the
Society of Jesus, and the whole Order, That a Stone should not be left unturned
to promote the Catholic Religion; and if that you had not complied with them
as you did, they would have served you the same Sauce as they designed for your
Brother, for that they were as sure of the Aid and Power of the French King, as
ever you was, and would have completed their Design without you had not you
given them fresh Instances of your Resolutions to bear up in the Cause then in
hand, and to tell you the truth they could have been contented that you had
been more ^it for their purpose than indeed you were, and the Reason the Lord
Arundel gave, was because that you was not a Man either ^it to Govern or
Receive advice; but what you wanted in Understanding you made up in your Zeal,
and therefore they were the more willing to join with you; but your Brother had
cheated them so often that there was no trust to be put in him. 7. That he was
confident that they might begin to build Colleges and erect Schools before a
Year to an end, and that he himself had procured several Catholic
Schoolmasters to be connived at, especially a School near to Winchester, the
Masters name of which was Taytour. 8. That he wondered that he had received
nothing from the Pope, when as there were such assurances made to Mr. Coleman
by Cardinal Howard in the Month of July, 1677.

9. That he was an humble Servant to Father General and the whole Society, and
desired that his Humble Duty might in a most especial manner be Presented to
him, and thanked him for his last kind remembrance of him. 10. That though he
had spent several Hundreds of Pounds upon repairing his House in Wiltshire, yet
he would not be wanting to appear in carrying on the Design. This Memorial you
were Privy to, excepting to assign that Clause in the sixth Particular that
related to yourself, and that was put in by trusty Ned your own Secretary;
after that you had perused the Memorial, with whom you had been very rash with
him about an affront he had put upon Sir Allen Apsly in relation to Religion,
of which he had complained to you, for Coleman was as Impudent on the one hand,
as you were short in your Judgment on the other, which many times did much
prejudice your Design, and truly it was his impudence and your Folly that
helped to deliver the Nation.

2. That this Lord Arundel of Wardour did give Money to pervert several of the
Subjects of England, under the notion of Charity, which was distributed by
Fenwick and Ireland, for the use of Poor Converts, and no other need I; did see
the Money distributed to several Persons perverted, as the Lord Arundel's money
in the Month of December 1677, and in the Month of June 1678, in Drurylane at
Fennicks Chamber, that Money in June 1678 was 160 l. that was given to about 80
People that Fenwick had Perverted to the Church of Rome.

3. That the Lord Arundel of Wardour was privy to the Consult held in April and
May, in which the Death of the King your Brother was determined; for in the
beginning of May, this Fenwick gave that noble Lord a full account of the
unanimous Resolution of the Fathers of the Society in that Point, and it was at
the same time this noble Lord signed a Bill of 250 l. for the use of the
Societies in carrying on their Design.

4. This Lord Arundel (as mighty as you appear to be) had the chief managing of
the Affairs of the Popish Party, and the Negotiations between you and the
French King, both as to War and Peace, and between the Pope and you in
reference to Religion was managed by him, and you could never have Obtained the
Kingdom, till that in the Month of June 1678 you had engaged to the French King
and the General of the Jesuits, who acted with you on the behalf of the Bishop
of Rome, to take the Kingdom upon the terms the Pope and the French King would
allow of, and then you fully complied, and Arundel was made choice of, and was
to have been your chief Minister of State, and your trusty and well beloved
Cuckold, and Counselor, was to have had a Cardinals Hat, with which Sir, I
suppose you will at this time be content, and be glad if you can come of so
fairly.

5. The Lord Arundel of VVardour did take a Commission from the General of the
Jesuits to be high Chancellor of England, which was delivered to him by one of
Langhorn's Son, and to my Knowledge he owned the Receipt of the said Commission
in Colemans presence; and also by a letter to Fenwick, who showed me the
Letter, by which the World may see what a Dogs-turd of a King you were like to
be, for you durst not for your Ears have granted that Commission; therefore to
Skreen you from the imputation of a Traitor, and the French King of an
Invader, you and he agreed to put it upon the General of the Society, who with
some difficulty undertook the Province, and was on the Popes behalf to choose
your Officers both Civil and Military, and the Dignities of the Church, had not
the Design been Discovered, which made all of you that did not suffer the
Justice of the Nation to alter your Measures.

6. That your Servant Coleman having held a long Correspondency with the Sea of
Rome, and finding that the Pence he Received did not answer his expectation, he
began to flag and complain of the same to the Lord Arundel of Wardour, but the
Lord Arundel was resolved that Coleman should not be discharged, and therefore
the Lord Arundel writ to the Fathers of the Society, and complained of the
slowness of the Court of Rome of remitting Money to England, and in the Letter
to the Fathers of St. Omers, was one enclosed to Cardinal Howard, of which
there was answer, that the Cardinal did not question but that he should obtain
a good Pension from the Pope for Coleman, and after some time did obtain the
said Pension for honest Ned, and then he went on briskly and you know that at
that very time your Packet went; a Copy of which Coleman Communicated to the
Fathers in London, which I had the opportunity of seeing, and it did farther
appear to me by the constant Correspondence that they held with the Jesuits at
St. Omers in the Year 1675, 76, 77, 1678. that he had been a great support to
Coleman in those his Correspondences with the General of the Jesuits and
Lachaise.

7. This Lord Arundel of VVardour by your especial Direction, did acquaint the
Fathers at St. Omers, in what awe you kept the Justices of Wiltshire, insomuch
they durst not appear to put the Laws in Execution against the
Roman Catholics. and told some that they were more forward than they had
thanks for their Pains, and that they must expect, that if they were more
mild, they would find that which was Sauce for a Goose was Sauce for a Gander;
and in that Letter expressed much Joy, that there was every day a fine increase
of the number of Roman Catholics, especially in Wales, Herefordshire and
Staffordshire.

8. This Lord Arundel of VVardour told Mr. Fenwick at his Chamber in my
hearing* that he did not question but to have Berwick upon Tweed put into the
Hands of the Scotch Roman Catholics, and that it would be a good refuge for
the Scotch Party, which Scotch Party you know; a parcel of Scotch Highlanders,
Cutthroats, that were to molest all the North Parts of England, and the Fife
in Scotland, and that the Castle of Edinburgh was to be put into the Hands of
the then Marquess of Huntly; so that you were sure of doing your business in
the North without much Opposition, you by your Tool Lauderdale having brought
that Kingdom intosuch Slavery, that the Poor Protestants had but little hopes
of Recovering their Liberties, and I do believe they would have chosen rather
to have fallen into the Hands of the Popish party, than to have continued under
that Slavery they groaned under by the Tyrany of Lauderdale and his Villainous
Scotch Prelates, but how they could have mended their Condition by falling into
their Hands, I am yet (I confess) to learn

9. That the Lord Belasys, the Lord Arundel of VVardour, the Lord Powis, the
Lord Stafford, and the Lord Baltimore met, and held a Committee at VVild-House,
and this Lord Arundel was in the Chair, and Mivo the Jesuit sat Secretary to
them at that time, and a letter was drawn up to Coleman to Communicate to you,
and the Import of the said Letter was this, that whereas Peter Talbot the
Archbishop of Dublin had informed them, that the Duke of Ormond then Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, would endeavor to raise the Revenue of Ireland to be
two Hundred thousand Pounds Per annum for ever, over and above all the Charges
of the Government, and that whereas they were as^ured by the then Marquis of
Huntley, that they begun pretty well in Scotland, and that if four Hundred
Thousand Pound Per annum were settled in England upon the King your Brother, and
his Heirs for Ever, that then your Brother would stand no more in need of this
Peevish Parliament, and when that he was Dispatched, their would be something
for a Successor to come to; therefore they prayed you in these Letters, that
you would Persuade the King your Brother to move in Parliament for an
Additionall Revenue, for such an Additionall Revenue for him and his Heirs:
Upon your sight of this Letter you did Prevail with the King to move it in
Parliament; and what became of the Motion we all well know, for though your
Pensioners were willing to often to grant the King a sum of Money, yet for fear
of becoming as useless to themselves, as they had been Dangerous to their
Country; they fairly denied him such a Revenue; but the Jesuits when they
found their Expectation Defeated, did Write to these Lords, that
notwithstanding the unwillingness of the Parliament to settle such a Revenue,
that they questioned not but to find a Sufficient Revenue for the Successor
without the help of a Parliament, which Letter you saw, and was much pleased
that the Jesuits were concerned for the support of the Successor.

10. That when your villainous Conspiracy was Discovered, the said Lord Arundel
of VVardour in your presence did chide Justice Godfrey, and told him that he
had been to forward in taking my Depositions, which did put Godfrey into great
fears, as he told me but a Week before he was missing, and that he told him in
your Presence, the Day before the King went to New Market, that the said
Justice Godfrey would find the Parliament would give him no thanks for his
pains.

LORD POWIS. It is time to hasten to this Noble Lord, and put you in mind how
far he was Engaged with you in your mighty Work that you had upon your Hand,
and you must own him as necessary a Traitor as you had in the whole bunch,
therefore to engage him to you, he had your Countenance, and in return of such
a favor, he was as Obsequious as any of them all. Therefore

1. You may remember, that at your direction, he Entertained in his House one
William Morgan, one of the Consult held in April 1678, and that this Lord Powis
knew him to be such; for by his then Secretary, which was Mr. Peirson, he sent
a note to speak with Mr. Morgan, in which he said he hoped that they had come
to a Resolution in the affair; it being four of the Clock in the Afternoon; by
this Peirson, the Lord Powis received his Commission to be Lord High Treasurer
of England from Fe^wick and Ireland, and this Peirson delivered to them a
Letter from the Lord Powis, and 300 l. for the use of the Society, in which
Letter he said, that he would venture his Life and Fortune in the affairs; and
give me leave to tell you, that I saw the Commision, before that Ireland and
Fenwick had it at Langhorn's Chamber in the Temple.

2. That there was a Commission from Rome, that the Government of the Nation
should be in the Hands of the Lord Powis and the Lord Belasys; but the Lord
Arundel of Wardour who was always to preside in their councels; and by the way
of Coleman you were to have an account of their Resolution, and by the way I
pray observe that Powis and Arundel of Wardour had Negotiated between you, and
the Pope for Eight Years, and that Powis and Belasys was also to Execute all
such orders that they received from the General of the Jesuits, and the French
King, with which you were also acquainted from time to time by Mr. Coleman, and
some times by the Father General himself, and from Lachaise on the behalf of
the French King, and from both those, that you might not appear, least the evil
that fell upon Coleman might have been your Portion.

3. Further to oblige you, the good Lord Powis bred up his So^ at the Jesuits
College at Paris, and in order to his better Reception; there you recomended
him to the care of Father Lachaise, and in his Letter to his Son there was one
sent to Father Lachaise, in which he, and the rest of the Popish Lords engaged
with you, in the Conspiracy against the Religion and Government; earnestly
importune the aid and assistance of the French King, which Letters bore date
about the latter part of December 1677, and in his Letters to the Fathers at
St. Omers of the same date, in which his Lordship protested his Prudence in the
managing the design there on Foot, and that he had distributed the 2000 Tickets
amongst the Catholic Party in the West, that were then Well-wishers; which
were to be their Protection from the Rage of those, who were to come from
France, to Suppress the Protestant Party, and that he had a good Friend that
had a great authority in Wales, and the bordering Counties, that would Join in
with the Catholic Party, and in a Particular manner promised, that the Militia
in Wales should not be in any posture to give them any Opposition, and that he
had procured several to be made Deputy Lieutenants, by the favor of his good
Friend, that had promised to appear for the Catholic Party, when the Design
should take effect, and that it did become them to bear a Signal respect to
his Friend, which he Named, but I will not, but your old Friend Mr. Arnold can
for a need, for he has been an Excellent Friend of his (the clean contrary
way) and how the said Lord gave a great Incomium of Sr. Politic Fring, Mr.
Arnold's Friend for that he had made several worthy Justices in those parts,
that were hearty Men in the cause, what ever the World thought of them.

4. That in other Letters of more Ancient Date to the Fathers at St. Omers; he
the said Lord Powis did write to the Jesuits that he had procured several
forward Fellows, to be turned out of the Commission of the peace, Particularly
Mr Arnold and Mr. Scudamore, and others did but Bark against the Catholics;
and you told them, that you were pleased that a Lieutenancy through out all
England should be constituted of such, as should be True Men, and further
assured them, that there was great sums would be Expended, as soon as you
should receive that sum of 300000 l. from the French King to enable you; and
these Letters bore date 1675. And another of 1675: And furthermore told the
Fathers in that of 1675, that great numbers were daily converted to the Faith,
and obedience of the Roman Catholic Church.

5. In his Letters of June. 1678 he the said Lord Powis acquainted the Fathers,
that Mr. Coleman was to open in his business; and did desire the Fathers to
admonish Mr. Coleman, to be more close, and stick more to his Cipher, and with
all acquainted them, that Father Lachaise had acquainted him, that
notwithstanding his Receipt 20000 l. of which he had given no manner of
account; he was still urgent for Money, which did cause a suspicion in the
French King; that Coleman sought rather his own, then the French Kings
Interest* and that Lachaise had written to him, that the French King would not
be wanting to supply the Nobility of England, that were engaged to advance his
Interest, and design here in England; and at the time of the Concell, the Lord
Powis did Chide Coleman for his being so open in his Correspondence least he
Smarted for it without hopes of Relief, and told him it was a piece of V^^
Glory in him and that he would prejudice himself, and Friends; of which ^^iding
Coleman told Whitebread, and Whitebread in my hearing did tell Mr. Coleman,
that it was good to be prudent in affairs of such moment as those were.

6. In Letters of August 1678, to the Fathers at St. Omers he wrote that he
Longed till the Blow was Given; I suppose Sir, I shall not need to Explain
those Expressions to you; though your Cattle then did Vindicate your Innocence,
that when the Work was done their Mouths were Stopped, and some did observe
that after you Usurped the Crown; you never could hold up your Head; but like
Cain carried about you such a guilt of his Blood in your Countenance, as made
several stand amazed; but whether I may make a wrong Judgment, or they that did
observe you; nothing can be more plain then that your Brother came to an
Untimely end; and who was called to an account for his, or Shorts Murder; who
to his dying Day did say, that he was Poisoned; so as Powis longed for the
Blow, I do not question but that you longed to, and if you did you had your
longing Gratified. And so much for Powis.

LORD PETRE. I could have put you in mind of several other passages, relateing
to the Lord Powis, but they were not very material, and so I let you pass for
the present, and come to this noble Lord Petre, who was not a man of such
Contemptible parts, as some men would make him, he was much of your own
Standard, both as to Courage and Cunning, and therefore as sit to engage with
the Jesuits to destroy your Brother Charles, as your self and he might as well
serve for a Lieutenant General, and to as much purpose too; under the Banner
of the French King, as ever you served under the King of Spain; the Lord Petre
differed only from you in this Point, that where he did Espouse a Cause, he
never left it, as you did the interest of your Master the King of Spain, that
kept your Brother and you from Starving, and for his Recompense, your Brother
and you Sold him into the Hands of the French King; but to the point in Hand.

1. This Lord Petre was constituted one of the Lieutenant Generals of your
Popish Army, the Patent I saw in Mr. Langhorn's Chamber in the Month of May
1678. and in the Month of June the Lord Petre received this Commission; and I
heard a Priest, whose Name was Langworth, wish him much Joy of the said
Commission, and this Langworth was Priest in the House of the Lord Petre, and
was of the Order of the Jesuits, and at the Consult at Wild-house, where the
grand Consult was held in April 1678. And you planted Langworth in the Lord
Petre's House, as you had Mr. Morgan in the House of the Lord Powis.

2. That the Lord Petre was privy to that Consult; for this Langworth gave the
Lord Petre an exact Account of the said Consult in my own Hearing, and that
Coleman had another to show you; and I suppose honest Ned would not be behind
hand of letting you know how the World did swing, and he swung for it to your
great Joy: So the Lord Petre had the same Account from his Priest, that you had
from your Secretary, in these Particulars. 1. That Cazy was sent from England
to Rome, and that this Cazy was a substantial Man fit for Business. 2. That
Pickering and Groves were appointed to kill the King, and the said Langworth
telling the Reward that Pickering was to have, Petre's laughed heartily, and
said, That a little ready Money would not have been amiss. And also telling the
Reward that Groves was to have said, It was too little for such a considerable
piece of Service; but said, If they like it I do, But this I say, That I know
Groves to be a stout Fellow. But in the Conclusion of the whole Story, the Lord
Petre was for poisoning the King as the more safe way.

3. That by your Direction the Lord Petre kept several Men in Pay, which were
to be ready to join in with the French, when ever they should Land; and that
Portsmouth and Plymouth were in safe Hands, in Men that were the avowed Friends
of the French King, and your self; and Petre did agree with Langworth and the
Consul, who said, That they had expected long enough, and could no longer bear
his Usage of them; for he had put many Things upon them, which he had promised
to the contrary when he was at Bruxels: And the Lord Petre did say, That he
thought the Fool would have more Wit when he came in.

4. That the Lord Petre did say, That notwithstanding he had received 10000 l.
from you, yet he had expended 3000 l. more than ever he had received, and that
he expected that he should have received more from you; for that you had
received 300000 l. from the French King twice told, and that he could not
continue your Men upon Pay without Money; and that you had put him off to the
Lord Arundel of Wardour, who would acquaint him with the Packet that Sir Henry
Titchburn had brought both from Rome and France: But when the Lord Petre
discoursed him about them, and having received no Directions from the Lord
Arundel, Petre pressing the Lord Arundel with too much Importunity, he huss'd
him the Lord Petre, and called him Fool, and asked him what he would have; and
this the Lord Petre took as a great Affront, and complained of it to your self,
and all the Answer he received from you was, That the Lord Arundel was a great
Man, and was old, and that you could advise the Lord Petre to nothing but
Patience, and in due time all things would be accommodated to the Lord Petre's
Content; and withal told the Lord Petre that he must obey the Lord Arundel's
Directions, the French King putting great Trust in him, and the Lord Powis, and
the Lord Belasys. This Discourse was at the Lord Petre's House in Covent
Garden; and thus far the Lord Petre.

LORD BELASYS. Thus the World may see what a Creature of yours the Lord Petre
was: But like to like, as the Devil said to the Collier, you were not at all
unequally yoked; and I having refreshed your Memory concerning him, let me give
you a touch of the Lord Belasys, who was a Son of the Church to all Intents and
Purposes, not of the Church of England but of the Church of Rome, your own
Church, and of the same French Interest; so that your Expectations of his Truth
and Fidelity to your Designs was not without Ground. This Lord having
signalized himself in your Service, especially in this secret Part of it; for
you must know there is secret Service, as well as public Service, that great
Men expect from their Admirers and Followers; or else that worthy Lady Mrs. Po
-- would have ere this time been very useless in her Generation. But to the
Point in hand.

The Lord Belasys was deeply engaged with you, and your Jesuits, in the Popish
Conspiracy; and that did appear to me, because that he in Feb. 76. did write
Letters to the Fathers at St. Omers, in which he gave an Account, That Lewis
the French King had, by Lachaise his Confessor, made a Promise of 300000 l.
provided that upon the Payment of the Money, Hull, Portsmouth, and Plymouth,
and the Isle of Wight, might be delivered up to him; which you know was a Sum
that was distinct from that 300000 l. that you received for the raising of your
Popish Forces: So that if you had complied with your Promise, you would have
made the French Masters of Four of the most important Places of this Realm.
This Lord Belasys did farther acquaint the said Fathers, That he was
recommended to them as a Person ^it to take Arms, and did assure them, that his
own Interest, and the Interest of his Family, should be at their Devoir; and
that he would spend the best Bood he had to demonstrate to the World, that he
had some Religion; and that if Things had been in so fair a Posture when he was
Governor of Tangier, that he would have delivered it up to the French King.

2. That the Lord Belasys took a Commission from the Sea of Rome, granted by
Johannes Paulus d'Oliva, General of the Society, by Virtue of a Breve from the
Pope; which Commission I saw in Mr. Langhorn's Chamber about April or May 1678.
and it was to be General of your Popish Army; and on the Month of July he was
pleased by a Letter to acquaint Fenwick of his receipt of the same, and in that
Letter he gave the Fathers of the Society fresh Assurances of his answering
their Expectations, and that you was pleased to express your great
Satisfaction, that the Lord Belasys was made choice of for that Work. And in
the said Letter he tells us, That you were pleased to assure him, that as soon
as the Peace was concluded, that his most Christian Majesty would bend all his
Forces for England and Ireland, in order to subdue Heresy and Schism; and that
the English Forces already raised, and the Catholic Forces that would appear
upon the Landing of the French Forces, would determine the Point in a short
time.

3. That in the Month of July 1678. your Servant St. Coleman did acquaint the
Fathers that were left in London in the Absence of the Provincial Thomas
Whitebread, who was then beyond the Seas, did attend the Lord Belasys from you
to acquaint him, That you thought it necessary that Money should be sent down
into Staffordshire, and Worcestershire, and Lancashire, etc. to draw up the
Roman Catholics to be here in Town with all speed, that they might be ready
against the Time of the Landing of the French Forces; and that the Gentlemen
should go to their Catholic Tenants, and pay them Money to bear their Charges
up to Town, that they should receive from the Lord Stafford, by direction from
my Lord Belasys; and you may remember that it was the main End of Stafford's
going round the Country that Summer. And that I may not overburden your weak
Memory I here conclude, and so good Night to my Lord Belasys.

There is another of your Rogues (though I confess he is not worth naming) and
that is Baltimore; he is an Irish Lord, and your Father made his Father
Governor of Maryland; and as you are at this day King of Noland, so he is
Governor of Noland. That Villain of a Lord received a Commission for a Troop
of Horse, for he was so mean that nothing could be meaner in the Eyes of your
whole party; I remember upon discovery of the Popish Plot he fled for the same
and was not examined, no not so much as at Feversham, for he had Ballast
enough, and so escaped the Catechizing Bout you met with all, I think he lives
at present without being remarkable for any thing but Kidnapping my Kinsman to
St. Omers, who though his Father Mr. Rozer, desired that he might be bred a
Protestant, yet he was by him Perverted to the Church of Rome, which is high
Treason, and I hope the Government will reckon with him for it in due time.

It will not be amiss Sir, to refresh your Memory with a small Touch upon your
Jesuits and other Assassins, which were also heartily engaged with you in this
soul Conspiracy against our Religion and Government, and the Life of your
Brother: Come lets have a little Patience exercised, and consider with your
self, that they were Men that deserved well from you, and worthy of your
remembering their good Service; they did all they could though you left them in
a decent way, so that they were fairly hanged for their Pains, they had taken
in your secret Service; and since they met with a convenient Reward for their
great and mighty Works: Come Sir, you may see that there were more that were
working besides you, and Coleman and the French King they were Laborers in
your Harvest Field; let us see how they carried themselves, and indeed upon the
consideration of their Behaviors, you may make a Review of your own, for you
had not so much as one ill Quality in you, but they made it theirs, and they
had not one Roguish Design but you were Master of it; I will not charge you
with lifting up your Eyes and Hands, and wishing the Design of your Brothers
Murder good Success, as Langhorne did, but since he ended his days so
Strangely, and none called to an Account for it, no, not so much as the Virago
that gave him the deadly Dose; What can any Man say for you in this Case? I
must tell you again of Dr. Short, had he been suffered to live he could have
told a lamentable Story; but he was sent to tell his Tale in another World; and
it is well known that the Jesuits and you had not Patience to stay the Ordinay
course of Establishing Popery and Arbitrary Power; and they notwithstanding you
were not Wise enough, yet they found in respect of your Zeal you were willing
to serve their turn, and had at last engaged to serve them upon the most
Villainous Terms that ever Man could imagine, and though you were neither
capable of giving or receiving Advice, yet you had the Gift to Pick your Nose
and say nothing, and let them Play the Game as they lifted, and when they were
strengthened by your Interest, and the French Kings Power, they could send you
Trudging into the Kingdom of Darkness, as you did your Brother: But to come
home to your Jesuits.

Sir, let me put you in mind that upon the fifth of April we had notice from
Thomas White and the Fathers in London, that a General Consult was to be held
on April the 24th, and the Fathers of Liege, and Ghent, and VVatton, and St.
Omers were ordered to attend the said Consult, and the Summons was to this
effect; Thus all that had Jus Suffragij was to be there, and that they were not
to hasten to London long before the time appointed, nor to appear much about
the Town till the meeting was over, least occasion should be given to suspect
the Design, and Secrecy as to the time and place was much Recommended to all
those that were Summoned, as it would appear of its own Nature necessary; this
was the Summons, and to this Summons we all obeyed, and to London we came and
there met about 50 or 60 of the Society from all parts of the Kingdom, who
(before the Consult was disolved) did resolve upon the Death of the King,
either by Shooting, Poisoning, or Stabbing; Conyers the Benedictin was pitched
upon, and four Irish Russians to Stab him, and Pickering and Grove were pitched
upon to shoot him, and Sir George VVakeman to Poison him; thus your Brothers
death was resolved upon, and what they could not effect in 1678, they did in
1684, and to this of 78, your Servant Coleman was not only Privy too but was
aiding, and advising, and consenting, and how could you be Ignorant of it then?
For what you did in 1684 you had long designed, of which Sir, no doubt in the
least can be made, and therefore its in vain for you or any of your Villains to
dispute it, can you deny that you sought the Destruction of the Prince of
Orange whilst he was in that Station, only because he had Married your
Daughter; can you or your Brother of France deny that the Papists were to have
your Aid and Power to subdue the Northern Heresy? Can you deny that Coleman
labored for a Peace, that the French King might be at leisure to assist you
here in England? And that you might not have one to hand a Party against you;
was not the Duke of Monmouth kept under the Hatches by you and your Party? And
was not the Parliament to be disolved? And by the Dissolution of the Parliament
a Peace could be procured upon more Advantageous Terms to the French, and in
order to your regaining your Power and Interest, which was hurt by quitting the
Office of Lord High Admiral, it was contrived that you should be restored, and
that the King your Brother should put the Fleet into your Hands as the only
Person that could give a good account of it; and farthermore that for all the
Places of importance of the Kingdom put into his Hands, till the Popish
Religion and Arbitrary Power was fixed, and you at the Hand of it, in which
Post you were to be but a Royal Tool to serve their base Ends and Purposes, and
if you did not comply they knew how to dispose of you, even in no worse way
than they designed upon your Brother, which I say (through Gods Mercy to
England and your Clemency) they did effect, and then Popery had but two Legs,
whereas in his time she had four such as they were.

Objection. That it was objected against me, that I was not in Town in the
Months of April and May; this was one main Objection against my Discovery, and
to this end the Jesuits produced a Number of rascally Boys from St. Omers, to
prove my being there those Two Months, nay, some of them Swore from December
till June.

And to answer this Objection, I brought in Seven or Eight Witnesses to prove
my being in Town, which gave the Court great Satisfaction. 1. The first Witness
I called was Mr. Walter, sometimes Vicar of Rainham in Kent, who did declare
that he had known me several Years, and had met me in Newgate Market; and in
the Month of April he saw me in a Disguise in a gray Serge Coat, and a gray
Hat; at the first Sight this Minister did not know me to be the Man, but upon
due recollection he found me to be the Man that he had seen; and to confirm his
Judgment in it, he went to a Gentlewoman whose Name also he did not know, he
went to her because he had seen me at her House, to enquire of her what was
become of me, and how I did; and the Gentlewoman, not knowing the End of my
going beyond the Seas, answered him thus; Oh, says she, he is an undone Man, he
is turned to the Church of Rome, and Absconds and hides himself I know not
where; Can all this be true? Then Mr. Walter told her, That he had seen me
later than she had done; for he had seen me the Day before, at the upper end of
St. Martin's Lane near Leicester House. 2. Sarah Ives was another Witness in
the Case, to confirm what Mr. Walter had said; this was the Woman of whom he
enquired concerning me, who owned she had not seen me, but my Friends had told
her that they judged me about the Town Incognito; and she proved that Walter
had the aforesaid Discourse with her concerning me, and that he had told her
that he had seen me the Day before; and she tells you a particular Token, That
my Father came then unto her House to see her, and she did ask my Father to eat
some thin Cheese that was newly come in, and the first she had come in; and she
enquired of my Father when he did see me, my Father told her, That he had not
seen me of late; then, said she, I can tell you News of your Son; here was one
Mr. Walter in my Shop that says he met him in Leicester Fields, but in a
Disguise, and that he had told her what Habit I was in. 3. A third Witness that
proved me in Town at that time was one Butler, that was Coach man to Sir
Richard Barker, who said, That he was about his Coach which stood in the
Gate-way, and that I came in, and asked him whether Dr. Tongue was within, and
he answered, No: At the first Sight he did not know me, by reason of the
Disguise that I was in, but had known me well before, because that I wore a
Minister's Habit, as I did then at the Trial of the Jesuits; but upon calling
to mind who I was, he did bid me welcome into England again, but he said I took
no notice of him, but went on forward into the House: But I made but little
stay in the House, because a young Fellow had affronted me for the sake of the
Habit I was then in, and this he swore was in the Month of May 1678. and that
some time after he did acquaint his Master with my being there in this strange
Habit. 4. The fourth Witness was Cicily Mayo, who deposed that she had never
seen my Face before that time she saw me in a Disguise; and had not taken
Notice of me then, had not a young Fellow, that was a Servant to Sir Richard
Barker, told her that my Name was Oats; and she having heard of my Name in the
Family, she did take the more notice of me, and came to visit me after I was in
White Hall, and she said that it was about a Fortnight before VVhitsontide. 5.
The fifth Witness was Philip Page, another Servant of Sir Richard Barker, who
also deposed, That he saw me at Sir Richard's House in the beginning of May
1678. and that I was in a light-coloured Campaign Coat; this he did prove by
this material Circumstance, That his Master had a Patient at Islington at that
time that was Sick of a Fever. 6. Sir Richard Barker himself was called, but he
deposed, That he did not see me till June or July, but that his Servants had
acquainted him that I had been there in May; that they had seen me in Two
several Disguises, at which the said Sir Richard wondered very much. 7. There
was one Smith, sometimes a Schoolmaster at Islington, that did depose, That he
saw me the first Monday in May 1678. and that we dined together. 8. The eighth
and last Witness was Mr. Clag, an old Romish Priest, who (notwithstanding he
was of your Church) thought it his Duty to tell the Truth, and he deposed, That
he saw me at Mr. Charles Howard's House in Arundel House; but Charles Howard
was ready to confront Mr. Clag, but Howard was baffled being taken in a Lie, to
which he would have sworn, and did afterward at another Trial against me: But
I had saved the Villain from the Gallows, and he made good the old Proverb in
Omnibus; Save a Rogue from the Gallows and he will be the first that shall cut
your Throat. But when most of these Witnesses were dead, then you brought over
your St. Omers Boys, and having Four Villains that were Judges, and Twelve
Profligate Forsworn Rogues, Murderers, that were Jurymen, you obtained a
villainous Verdict against me; and to the Admiration of all Men, these Rogues
called themselves Protestants of the Church of England, and Englishmen. But I
have seen the End of some of them, and I question not but the Righteous God
will avenge my Cause, notwithstanding the unjust Judgment of your Villains
pronounced against me.

Obj. Another main Objection that was against my Testimony, was that which did
relate to Mr. Ireland's being in Town in the Month of August, and the beginning
of September: And this was positively proved by Sarah Pain, that he was in Town
when she went to live at my Lord Arlington's, and that was a Week after the
King went to Windsor, in August 1678. and that she saw him Eight or Nine Days
before, and the King went to Windsor on the Thirteenth, and about the
Twentieth she went to live with the Lord Arlington; and seeing Ireland Eight or
Nine Days before, it must be then about the Eleventh or Twelfth, which was the
time I deposed. And your Villains the Judges, Seven Years after, tried me upon
that Point; and they had packt a Jury of notorious Villains that was to do the
Jobb, and they convicted me, for Sarah Pain was not to be found; and Mr.
Jennison, he who swore Ireland's being in Town the Nineteenth, was forced to
fly; such was your Rage against those who discovered your villainous
Conspiracies against the Nation, and the Laws and Liberties thereof. So that I
was miserably crushed by you; but a Parliament gave me this Vote, Resolved,
That the Prosecution of Titus Oats upon Two Indictments for Perjury in the
Court of King's Bench, was a Design to stifle the Popish Plot; and that the
Verdicts thereupon given were Corrupt, and that the Judgments thereupon were
Cruel and Illegal.

Obj. Another Objection that has been made use of by some, Why the General of
the Jesuits was used to sign Commissions for Civil and Military Officers? And
why he disposed the Dignities of the Church? And why should not you or the
French King rather have done it? Answ. If Talbot and Coleman had been alive,
they would have told you the Reason; Nay, trusty Dick, your Earl of Tyrconnel,
would not have mine'd the Matter. But since they are departed, some one way,
and some another; and since I am the only Man that can give the World an
Account of the Business, I must not hold my Peace. Therefore be pleased to
remember,

That when your Council at St. James's had formed the Design which was in the
Year 1673. they were at a great Loss who should be at the Head of it; they and
you had agreed, that you should not appear at the Head of this Design, (though
you really was so;) and the Reason was this, That you might not be obnoxious to
the Law, in case there should at any time appear any one or more to discover
this Intrigue of yours: But the main Reason was, they found you leaky, and
therefore it was concluded that this great Affair should be managed by one, or
by a Number of Men, that could carry on a Design with that Secrecy that became
the Nature of the Thing; and therefore that vain glorious Fool your Secretary
was often chidden for his being too open in the Matter. You may remember that
when the Lord Arlington, and the Earl of Ossery went for Holland, which was on
the Tenth of November, the very Day after a Council was held at St. James's,
and there it was concluded, That the French King should be at the Head of this
Design, and you approved of the Advice, and dispatched away Richard Strange, a
Jesuit, to the French King, with a Packet, and in Company with him Edward
Mico, to press the French King to assume to himself a Power of granting
Commissions both Civil and Military, to such of the English Nobility and Gentry
as were recommended by your self, and your said Council; and that he would by
no means wave the same, lest the Design should sink; for the Council thought it
no ways convenient for you to appear in it. And the main Reason was, That you
were obnoxious to several in the House of Commons, who would pursue you with
the utmost Vigor, if ever such a Thing should take Wind, and they find you at
the Head of it. Strange and Mico waited Three Days, and they received no other
Answer from your French King, than that he would consider the Letter he
received from you, and would answer the same in due time; and accordingly he
took time till the middle of December, and then you received an Answer from the
French King, that it was no ways convenient for him to engage in granting
Commissions to any of the English Catholics, nor could he assist them at the
present, because of the War he was then engaged in against the Consederate
Princes; but when he had obtained a Peace, his Aid and Power should not be
wanting: And further he promised to pitch upon some convenient Person that
should appear at the Head of the Design, that should please all Parties, both
French and English. And this was the present Thought, because that he should
appear very obnoxious to all the Princes of Europe, if he should engage in that
Particular: And in the Conclusion of the Letter, he advised you, and your
Council at St. James's, not to be too hasty in pressing on Things too far, till
he was in a Condition to assist you.

Upon the Receipt of this you di^patcht away Coleman to the Pope's Internuncio
then at Bruxels, to whom you wrote for his Advice, and to whom you also
communicated the Advice of the French King, which was approved by the Pope's
Internuncio; but with this Exception, That you ought to have a Man in your Eye
of whom you might be sure; and truly he advised, That the General of the
Jesuits should be made use of as the fittest Man in that Affair; and it was
necessary to be done this way, that the Pope should grant him his Bull, and by
Virtue of that he should be empowered as a Substitute of the Sea of Rome to do
that Business. C^leman travels from Bruxels to Paris, where he discoursed with
Father Farrier, who then was indisposed; but when Father Farrier heard him
named, the General of the Jesuits was much concerned, and said, It would make
the whole Thing appear Ridiculous to all Christendom, and be laughed at as the
vainest Thing that ever was attempted; and so Coleman returned home, and upon
his Return you called your Cattle together, and Coleman's Negotiation was
communicated to the Council, and they thought that a Consult of the Jesuits
should be summoned, and accordingly they were summoned, and met, and they
resolved to write to the Father General about it; and the Answer you had from
the Gene^al, That the Motion was very strange, that it was worthy of
Consideration, and within a Month you should have an Answer with that respect
that became him to so great a Prince. Well, what was next? Truly when the Month
was expired you had an Answer, That he had considered of it, and that he found
himself not only incapable of doing you Service; but it would be very
inconvenient for him to engage in such a thing, for that the whole concern of
the Society lay upon him, and he was Old and could not well do the Duty of his
place; he approved of your Resolutions of using the name of an indifferent
Person, and therefore humbly advised you to find out some other Person, and he
thought that some Prince Cardinal would be very fit to be applied to in such a
Case as that.

You were much concerned at this Answer, and the Death of Father Farrier, who
died in a small time after, and you was in a great strait what to do; but upon
a Letter you received from the French King, you were much raised in your hopes
that the Confederates would be brought to Reason, and that as soon as he had
done with them, that he would push your Design on with all vigor; that he had
great Thoughts of obtaining the Pope to substitute some Person of ote, Nthat
should be the Head of it, and that he himself would Commission his own Officers
that should be sent to your assistance, that you should have a sufficient Force
to do your business; in this Letter he acquainted you how unfaithful your
Brother the King had dealt by him; a Copy of this Letter was given to the
Fathers at London by Coleman; and I had the good fortune to see it when I came
amongst them; for by that time they had Translated most of the Letters that
passed between you and the French King, and entered them down upon their Books
at large.

You know that in the Year 1675 the French King made Choice of Father
Lachaise, for his Primier Father Confessor, which whom he advised very much in
Relation to the business he designed to push in England; and this Father
Lachaise was the Man that was Tooth and Nail for carrying on the Work; in the
Summer you and Coleman fixed a Correspondence with him, and it was agreed that
he should have an Abstact of the Correspondency that you and Coleman had held
with Father Farrier in his Lifetime; which was a bout three Years
Correspondence, which Coleman did to your great Satisfaction; and to the
Satisfaction of your whole Council, and to whom you were also pleased to Write:
This Lachaise was very Zealous to have the General of the Jesuits Engaged, and
Engaged the French King to Write to the then Pope to lay his Command upon the
said Father General, to undertake the Province of Commissionating the Offices
both Civil and Military, yea and Ecclesiastical too; the Pope consented, and
the Father General was importuned by the Pope, but he desired the Pope that his
Age and great business* in which he was engaged in relation to the Affairs of
the Scociety might be considered; so it was put off till 1676, and the Pope
pressing the General very hard in the Month of December 1676, he undertook the
Affair, and Cardinal Howard was extremely displeased that he was not applied to
for his Council in that Affair; but the Legantine Power, and the Archbishop^ick
of Canterbury, and 40000 Crowns Pension stopped his Mouth: You cannot forget that
Coleman told the King your Brother, that Cardinal Howard would make as good an
Archbishop as Dr. Shelden; but the King told him that he was very busy about
that which would hang him, if he had not a great Care hanging would be his end,
and thought that the Duke made to much haste in his business; for Sir, your
Brother was for doing that by Degrees which you would have done at once; and
told Coleman further that till this Parliament had enabled him with a good Sum
of Money, he could not put them off, and all the Ships that were taken whilst
it was in being would prove to be in Vain, and that it would be a much better
Employment for him and Friends, to make such an Interest in the House of
Commons that he might have Money enough to subsist without them, than to employ
himself in these Foreign Negotiations as would ruin all: But Poor Ned Coleman
turned a Deaf Ear to this discourse of your Brothers to him, not believing that
the Gallows would have been his Fate. Well, you were now sure of the General to
whom you had recommended several, but you saw no Commissions appear, which put
you under some concern, and Judged your self slighted; but the Reason the
General gave you that at present he had not received his Power from the Pope;
then you pressed the Pope both by Sir Henry Titchburn and Cardinal Howard; but
it was 1677 till the General received the Popes Bull for that Work, and when
the Bull was obtained then in the latter part of 1677, Commissions began to
appear pretty rife, and in the year 1678 to the time the Plot was Discovered to
your Brother, which was some little time before you went to Windsor. But to
conclude this particular, observe 1. that you were not to appear a^ the head of
the Conspiracy for fear of being Exposed to the Parliament 2. that if the thing
were Discovered, it should appear an unprobable Story, and so not be Believed.
3 That your Allie of France might not Expose himself to the Princes of
Christendom. 4 That the General of the Jesuits unwillingly engaged in the
Affair of granting Commissions. 5. That when he had undertaken the Province
aforesaid; the whole Body of Jesuits were engaged in the Work. 6. And more
closly Linckt to the Interest of the French King, their General being his
Creature to all Intents and Purposes.

8. What Credit the Discovery of the Popish Plot obtained in the Nation, this
did not only obtain Credit in the Nation, but might have been of great use to
Charles your Brother, and I am sure it was very Fatal to you and your Party,
but that which you sneer at, were the Reasons why the Witnesses were so ill
treated at Court, and were not beloved by your Brother; to this I must give you
these two Answers,

1. By way of Concession, that is possible he might not be pleased to give that
Credit to the Discovery of the Popish Plot, and therefore its true he did not
give the Witnesses that kind Treatment at Court the Nature of their Cause
required, and there where four Reasons for it.

1. Your Brother was well acquainted with the new Government and the new
Religion that was to be brought in, but you were not so Civil as to acquaint
him with the Design that was against his own Life, so that when that part of
your Design was Discovered, you almost prevailed upon your Brother not to
believe this part of the Plot, because that you had so freely acquainted him
with all the other Part of your Design, and engaged him in it; so that he being
persuaded by you and your Party not to give Credit or at leastwise to own that
he did believe that the self same Party (with whom he himself was in a
Conspiracy) should have such another Plot against his Life: the King your
Brother was in the Design against the Religion and Government of the Kingdom,
because he was sold into an opinion that the Religion and Government thereof
was inconsistant with Monarchy, as he told the King of Poland by old Sir
Cutbook Lockrom Jaws, alias Mapleface quondam his Envoy then, and that Rascal
of a Book-Cutter had got such a notion of the uniting of the Church of England
with the Church of Rome, that I think it was as great an argument to induce you
to prefer him, as well as the cheating of your dear Brother by reason of his
excellent Talent in the work of Book-Cutting, and also at the destroying of the
Discovery of the Popish Plot.

2. Another Reason why the King your Brother might not be inclined to give the
Witnesses that Credit and Reception they did deserve, because of his affection
to the Popish Crew, tho I must tell you that had I been of your Brothers
Council, I should have given him this Advice, viz. That if he would have
preserved himself from a Conspiracy, was obliged in Policy to have had an Eye
upon those for whom he has done the greatest Kindnesses, rather than upon
those to whom he has been unkind; for those that were disgusted they made not
such frequent Opportunities, nor such easy Accesses to him as your favored
Villains had, and the Conspiracy that was begun against his Life, was; by you
and those Popish Lords and Jesuits that had been most familiar with him for was
it not his own only Life that kept you from the three Kingdoms, and that you
were in danger every day to turn your Party destroyed by the Parliament,
therefore it stood you in much stead to dispense with the Sixth Commandment,
rather then your Negotiations with the Cardinal Howard, the French King, and
Father Farrier, and Father Lachaise, and Oliva General of the Jesuits, and the
Popes Internuncio at Bruxels, nay with the Pope himself should fall to the
Ground, and you know that you found him but loose in his Religion, which was
that of Rome, (if he had any at all) and that he had neither Resolution nor
Courage, nor Constancy, and Popery was the thing you now Resolved upon, and
Arbitrary Government, he was Privy to all this and liked the Project but would
not run the hazard you did, therefore because he was a Trotter only and not a
Galloper, you were resolved to destroy him, and to blind him so that he might
not see your Design nor believe it, you and your Party urged this for a main
Reason; his Affection to them and his laying so many Obligations upon them, was
an Argument sufficient to support your Party against the Credit of the
Witnesses that appeared to accuse them.

3. Because the King your Brother was Swallowed up in the Pleasures of his
Lusts, he preferred the Amorous Glances of his Whores before the safety of the
three Nations, who were most of them of the Popish Religion, and they having
his Ear and his Heart, did much prevail with him to discountenance the
Discovery of the Popish Plot and the Discov^rers thereof; as Portsmouth in
particular, who in Conjunction with you and your Party carried the King and his
Ministers (that were up to the Ears with you in all the other Parts of the
Design) and you know that when I appeared I stood a single Witness a great
while, and notwithstanding you and the Court Whores, and Court Pimps, and Court
Bawds, set your Faces upon me to destroy me, nevertheless, I stood like a Rock
against all your Attempts. 1. You know who it was that was acquainted with the
Conspiracy by Order from the King your Brother; and he was so far pursuing the
Discovery, that he chose rather to let the Conspirators have time enough to
convey away their Person and their Papers, and Madam Remarkable was as diligent
a cast Whore as any in that Affair. 2. Your Italian Comrade you know made a
visit to the Princess of Orange in Flanders, and by that Opportunity many of
the Traitors had an opportunity to escape; as also when you was sent to take
the Air in that Country, you took along with you several of your Villains. 3.
You know how Coleman's last two years Letters were Conveyed away. 4. You bribed
Scroggs to baffle the Testimonies of the Witnesses; you and the Whores thus
prevailing upon the King; you might dispose him not to give the Witnesses that
reception their Cause and Service did deserve.

2. I answer in the second Place, that notwithstanding the usage the Witnesses
met withal from your Brother in private Capacity, as he was a Man Wedded to his
Pleasures, and very Obsequious to the Strumpets that were about him, yet do but
observe what Credit the Parliament of England gave the Witnesses, and that
through the Power of Truth, and Energy that was in the Testimony they gave.

1. Upon the Testimony they received from me when I was a single Testimony upon
the first of November 1678, the Lords and Commons past this Vote; viz. Resolved
Nemine Contradicente, That upon the Evidence that has already appeared to this
House, that this House is of Opinion that there has been, and still is a
Damnable and Hellish Plot Contrived and Carried on by the Popish Recusants, for
the Assassinating and Murdering the King, and for the Subverting the
Government, and Rooting out and Destroying the King: To which Vote the Lords
agreed Nemine Contradicente.

2. The Lord Chancellor Finch, that famous Tool reported upon the 28th of
November 1678, the effect of a Conference desired by the Commons; that upon
hearing of the Testimony of Mr. Bedloe and my self, that they were in an
Amazment, when they considered in what danger the Person of the King your
Brother was, and his Government; whereupon they prepared an Address to be
presented to the King your Brother; to which they desired the Concurrence of
the House of Lords, and they had the Concurrence of the House of Lords in the
said Address, and it was accordingly presented to the said King on the 29th by
both Houses; so that you and your Villains may see that the Discovery of the
Popish Plot was not so small a Matter as you would seem to make of it.

3. Observe the Address of Parliament on the 21st of March 1679, in which the
Parliament did lay before the King your Brother, the great Sense they had of
the sad and Calamitous Condition of this Kingdom, occasioned chiefly by the
Impious and Malicious Conspiracies of the Popish Party, who had not only
Plotted and intended the Destruction of the King your Brother, but the total
Subversion of the Government and the true Religion established amongst us; and
therefore they Prayed that a Day might be set a part for Fasting and Prayer;
and accordingly a Day was set apart, but I suppose though you knew of that Day,
you nor none of your Villains ever kept it.

4. Observe the Vote of the 24th of March 1679, Resolved Nemine Contradicente,
by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That they are fully satisfied by the Proofs that they
have heard, that there now is and for diverse Years last past has been a horrid
and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy contrived and carried on by those of the
Popish Religion, for the Murdering of his Majesty's Sacred, Person and for the
Subverting of the Protestant Religion, and the ancient and well established
Government of this Kingdom; To which Vote Sir, give me leave to remind you of
the Impeachment of the five Popish Lords, upon which Impeachment the Lord
Viscount Stafford was tried and found Guilty, and suffered the Pains of Death
as a Traitor to the King, and Kingdom, and so fully satisfied was the
Parliament of the Integrity and Truth of the Witnesses, that they intended to
have proceeded against the rest of the Traitors, that none of them could have
escaped the Justice of the Nation, had not they been dissolved in a most
Arbitrary manner.

5. Observe the Proceedings of the Parliament against Nathaniel Reading Esquire who
Corresponded with the Lords in the Tower that stood Impeached for the Popish
Plot, in their Address to the King your Brother upon the 8th of April 1679, in
which they set forth the Inquiry they had made into the Hellish Design that was
carried on by the Papists against the Person and Government of the King your
Brother, and upon Examination, they found that he the said Reading had used his
utmost endeavors to prevent and suppress the Kings Evidence, and as much as in
him lay to stifle the Discovery of the said Plot and and thereby to render the
same Fallacious and of no Reality, and by such undue Means to prevent the
Malefactors from coming to Justice; therefore they prayed, that a Commission of
Oyer and Term^er might be issued forth for the trying of the said Reading for
that Offense; Reading was tried and was found Guilty, and therefore would have
you take notice of what was said by the then Lord chief Justice North, when he
gave Judgment upon the said Reading; I will tell you, says he, your offense is
so great, and has such a Relation to that which the whole Nation is concerned
in, because it was on attempt to baffle the Evidence of that Conspiracy, which
if it had not been by the mercy of God detected, (God knows) what might have
befallen us all by this time, and still the Parliament have it under their
Consideration how to prevent any farther mischief by it, but this Villain of a
Cutthroat had the grace to join with your Brother and you to stifle it, as I
shall show you in the next Part of this your sweet Picture.

6. Observe the Address of the House of Commons upon the 14th of May, upon the
Assurance that the King your Brother had given the then Parliament of his
constant Care to do every thing that might preserve the Protestant Religion and
Government, they did upon the said Assurances represent to the King your
Brother the deep Sense they had of the state of Religion, and showed the King
that the Papists by their Designs against his Person and Government (which the
said Parliament was resolved to defend) gave themselves hopes of Success,
therefore the Parliament were resolved to apply themselves to the making such
Laws, as might defeat those Popish Adversaries of their Hopes of gaining any
Advantage by any Attempt they should at any time Form against the Person of the
King your Brother.

7. Another Instance of the Credit the Discovery of the Popish Plot had, you
may see in this Address of the House of Commons to the King your Brother.

The ADDRESS to his Majesty from the Commons, Saturday Nov. 13th. 1680.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most loyal and obedient Subjects the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, having taken into our most serious Consideration your
Majesty's gracious Message brought unto us the Ninth Day of this instant
November, by Mr. Secretary Jenkins, do with all Thankfulness acknowledge your
Majesty's Care and Goodness in inviting us to expedite such Matters as are
depending before us, relating to Popery and the Plot. And we do, in all
humility, represent to your Majesty, that we are fully convinced that it is
highly incumbent upon us, in discharge both of our Duty to your Majesty, and of
that great Trust reposed in us, by those whom we represent, to endeavor, by
the most speedy and effectual Ways, the suppression of Popery within this
Kingdom, and the bringing to public Justice all such as shall be found guilty
of the horrid and damnable Popish Plot: And though the Time of our Sitting
(abating what must necessarily be spent in the choosing and presenting a
Speaker, appointing grand Committees, and in taking the Oaths and Tests
appointed by Act of Parliament) has not much exceeded a Fortnight; yet we have
in this Time not only made a considerable Progress in some Things which to us
seem, and (when presented to your Majesty in a Parliamentary Way) will, we
trust appear to your Majesty to be absolutely Necessary, for the Safety of your
Majesty's Person, the effectual Suppression of Popery, and the Security of the
Religion, Lives and Estates, of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects: But even in
relation to the Trials of the Five Lords impeached in Parliament for the
execrable Popish Plot, we have so far proceeded as we doubt not but in a short
Time we shall be ready for the same. But we cannot (without being unfaithful to
your Majesty, and to our Country by whom we are entrusted) omit upon this
Occasion humbly to inform your Majesty, that our Difficulties even as to these
Trials are much increased by the evil and destructive Counsels of those Persons
who advised your Majesty, first to the Prorogation, and then to the Dissolution
of the last Parliament, at a Time when the Commons had taken great Pains about,
and were prepared for those Trials. And by the like pernicious Counsels of
those who advised the many and long Prorogations of the present Parliament,
before the same was permitted to sit, whereby some of the Evidence which was
prepared in the last Parliament may possibly (during so long an Interval) be
forgotten or lost; and some Persons, who might probably have come in as
Witnesses, are either dead, have been taken off, or may have been discouraged
from giving their Evidence, But of one mischievous Consequence of those
dangerous and unhappy Counsels we are certainly and sadly sensible; namely,
That the Testimony of a material Witness against every of those Five Lords (and
who could probably have discovered and brought in much other Evidence about the
Plot in general, and those Lords in particular) cannot now be given Viva voce.

Forasmuch as that Witness is unfortunately dead, between the calling and the
sitting of this Parliament, to prevent the like or greater Inconveniences for
the future, we make it our most humble Request to your Excellent Majesty, that
as you tender the Safety of your Royal Person, the Security of your Loyal
Subjects, and the Preservation of the true Protestant Religion, you will not
suffer your self to be prevail*d upon by the like Counsel, to do any thing
which may occasion in Consequence (though we are assured never with your
Majesty's Intention) either the deferring of a full and perfect Discovery and
Examination of this most wicked and detestable Plot, or the preventing the
Conspirators therein from being brought to speedy and exemplary Justice and
Punishment. And we humbly beseech your Majesty to rest assured (notwithstanding
any Suggestions which may be made by Persons, who for their own wicked Purposes
contrive to create a Distrust in your Majesty of your People) that nothing is
more in the Desires, and shall be more the Endeavors, of us your faithful and
loyal Commons, than the promoting and advancing of your Majesty's true
Happiness and Greatness.

In which the Parliament laid before the King your Brother these following
Particulars. 1. The grateful Sense they had of his Care (in his Message to them
by Jenkins his Secretary) inviting the Parliament to expedite the Matters that
were then before them relating to Popery, and the Plot. 2. That they were
convinced that it was a Duty incumbent upon them to suppress Popery, and to
bring to Justice all such as should be found Guilty of the horrid and damnable
Popish Plot. 3. That the King, by his frequent Prorogations and Dissolutions of
his Parliaments, had rendered the Trials of the Popish Lords more difficult, by
reason that a material Witness was dead. 4. That the Person of the King your
Brother was not safe, till the Criminals in the Popish Plot were brought to
Justice. 5. That notwithstanding the wicked Suggestions of your self, and
villainous Party, they were resolved to be true and faithful to the King your
Brother.

8. Observe the Address of the House of Commons to the King your Brother on the
29th of Nov. 1680. upon the Message he sent to the House of Commons about the
Affair of supplying Tangier; in which they laid before the King these following
Particulars, worthy of your remembering. 1. They laid before the King, that
since Tangier had become part of his Dominions, it had been formerly under the
Command of Popish Governors, but more particularly it had been for some time
under the Command of a certain Lord that stood impeached by Parliament, and a
Prisoner in the Tower for the execrable and horrid Popish Plot. 2. That the
Supplies sent thither were made up of Popish Officers and Irish Papists; and
that the Popish Party there were the Persons most countenanced and encouraged.
3. The restless Endeavors of the Popish Party within this Kingdom to introduce
the Romish Religion, and to extirpate the Protestant Religion. 4 The Assistance
they had received from some perfidious Protestants, in the Approaches they made
for the Compassing their Designs; viz. The Devil's Brokers, and their nasty
Passive Obedience Vermin, that it was a Wonder of Wonders they had not
dispatched old Pious for some time before. 5. That the Popish Party made use of
their being discharged from Offices, by their not taking the Test, to give
themselves up to the practicing their Idolatry and Superstition without
control in many Parts of the Kingdom; and great Swarms of Priests and Jesuits
had resorted hither, in order to carry on the Plot, and exercised their
Jurisdiction, and had been daily tampering to pervert the Consciences of the
Subjects of England; and the Judges and Justices of the Peace that had opposed
them were in disgrace, and turned out of the Commission, in contempt of the
known Laws of the Land; and if they could not corrupt Men, they attempted
nothing less than to destroy them. 6. That several Papists, to serve a Popish
Turn, had not only taken the Oaths, but subscribed the Test, and held the
Offices themselves, or else there were those put in that were so favorable to
the Popish Interest, insomuch that Popery had rather gained Ground since the
making the Test Act than lost. 7. The Correspondences that your Secretary held
with Cardinal Howard, and the Courts abroad. 8. That when the Plot began to be
discovered, the Popish Party began to smother it by the Murder of a Justice of
the Peace within one of the King's Palaces. 9. That the Papists reckoned the
Life of the King your Brother the only Obstacle in the way, and having you in
their Eye, whom they had gained to their Religion and Interest, they were
resolved to begin with the Assassination of the King your Brother, and to carry
it on with the Murder of the Protestant Party. 10. A great number of Officers
that were Papists had been employed, and several under half Pay, and many other
Things of the like Nature: All which Particulars, laid before your Brother in
this Address, justify the Credit the Evidences of the Popish Plot had in
Parliament. But that I may not leave you so, I pray peruse the Address it self,
it was a Swinger I Will assure you, and much to the purpose.

The humble Address of the Commons in Parliament assembled, Presented to his
Majesty Monday the 29th. of Nov. 1680.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Obedient and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
assembled, having with all Duty and Regard taken into our serious Consideration
your Majesty's late Message relating to Tangier, cannot but account the present
Condition of it, as your Majesty is pleased to represent in your said Message
(after so vast a Treasure expended to make it useful) not only as one
Infelicity more added to the afflicted Estate of your Majesty's faithful and
loyal Subjects, but as one result also of the same Counsels and Designs which
have brought your Majesty's Person, Crown and Kingdoms, into those great and
imminent Dangers with which at this Day they are surrounded; and we are the
less surprised to hear of the Exigencies of Tangier, when we remember that
since it became a part of your Majesty's Dominions, it has several Times been
under the Command of Popish Governors, (particularly for some Time under the
Command of a Lord impeached, and now Prisoner in the Tower for that execrable
and horrid Popish Plot;) that the Supplies sent thither have been in a great
Part made up of Popish Officers and Soldiers, and that the Irish Papists
amongst the Soldiers of that Garrison, have been the Persons most countenanced
and encouraged.

To that part of your Majesty's Message which expresses a Reliance upon this
House for the Support of Tangier, and a Recommendation of it to our speedy
Care, we do with all Humility and Reverence give this Answer; That although in
due Time and Order we shall omit nothing incumbent on us for the Preservation
of every Part of your Majesty's Dominions, and advancing the Prosperity and
flourishing Estate of this your Kingdom; yet at this Time, when a Cloud that
has long threatened this Land is ready to break upon our Heads, in a Storm of
Ruin and Confusion, to enter into any further Consideration of this Matter;
especially to come to any Resolutions in it, before we are effectually secured
from the imminent and apparent Dangers arising from the Power of Popish Persons
and Counsels, we humbly conceive, will not consist either with our Duty to your
Majesty, or the Trust reposed in us by those we represent.

It is not unknown to your Majesty how restless the Endeavors, and how bold the
Attempts, of the Popish Party for many Years last past have been, not only in
this but other your Majesty's Kingdoms, to introduce the Romish and utterly to
extirp^te the Protestant Religion. The several Approaches they have made
toward the compassing this their Design (assisted by the Treachery of
perfidious Protestants) have been so strangely successful, that it is matter of
Admiration to us, and which we can only ascribe ^o an overruling Providence,
that your Majesty's Reign is still continued over us, and that we are yet
assembled to c^nsult the Means of our Preservation. This bloody and restless
Party, not content with the great Liberty they had a long time enjoyed, to
exercise their own Religion privately among themselves, to partake of an equal
Freedom of their Persons and Estates with your Majesty's Protestant Subjects,
and of an Advantage above them, in being excused from chargeable Offices and
Employments, has so far prevailed as to find Countenance for an open and
avowed Practice for their Superstition and Idolatry without control in several
Parts of the Kingdom. Great swarms of Priests and Jesuits have resorted hither,
and have here exercised their Jurisdiction, and been daily tampering to pervert
the Consciences of your Majesty's Subjects; their Opposers they have found
means to disgrace, and if they were Judges, Justices of the Peace, or other
Magistrates, to have them turned out of Commission; and in contempt of the
known Laws of the Land, they have practiced upon People of all Ranks and
Qualities, and gained over diverse to their Religion, some openly to profess it,
others secretly to espouse it, and most conduced to the Service thereof.

After some time they became able to influence Matters of State and Government,
and thereby to destroy those they cannot corrupt: The Continuance or
Prorogation of Parliaments has been accommodated to serve the Purposes of the
Party: Money raised upon the People to supply your Majesty's extraordinary
Occasions, was, by the prevalence of Popish Counsels, employed to make War upon
a Protestant State, and to advance and augment the dreadful Power of the French
King, though to the apparent Hazard of this and all other Protestant Countries.
Great Numbers of your Majesty's Subjects were sent into, and continued, in the
Service of that King, notwithstanding the apparent Interest of your Majesty's
Kingdoms, the Addresses of the Parliament, and your Majesty's gracious
Proclamations to the contrary. Nor can we forbear to mention, how that at the
beginning of the same War, even the Ministers of England were made Instruments
to press upon that State the acceptance of one Demand, among others, from the
French King, for procuring their Peace with him, That they should admit the
public Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion in the United Provinces, the
Churches there to be divided, and the Popish Priests to be maintained out of
the public Revenue.

At home, if your Majesty did at any time by the Advice of your Privy Council,
or of your Two Houses of Parliament, command the Laws to be put in due
Execution against Papists, even from thence they gained Advantage to their
Party, while the Edge of those Laws was turned against Protestant Dissenters,
and the Papists escaped in a manner untoucht. The Act of Parliament enjoining a
Test to be taken by all Persons admitted into any public Office, and intended
for a Security against Papists coming into Employment, had so little effect,
That either by Dispensations obtained from Rome, they submitted to those Tests,
and held their Ofces themselves, or those put in their Places were so
favorable to the same Interests, that Popery it self has rather gained than
lost Ground since that Act.

But that their Business in hand might yet more speedily and strongly proceed,
at length a Popish Secretary (since executed for his Treasons) takes upon him
to set a foot and maintain Correspondencies at Rome (particularly with a Native
Subject of your Majesty's promoted to be a Cardinal) and in the Courts of other
foreign Princes (to use their own form of Speech) for the subduing the
pestilent Heresy which has so long domineered over this Northern World; that
is, to root out the Protestant Religion out of England, and thereby to make way
the more easily to do the same in other Protestant Countries.

Toward the doing this great Work (as Mr. Coleman was pleased to call it)
Jesuits (the most dangerous of all Popish Orders to the Lives and Estates of
Princes) were distrib^ted to their several Precincts within this Kingdom, and
held joint Councels with those of the same Order in all Neighbor Popish
Countries.

Out of these Councels and Correspondences wus hatched that damnable and
hellish Plot, by the good Providence of Almighty God brought to light above Two
Years since, but still threatening us; wherein the Traitors, impatient of longer
delay, reckoning the prolonging of your Sacred Majesty's Life (which God long
preserve) us the great Obstacle in the way to the Consummation of their Hopes;
and having in their Prospect a proselyted Prince immediately to succeed in the
Throne of these Kingdoms, resolved to begin their Work with the Assassination
of your Majesty to carry it on with armed Force, to destroy the Protestant
Subjects in England, to execute a second Massacre in Ireland, and so with ease
to arrive at the Suppression of our Religion, and the Subversion of the
Government.

When this accursed Conspiracy began to be discovered, they began to smother it
with the barbarous Murder of a Justice of the Peace, within one of your
Majesty's own Palaces, who had taken some Examinations concerning it.

Amidst these Distractions and Fears, Popish Officers, for the Command of
Forces were allowed upon M^sters by special Orders, (surreptitiously obtained
from your Majesty) but counter-signed by a Secretary of State, without ever
passing under the Tests prescribed by the aforementioned Act of Parliament: In
like manner above Fifty new Commissions were granted about the same time to
known Papists, besides a great Number of desperate Popish Officers, though out
of Command, yet entertained at half pay. When in the next Parliament the House
of Commons were prepared to bring to a legal Trial the principal Conspirators
in this Plot, that Parliament was first prorogued, and then dissolved: The
Interval betwixt the Calling and Sitting of this Parliament was so long, that
now they conceive Hopes of covering all their past Crimes, and gaining a
seasonable Time and Advantage of practicing them more effectually.

Witnesses are attempted to be corrupted, and not only Promises of Reward, but
of the Favor of your Majesty's Brother made the Motives to their Compliance:
Diverse of the most considerable of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects have
Crimes of the highest Nature forged against them, the Charge to be supported by
Subornation and Perjury, that they may be destroyed by Forms of Law and Justice.

A Presentment being prepared for a grand Jury of Middlesex, against your
Majesty's said Brother the Duke of York, (under whose Countenance all the rest
shelter themselves) the Grand Jury were in an unheard of and unpresidented and
illegal Manner discharged; and that with so much haste and fear, lest they
should finish that Presentment, that they were prevented from delivering many
other Indictments by them at that time found against other Popish Recusants.
Because a Pamphlet came forth weekly, called, The weekly Packet of Advice from
Rome, which exposes Popery (as it dese^ves) as ridiculous to the People; a new
and arbitrary Rule of Court was made in your Majesty's Court of King's Bench
(rather like a Star Chamber than a Court of Law) that the same should not for
the future be printed by any Person whatsoever.

We acknowledge your Majesty's Grace and Care in issuing forth diverse
Proclamations since the Discovery of the Plot, for the banishing Papists from
about this great City, and Residence of your Majesty's Court, and the
Parliament; but, with trouble of Mind, we do humbly inform your Majesty, that
notwithstanding all these Prohibitions great Numbers of them, and of the most
dangerous Sort, to the Terror of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, do daily
resort hither, and abide here. Under these and other sad Effects and Evidences
of the prevalency of Popery, and its Adherents, we your Majesty's faithful
Commons found this your Majesty's distressed Kingdom, and other Parts of your
Dominions laboring when we assembled.

And therefore from our Allegiance to your Majesty, our Zeal to our Religion,
our Faithfulness to our Country, and our Care of Posterity, we have lately upon
mature Deliberation proposed one Remedy of these great Evils, without which (in
our Judgments) all others will prove vain and fruitless; and (like all
deceitful Securities against certain Dangers) will rather expose your Majesty's
Person to the greatest Hazard, and the People, together with all that is
valuable to them as Men or Christians, to utter Ruin and Destruction: We have
taken this Occasion of an Access to your Majesty's Royal Presence, humbly to
lay before your Majesty's great Judgment and gracious Consideration this most
dreadful Design of introducing Popery, and, as a necessary Consequent of it,
all other Calamities into your Majesty's Kingdoms. And if after all this, the
private Suggestions of the subtle Accomplices of that Party and Design should
yet prevail, either to elude or totally to obstruct the faithful Endeavors of
us your Commons, for the happy Settlement of these Kingdoms, we shall have this
remaining Comfort, That we have freed our selves from the Guilt of that Blood
and Desolation which is like to ensue. But our only hope, next under God, is in
your Sacred Majesty, that by your great Wisdom and Goodness we may be
effectually secured from Popery, and all the Evils that attend it; and that
none but Persons of known Fidelity to your Majesty, and sincere Affections to
the Protestant Religion, may be put into any Employment, Civil or Military.
That whilst we shall give a Supply to Tangier, we may be assured we do not
augment the Strength of our Popish Adversaries, nor increase our own Dangers.
Which Desires of your faithful Commons, if your Majesty shall graciously
vouchsafe to grant, we shall not only be ready to assist your Majesty in
defense of Tangier, but do whatsoever else shall be in our Power, to enable
your Majesty to protect the Protestant Religion and Interest at home and
abroad, and to resist and repel the Attempts of your Majesty's and the Kingdoms
Enemies.

9. Observe the Vote against your self, which was made April the 27. 1679. That
the Duke of York's being a Papist, and the Hopes of his coming to the Crown
such, has given the greatest Encouragement to the present Conspiracy, and
Designs of the Papists against the King, and the Protestant Religion. Upon
which, Sir, a Bill was brought in, and is as follows.

A Copy of the Duke of York 's BILL.
WHereas James Duke of York is notoriously known to have been perverted from
the Protestant to the Popish Religion, whereby not only great Encouragement
has been given to the Popish Party, to enter into and carry on most Devilish
and Horrid Plots and Conspiracies, for the Destruction of his Majesty's Sacred
Person and Government, and for the Extirpation of the true Protestant Religion:
But also if the said Duke should succeed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
nothing is more manifest than that a total Change of Religion within these
Kingdoms would ensue. For the Preservation thereof, be it Enacted by the King's
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, That the said James Duke of York shall be,
and is by the Authority of this present Parliament, excluded, and made for ever
incapable to inherit, possess or enjoy, the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and
of the Kingdoms of Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories to them, or to
either of them, belonging; or to have, exercise or enjoy, any Dominion, Power,
Jurisdiction or Authority, in ihe same Kingdoms, Dominions, or any of them. And
be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said James Duke
of York shall at any Time hereafter challenge, claim, or attempt to possess or
enjoy, or shall take upon him to use or exercise any Dominion, Power or
Authority, or Jurisdiction, within the said Kingdoms or Dominions, or any of
them, as King, or chief Magistrate of the same, that then he the said James
Duke of York, for every such Offense, shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of
High Treason; and shall suffer the Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as in Case
of High Treason. And further, That if any Person or Persons whatever, shall
assist or maintain, abet, or willingly adhere unto, the said James Duke of
York, in such Challenge, Claim or Attempt; or shall of themselves attempt, or
endeavor to put or bring, the said James Duke of York, into the Possession or
Exercise of any Regal Power, Jurisdiction or Authority, within the Kingdoms and
Dominions aforesaid; or shall by writing or preaching advisedly publish,
maintain or declare, That he has any Right, Title or Authority, to the Office
of King or chief Magistrate, of the Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid, that then
every such Person shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High Treason, and that
he suffer and undergo the Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if he the said
James Duke of York shall at any time from and after the Fifth of Nov. 1680.
return, or come into or within, any of the Kingdoms or Dominions aforesaid,
then he the said James Duke of York shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High
Treason; and shall suffer the Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as in case of
High Treason: And further, That if any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall be
aiding or assisting unto such Return of the said James Duke of York, that then
every such Person shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High Treason, and
shall suffer as in cases of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That he the said James
Duke of York, or any other Person, being guilty of the Treasons aforesaid,
shall not be capable of, or receive Benefit, by any Pardon, otherwise than by
Act of Parliament, wherein they shall be particularly named: And that no Noli
prosequi, or order for stay of Proceedings, shall be received in, or upon any
Indictment for any of the Offenses mentioned in this Act.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, and it is hereby Enacted and Declared,
That it shall and may be Lawful to and for any Magistrates, Officers, and other
Subjects whatsoever, of these Kingdoms and Dominions oforesaid; and they are
hereby enjoined and required to apprehend and secure the said James Duke of
York, and every other Person offending in any of the Premises, and with him or
them in case of Resistance to fight, and him or them by force to subdue; for
all which Actings, and for so doing, they are, and shall be, by Virtue of this
Act, saved harmless and indemnified.

Provided, and it is hereby Declared, That nothing in this Act contained shall
be construed, deemed or adjudged, to disenable any other Person from inheriting
and enjoying the Imperial Crown of the Realms and Dominions aforesaid, (other
then the said James Duke of York;) but that in case the said James Duke of York
should survive his now Majesty, and the Heirs of his Majesty's Body, the said
Imperial Crown shall descend to, and be enjoyed by, such Person or Persons
successively, during the Life of the said James Duke of York, as should have
inherited and enjoyed the same in case the said James Duke of York were
naturally dead, any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That during the Life of
the said James Duke of York, this Act shall be given in charge at every
Assizes, and General Sessions of the Peace within the Kingdoms, Dominions, and
Territories aforesaid; and also shall be openly read in every Cathedral Church,
and Parish Church and Chapels, within the aforesaid Kingdoms, Dominions and
Territories, by the several respective Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and Readers
thereof; who are hereby required immediately after Divine Service, in the
Forenoon, to read the same twice in every Year, that is to say, on the 25th of
December, and upon Easter Day, during the Life of the said James Duke of York.

Which Bill was Read thrice, and Passed the House of Commons; and upon its
being Rejected in the House of Peers, behold this Address to the King your
Brother.

The humble Address of the House of Commons, presented unto his Majesty upon
Tuesday the 21th. of December, 1680. in answer to his Majesty's Gracious Speech
to both Houses of Parliament upon the 15th. Day of the same December.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, having taken into our serious Consideration your
Majesty's gracious Speech to both your Houses of Parliament, on the Fifteenth
of this instant December; and do, with all the grateful Sense of faithful
Subjects, and sincere Protestants, acknowledge your Majesty's great Goodness to
us, in renewing the Assurances you have been pleased to give us of your
Readiness to concur with us in any means for the Security of the Protestant
Religion, and your gracious Invitation of us to make our Desires known to your
Majesty.

But with grief of Heart we cannot but observe, That to these Princely Offers
your Majesty has been advised (by what secret Enemies to your Majesty, and your
People, we know not) to annex a Reservation, which if insisted on, in the
Instance to which alone it is applicahle, will render all your Majesty's other
gracious Inclinations of no Effect or Advantage to us. Your Majesty is pleased
thus to limit your Promise of concurrence in the Remedies which shall be
proposed, That they may consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in
its due and legal Course of Descent; and we do humbly inform your Majesty, That
no Interruption of that Descent has been endeavored by us, except only the
Descent upon the Person of the Duke of York, who, by the wicked Instruments of
the Church of Rome, has been manifestly perverted to their Religion. And we do
humbly represent to your Majesty, as the Issue of our most deliberate Thoughts
and Consultations, That for the Papists to have their Hopes continued, That a
Prince of that Religion shall succeed in the Throne of these Kingdoms, is
utterly inconsistent with the Safety of your Majesty's Person, the Preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and the Prosperity, Peace and Welfare, of your
Protestant Subjects.

That your Majesty's Sacred Life is in continual Danger, under the Prospect of
a Popish Successor, is evident not only from the Principles of those devoted to
the Church of Rome, which allow, That an Heretical Prince (and such they term
all Protestant Princes) excommunicated and deposed by the Pope, may be
destroyed and murdered; but also from the Testimonies given in the Prosecution
of the horrid Popish Plot, against diverse Traitors attainted for designing to
put those accursed Principles into practice against your Majesty.

From the Expectation of this Succession has the Number of Papists in your
Majesty's Dominions so much increased within these few Years, and so many been
prevailed with to desert the true Protestant Religion, That they might be
prepared for the Favors of a Popish Prince, as soon as he should come to the
Possession of the Crown: And while the same Expectation lasts, many more will
be in the same Danger of being perverted.

This it is that has hardened the Papists of this Kingdom, animated and
confederated by their Priests and Jesuits, to make a common Purse, provide
Arms, make Application to foreign Princes, and solicit their Aid, for imposing
Popery upon us; and all this during your Majesty's Reign, and while your
Majesty's Government and the Laws were our Protection. It is your Majesty's
Glory and true Interest to be the Head and Protector of all Protestants, as
well abroad as at home; but if these Hopes remain, What Alliances can be made
for the Advantage of the Protestant Religion and Interest, which shall give
confidence to your Majesty's Allies, to join so vigorously with your Majesty as
the state of that Interest in the World now requires, while they see this
Protestant Kingdom in so much Danger of a Popish Successor, by whom at the
present all their Counsels and Actions may be eluded, as hitherto they have
been, and by whom, if he should succeed, they are sure to ^e destroyed.

We have thus humbly laid before your Majesty some of those great Dangers and
Mischiefs which evidently accompany the Expectation of a Popish Successor, the
certain and unspeakable Evils which will come upon your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, and their Posterity, if such a Prince should inherit, are more also
than we can well enumerate.

Our Religion, which is now so dangerously shaken, will then be totally
overthrown; nothing will be left, or can be found, to protect or defend it.

The Execution of old Laws must cease, and it will be vain to expect new ones:
The most sacred Obligations of Contracts and Promises (if any should be given)
that shall be judged to be against the Interest of the Romish Religion will be
violated; as is undeniable not only from Argument and Experience elsewhere, but
from the sad Experience this Nation once had upon the like Occasion.

In the Reign of such a Prince, the Pope will be acknowledged Supreme, (though
the Subjects of this Kingdom have sworn the contrary) and all Causes either as
Spiritual, or in order to Spiritual Things, will be brought under his
Jurisdiction.

The Lives, Liberties and Estates, of all such Protestants, as value their
Souls and their Religion more than their secular Concernments, will be adjudged
Forfeited.

To all this we might add, That it appears in the Discovery of the Plot, that
foreign Princes were invited to assist in securing the Crown to the Duke of
York, with Arguments from his great Zeal to establish Popery, and to extirpate
Protestants (whom they call Heretics) out of his Dominions; and such will
expect performance accordingly.

We further humbly beseech your Majesty in your great Wisdom to consider,
Whether in case the Imperial Crown of this Protestant Kingdom should descend to
the Duke of York, the Opposition which may possibly be made to his possessing
it may not only endanger the further Descent in the Royal Line, but even
Monarchy it self.

For these Reasons, we are most humble Petitioners to your most Sacred Majesty,
that in tender Commiseration of your poor Protestant People, ^^ur Majesty will
be graciously pleased to depart from the Reservation in your said Speech; and
when a Bill shall be tendered to your Majesty, in a Parliamentary Way, to
disable the Duke of York from inheriting the Crown, your Majesty will give your
Royal Assent thereto; and as necessary to fortify and defend the same, That
your Majesty likewise will be graciously pleased to assent to an Act whereby
your Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be enabled to associate themselves for
the Defense of your Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Security
of your Kingdoms.

These Requests we are constrained humbly to make to your Majesty, as of
absolute Necessity, for the safe and peaceable Enjoyment of our Religion.

Without these Things the Alliances of England will not be valuable, nor the
People encouraged to contribute to your Majesty's Service.

As some farther means both of our Religion and Property, we are humble Suitors
to your Majesty, That from henceforth such Persons only may be Judges within
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, as are Men of Ability,
Integrity, and of known Affection to the Protestant Religion: And that they may
hold both their Offices and Salaries, Quam diu been se gesserint; That (several
Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, fitly qualified for those
Employments, having been of late displaced, and others put in their Room, who
are Men of Arbitrary Principles, and Countenancers of Papists and Popery) such
only may bear the Office of a Lord Lieutenant as are Persons of Integrity, and
known Affection to the Protestant Religion; That Deputy Lieutenants and
Justices of the Peace may be also so qualified, and may be moreover Men of
Ability, of Estates and Interest, in their Country.

That none may be employed as military Officers, or Officers in your Majesty's
Fleet, but Men of known Experience, Courage and Affection, to the Protestant
Religion.

These our humble Requests being obtained, we shall on our part be ready to
assist your Majesty for the Preservation of Tangier, and for putting your
Majesty's Fleet into such a Condition as it may preserve your Majesty's
Sovereignty of the Seas, and be for the Defense of the Nation.

If your Majesty has, or shall make, any necessary Alliances for defense of
the Protestant Religion and Interest, and Security of this Kingdom, this House
will be ready to assist and stand by your Majesty in the Support of the same.

After this our humble Answer to your Majesty's Gracious Speech, we hope no
evil Instruments whatsoever shall be able to lessen your Majesty's Esteem of
that Fidelity and Affection we hear to your Majesty's Service: But that your
Majesty will always retain in your Royal Breast that favorable Opinion of us
your Loyal Commons, That those other good Bills which we have now under
Consideration, conducing to the great Ends we have before mentioned; as also
all Laws for the Benefit and Comfort of your People, which shall from time to
time be tendered to your Majesty's Royal Assent, shall find Acceptance from
your Majesty.

If this be not Demonstration that the Discovery of the Popish Plot had an
universal Credit over all England; I will never undertake to make any out for
the future. And this I must say, That it is beyond Contradiction; no Man of
Sense ever standing in Opposition to that which is as plain as the Sun shining
at Noon Day: Therefore I will proceed in the tenth Place.

10. The Judges of England gave it Credit.

Let me put you in Mind of what Judge Scroggs said at Irelands Trial, in his
Charge to the Jury, he says thus, It is most plain the Plot is Discovered, and
that by these Men that it is a Plot, and a most Villainous one, nothing is more
plainer; and when the Jury had found Ireland, Pickering and Grove Guilty,
observe what he said to them, you have done Gentlemen like very good Subjects
and very Good Christians, (that is to say,) like very good Protestants, and now
much good may their thirty Thousand Masses do them.

Again in the Trial of the Five Jesuits, he says thus, This Gentleman's Blood
lies upon you, (speaking of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey) and some have being
Executed for it, it must be yet further told you, that in what you did, you
have given us a Specimen of what you would do, we have a Testimony that for
promoting your Cause you would not stick at the Protestants Blood; the Letter
(says he,) that was found in Harcourts Papers, does farther confirm Oats in
all the great and considerable Matters that he says, that there was a Plot, and
that that Plot was called by the name of a Design, which was to be keep Close
and Secret; This is an Evidence that cannot Lie.

2. Observe what your never to be forgiven Villain Jefferies said upon the
Justices finding the five Jesuits Guilty of Treason; Gentlemen, you of the
Jury, There has been a long Evidence given against the Prisoners at the Bar,
they were all Indicted, Arraigned, and farely Tried, and fully heard for
High Treason depending upon several Circumstances; they can none of them
pretend to say (and I take the Liberty to take notice of it for the
satisfaction of them and all that here present, and all the World) that not a
Person among the Prisoners at the Bar were either wanting to themselves to
offer, or the Court to them to hear any thing that they could say for
themselves, but upon a long Evidence and a full Discussing the Objection made
against it, and a Patient hearing the defense they made, they are found Guilty,
and I think every honest Man will say they are unexceptably found so, and that
it is a just Verdict you have given: Again, upon his giving Judgment upon
Langhorne and the five Jesuits, he said thus, But your several Crimes have been
so fully proved against you, that truly I think no Person that stands by can
be in any doubt of the Guilt, nor is there the least room for the most
Scrupulous Men to doubt of the Credibility of the Witnesses that have been
examined against you, and sure I am, you have been fully heard, and stand
fairly convi^ced of those Crimes you were Indicted for: I could give farther
instructions of this Nature; but I now come to an Eleventh instance which is
the Credit the Witnesses had with the Lord Chancellor Finch, who at Staffords
Trial when he gave Judgment upon that Traitor he told him that now it was out
of dispute who fired London, and who it was that Murdered Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey.

Answer, Give me leave to observe a third thing to you by way of answer; look
back a little and reflect upon the Behavior of the King your Brother in that
Affair, mistake not your self, Sir, the King your Brother did believe the
Popish Plot, and issued forth several Proclamations, made several Speeches in
Parliament that did show his belief, but Sir if he did not believe it, his
discourse of it was suitable to his Company he kept, but this I must say that
had he joined in with his Parliament in the discovery of it, he might have been
much more eas^y in his Government, and might have been upon the Throne, and
your head upon London Bridge, (for ought I know) but this I will say, your
Villainous Party could never recover the blow they received by the discovery of
that Plot, and it was the first and chief moving Cause of the late Revolution,
and the bringing our King to the Throne, and delivered the Nation from Popery
and Slavery; and notwithstanding my ill Usage I have received from unreasonable
Men, I shall not Repent of any thing that I have said or done concerning the
Testimony I have given, relating to the Villainous Rogues and Traitors therein
concerned, and your Worship was the chief of those never to be forgotten and
never to be forgiven, I say, I shall not Repent though I have received the
worst of Villainous usage from this best of Government and have been left to
Starve, I having been now deprived of the greatest part of my Pension these
five or six Years against all manner of Justice, to please one malevolent
Rogue, who never did one good Act in all his Life unless it were to cheat the
old Rogue his Father out of an Estate.

2. I come to answer a second Question, and that to show you to what end I made
the discovery, and 1. The first Reason was that the Body of Mankind might be
undeceived concerning your self and Party, that the impudent Lies of your Baals
Priests made in your Praise and Commendation both as to your Religion, Royalty,
and Love to the Nation might sufficiently be laid open, so that they might not
any longer deceive the People in that Point as they had done in the Doctrins of
Passive-Obedience and Non ressistance. 2. That the Nation might be so awakned
to provide in a legal way for its own security and the security of its Laws and
Religion; for in Truth the Lethargy that the generality of this Nation then lay
under, which amazed some thinking Men, and encouraged you and your vigilant
Villains; for some thought that upon the discovery of the Gunpowder Treason,
and upon the late Restoration of your Brother that the Popish Party had laid
all their Designs aside, but alas! they pursued their designs more
industriously, since we were Cursed with your Brothers Company and yours, than
ever before; and your Red-Letter'd Scoundrels had so started their Case, that
there was no room left for a Retreat; and rather than you and they would miss
your Hopes, you were resolved to stake your Lives and Fortunes and all upon a
Venture. You had taken so much Pains in the forming your Designs that you were
resolved not to loose your Labor, and (thanks be to God) you did not loose
your Labor; for you are well rewarded with the pleasant Air at St. Germains,
where you may abide, till by the way of Avignon you may be obliged to trot to
some other Place, where you may spend the Remainder of your admirable Life.
These two Reasons are sufficient to justify any Man's Ends in such an
Undertaking as this; and as for the Undertaking it self to discover, I am only
accountable to God, and my own Conscience; though thus much I may say, That in
complying with the Church of Rome in her Worship and Service, I nor no Man else
can justify himself, notwithstanding the Righteousness of those Ends I proposed
to my self in the Management of that Affair: And I therefore do tell you, I
would have no Man to follow my Example, In doing Evil that the greatest Good
may come thereof. I do avow the Truth of my Testimony that I delivered; but, on
the other hand, I disavow all those Principles that I pretended to hold and
maintain, whilst I was as to outward appearance in Communion with that
detestable Strumpet; for I was in Judgment always a Protestant of the Reformed
Religion, and by the grace of God, through Strength of Christ Jesus, I will
Live and Dye so: This may satisfy you and all Men, of my Truth in the
Discovery; and of my uprightness in the Delivery of my Testimony, and of my
Sincerity in this charge I have given here against you and your Villainous
Party, and had I not complied with your cursed Synagogue, I would not in any
measure have come at the knowledge of those things that I have formerly given
in against the Criminals concerned in the Design, nor have acquainted the World
and refreshed your Memory with several Particulars, in these four parts that I
have Written, that the Kingdom may both learn to watch against you and your
Hell-born crew: therefore I hasten to a ninth Particular, proposed in the
management of this Article.

I proceed to show you of what great use the Discovery of the Popish Plot might
have been to King Charles the second if he had managed himself according to his
Parliament, and the Patriots of the Protestant Religion. And that you shall see
in these following Particulars. as

1. We had been rid of all the Court Whores, who by their Lewdness and Baseness
had drawn the Heart of the then King your Brothe from his People, which the
Parliament plainly saw; and therefore were very unwilling to part with any
Money, for to supply the vain and Exorbitant Expenses of those impudent Womem,
who Consumed the public Treasure of the Nation; as fast or faster than, then
it could be given by Parliament; or raised and Collected when given; and by
this fair riddance of such Carrion, the then King for ought I know might have
enjoyed his Crown with Peace and Honor to this Day.

2. You had been Excluded from inheriting the Imperial Crown of this Realm;
which Exclusion had turned to a better Account to your self then the being an
humble Slave, and a pitiful Beggar, a Fugitive, and a Vagabond; but you by
opposing the full Discovery of the said Plot, and Conspiracy carried on by you
and your wicked Party; carried your Point against the said Bill, by which, you
was Emboldened in all and every of your wicked Practices against the Laws and
Liberties of this Kingdom; but you have received in part the Wages of your
abominable and unparalleled Unrighteousness; and much good may they do you with
all my Heart; I know no body that in the least that envies your blessed State,
and Condition, into which by the providence of God you have put your self.

3. The Nation had been discharged from the French Interest, that mightily
Prevailed in your Brothers Reign, to the great danger and damage both to the
Strength, and Trade of the Nation, and the Laws, and Liberties, and Religion
thereof; for as long as that Interest was Suppor^ed, and the Religion of Rome
Countenanced, it was impossible that England could be a Protestant Nation; or
her Inhabitants a free People. This the Parliament long saw before your Plot
was Discovered; and had your Brother encouraged the Discovery thereof, he had
secured to himself the Glory of restoring to us our Liberties, and making
himself a Terror to all his Enemies both at Home and Abroad, but he joining in
the Conspiracy, he became their Scorn and Contempt, and as his Reign was
wicked, so his End was Miserable.

4. Your Popish Party might have infallibly been destroyed and Rooted out from
being a People; but the said King not joining with his Parliament, in making
such an improvement of the discovery of the Popish Plot did Embolden that party
to Exert it self almost to the ruin of the Protestant Religion and Interest,
and at last to Poison the King himself, to make way for you to Enslave the
Nation and Subjugate it to Rome and France.

10. I now come to show you how Fatal the Discovery of the Popish Plot was to
your Popish Party, notwithstanding the Villainous Usage the Nation received from
that Party of Men; by which it was much weakened both to its Strength and
Wealth; yet the Discovery of the Popish Plot put a new Life into the honest
Party, so that they became Unanimous to a high Degree; the Dissenters that were
then much Divided; did in a great Measure unite against the common Enemy, and
joined with the moderate Church Party, in order to Extirpate that Romish Heresy
that had so much enlarged its Borders; and the Eyes of all Men were so opened,
that even in your Government Popery had been so mauled, that it could not stand
upon its Legs, notwithstanding the many cordial Incouragments it had received
from you and your mighty Allies in order to its recovery again: Nay the Princes
of Christendom have Joined as one Man to deliver England, so that they
themselves, might not be swallowed up by you and your mighty Nimrod.

What a Sweat you are in? Well, have a little Patience, my good Landlady will
rub you down at Night, What would you be at now? What you would say a
Comfortable Word on the Behalf of your Popish Crew, and would have the World
believe they were Innocent, and so you mump those lockrom Jaws of yours; and in
Speaking one Word in the Behalf of your Rogues, you intend ten for your self.

Come speak out Man, and tell us what you would have the Protestant Party of
England believe concerning the Innocence of your self and Party; we have a Set
of high Church Protestant Whelps, that are blinded yet, as not to give the
Discovery of the Popish Plot its due Credit; but they are a sort of Vermin
that are branded for infamous Rogues, and so it is no great matter what they
say; but for the generality of Protestants they have received the Discovery of
the Popish Plot with Hearts that were thankeful both to God and their
Deliverers: And let me tell you for all your Sneering, that our sober
Protestants are Men of as much Learning and Knowledge, and as acute in
Judgment, as ever your Party were since the Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome:
Sit down and once in your Life time look like Men. Protestants are Men free
from silly Superstition, Men of a clearer and more noble Religion, which
inspires a clearer and a more Illuminated Reason, that ever Popery could ever
pretend to do, and truly you and your Party must Imagine, that the sense of the
Protestant Party within these three Kingdoms, was so stupid, that they could
not understand Truth from Fals-hood without the assistance of your gracious
Vindication; but Truly you had better have let the business alone, for you and
your Popish Crew have so weakly defended the Point of your Innocence, that you
have Spoiled your Cause, but you have your Reward for the great piece of
Service you did your self and Party, and so good Night Mr. Innocence; and let
us hear what you have further to say to this Charge in hand, why the World
should not believe you and your Party guilty, of carrying on that Horrid
Design, to Murder the King your Brother, and subvert our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion.

Obj. 2. You and your Papists used to say, that it is not the Clamor of the
Hainousness and Horror of a crime impu^ed, but the Guilt and clear Conviction
of a crime proved, that renders Man accountable to Justice.

What a pr^tty sort of an Irish Evasion you have found ou^? One would think
that Tom Jenner, or Franck Wy^hens, or old Robin Wright, your famous Chief
Justice, had been teaching you some weak Rudiments of that little cunning they
had, to help you in the time of Need, but whether they had or have not, its
much alike to me; let me ask you this one fair Question? Did Coleman and the
rest of those Traitors, that suffered for that Conspiracy, lie only under the
single imputation of a Crime? Were not some indicted, fairly tried, fully
heard, and were not wanting to themselves in the least to make their Defense?
Nor did the Courts Judicatures want patience to hea^ them, and they were upon
full Evidence Convicted, and Condemned, others impeached in Parliament by the
Commons of England; why sure Mr. Wiseacre you will not make this a single
Imputation? Nay I will appeal to Jack Car^yll himself, if this be not many
degrees beyond a single Imputation; come Sir, by your leave, and the leave of
Mrs. Pugg and his Welsh Highness, it was no Clamor that prosecu^ed your
Villains, but by a Proof allowed by all the Courts of Justice, and by the High
Authority of both Houses of Parliament; bring but half so much proof of your
Honesty, for ought I know you may yet do mighty things for your Self and Party.

Obj. 3. That as Treason is the worst of Crimes, so is the stain of Innocent
Blood (when shed by Perjury) hard to be washed of, Ans. I suppose you judge
this to be a Piece of News, I pray Sir was it not put into the last Paris
Gazette, or into your friend Dyers News Letter, I suppose you think the Sons
of Men, here as ignorant as you, and your Party have been foolish and Knavish
but to put the Matter out of doubt; you and your Crew say no thing but what all
the World knows already: But where was ^your Proof of any Act of Perjury
Committed? its true you by your St. Omers Boys, did make three or four
Attempts up on me, and by a number of Whores and Rogues, you battered at me
twice, and you were defeated, and your forces fled to the place from whence
they came in six or seven Years after, when my Witnesses were Dead or durst not
Appear; and you having two Villainous Juries, you made a fresh Attack, Rallied
all your Forces, and then you carried your Point by the help of your four
^ambskin Rogues, then sitting in the Kings Bench; and you paid dear for it, it
cost you 3037 l. 9 s. 6 d. besides the Subornation Money old Hodge received, to
make him and his inferior Bumms merry, and for half the Money with such Judges
and two such Juries, a Man might have Convicted twenty Men of a far greater and
better Reputation in the World then ever I could pretend too; nevertheless, I
defy the worst of my Enemies to charge me with any hard Thing that was in my
Power to have avoided. But pray Sir, what was my being in Town or my not being
in Town in the Month of April, or Irelands being in Town or not being in Twon
in the Month of August 1678, to the whole Discovery of the Popish Plot, though
Truth of both those Points, for which you like a Villain Suborned Witnesses
against me; so that I suffered the greatest Barbarities that ever were heard
of, or seen since the supposed Conquest: What I say was all this to the purpose
to Colemans Letters, and those of the then Lord Berkshire, that Confessed upon
his Deathbed the whole Conspiracy; therefore you and your Party shall not need
to make such a stir about the Convicting of me of two pretended Perjuries; but
you might as well have Convicted me for being one of my Lord Mayor of Londons
Coach Horses, or Jack Gibbons, for writing a Traytorous Letter against your
Brother, that was never blessed with the Gift of Writing and Reading in his
whole Life time, yet he was Accused upon Oath, by some of your Suborned Crew,
and lay in Prison upon the said Accusation for six Months; and you would have
blessed the poor honest Man with a decent hanging, had not the Villainy of your
self and Party been detected; but as I said before, so I say again: I shall
stand by the Truth of what I have Sworn to the last Minute of my Life, and
could you have brought five Parliaments to have owned and justified your
Honesty, and your keeping your Coronation Oath you took or should have taken,
you would not have been driven ou^ of your native Country, from the enjoyment
of your Crown, you acquired by the Murder of your own Brother, to be a
Fugitive and Vagabond as a just reward for all your Perju^y and villainous
Conspiracy against the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of these three Kingdoms;
Therefore you have no such Cause if the matter were well examined, to make such
a noise about Perjury and my being Convicted for Perjury, nor nor Mr.
Prate-apace your broken Colonel, nor Mr. Wind and stink your Logger head of a
Warden, nor Dr. Tickle-pitcher his Namesake, no nor Mr. Pass-maker, That was
so lewd that he was capable of nothing but the Priesthood; for being to bold
with a certain Seal of a Friend of his when he was Employed.

Obj. 4. You think you made a pretty Spot of Work, when you did attempt the
Baffling the Discovery of the Popish Plot; and therefore you Huff and Bounce in
your Apartment a^ St. Germains, and cried out that the possitive Swearing of
every Person in every Matter, Hand over Head, is no Convection of another
Guilt.

Ans. What a Mouth you make; What do you think the drawing up your Lockrom-Jaws
will do the Business? What do you mean by Hand over Head? Do you think with your
Irish Understanding to impose upon the Ignorant; which if there were a number
of your Puppies that did not Understand the business so much as they ought to
have done, yet all Observing and Understanding Men did then know, that the
Testimony against your Popish Traitors passed all the Scrutiny and Sifting
imaginable of both Houses, the then Privy Council, and two Comittees of
Secrecy, and the whole Body of the Kings Council, learned in the Law, had the
Scanning not only of the Proofs but also of the Objections you and your Party
made against it; but your Rogues are so unreasonable that nothing will satisfy
them; surely Mr. Stuart, you would make a Man believe that you and your Friends
were Men that aspired to prodigious Parts, that you should think that after so
much Debate and Deliberation, so many great Personages and venerable Judges,
should not understand whether the Witnesses Swore Hand over Head as well as
your good Worship; sweet Sir, truly you and your Villains had, and still have a
mean Opinion of the Wisdom of the Nation, as to imagine that they should have
so little to do in Parliament, as to put themselves to the Solemn trouble to
Swear and Credit Witnesses only that Swore Hand over Head.

Obj. 5. It may, you will say, that false Accusations may be so laid as that
the contrary cannot possibly be Demonstrated by the Party; seeing no Mortal Man
can distinctly prove where he was, and what he did, said or heard every Day and
Hour of his Life; therefore the Accuser ought to be a credible Witness, that
is, not tainted with Crimes and Villainies, and also, That every Accuser be
strengthened with probable Circumstances, that bring along with them some
appearance of Truth distinct from the bare Accusation it self, but the
Witnesses of the Popish Plot were not credible Witnesses, for they were Guilty
of great noto^ious Crimes, and had not one Circumstance to corroborate their
Testimony.

Ans. What you have brought me to the Devils Sheep-Shearing? Here is a great
Cry and a little Wool; What you would by your usual Nonsense flatter Mankind
into an implicit Faith in your Dreams? Alas! Sir, you may assure your ragged
Crew at St. Germains, that there was no such heavy Task put upon your Traitors
at their Trial, nor would there have been any such a difficulty put upon you,
could we have brought you to a Public Trial; it is true, when your Villainous
Jesuits and other Traitors were at the Bar, they were in a Friendly manner put
in Mind of some remarkable Passages as Overt-Acts of Treason, the Times and
Places of Consultation and making Promises; and some of them so large which
were not so easiy forgotten, but that had they but had a willing Mind, they
might have rubbed up their Memories.

Ans. 2. As to the credibility of the Witnesses; this I must say, such as they
where they were once fit for your turn, and employed by your Party to carry
your dark Designs against the King your Brother and the Government; I trust
Sir, if they had been Saints they had not undertaken with you nor would you
have Employed them; and when they were in your Service, you said they were
Honest, but when they discovered your Rogueries, then, Oh! what Rogues were
they; but as little Credit as they had, you would give all your Shoes in your
Shop, that you had been blessed but with the Fiftieth part of that Credit that
I my self had with four Parliaments in your Brothers Reign; nay, the Popish
Plot was made out so plain, and was so Notorious, that Staffords Attainder
could not be Reversed, no, not in that wicked Parliament you Packt together in
the time of your Usurpation: I say again, That if you had been blessed with half
the Credit that I had from those Parliaments, you should not need to have been
mumping at St. Germains; but Sir, let me ask you one civil Question; Could it
be supposed that I or any of the other Witnesses, could be supposed to be
without Faults, that joined with you and your Party in that Conspiracy, and
when your good Brother at the request of both Houses of Parliament, was pleased
to grant us his Pardon, ought not we then in Point of Justice, let him and our
Country have the benefit of our Testimony: What Crimes others might have stood
Guilty of; it is not now my Province to take notice, but they were reputed very
honest Men when they were engaged in the Devils Service and Yours, and received
the Wages of their unrighteousness with all the ease imaginable, and as soon as
they left your Work upon your Hands, and approved themselves Honest Men, then
all the Faults of their lives were reckoned up, as if they had been Poxt in
their Morals, as you were once in your Body without the least hope of Cure; and
if your Brothers Faults and yours had been written in your Foreheads, Lies,
Murders, Adulteries, Cheats, Oppressions, Subornations, Perjuries, would have
so plainly appeared, that Exchequer Tom would Swear by his Cherry Cheeks, the
worst of all the Witnesses were Saints in Comparison of you both.

Ans. 3. As for Circumstances of time and place, it is Notorious that no
evidence was ever attended with greater Circumstances, and those so pregnant
that all Rational Men were convinced of the Sincerity of the Testimony, but yet
like restless Beasts your Party will not admit that a Papist could be engaged
in such a Design; Why not; Was this the first Plot that was discovered against
that Party of Men? What would you make it morally impossible that they should
be engaged in such a Design as this? Come let us call in Sir Simkin, and he
says, (he is a good Historian,) and he Swears by his Quondam beads, that there
were several Plots of theirs Discovered in the time of Queen Elizabeth against
her Person and Government; two or three in King James's time against him, and
another in the time of your Father, and two against the Life of your dear
Brother; and you had the grace to be your self in both of them, for the one you
were Pardoned, and for the other you were justified, till you at last most
graciously Poisoned your dear Brother, which was the best thing that ever you
did next to your running away; you may say that the Roman Catholic did in the
late Wars serve under your Father; what then, might they not be in the
Conspiracy against the Son: But this let me tell you, That I have often heard
this fair Story, but upon Inquiry I find the Story as false as any thing can be
true, for they fled to the King your Father either to be Protected by him or to
betray him as old Simkin says he did you, but your Fathers Cause was bad
enough, and if they did go in to serve him, it was like to like as the Devil
said to the Collier; but when they found his Interest sunk, they like old Rats
left the falling House, and Contributed all they could (good Men) to hasten his
blessed Memory out of the World, and joined in heartily with those that
Accomplished that Work; yet your Party were Netled, and say that it was
impossible the Popish Plot should be true, because there were so many Persons
of Quality said to be concerned in it, that had been most remarkable for their
Loyalty to your Family; what a mighty wonder is here, that Persons of Quality
should be engaged in a Plot. I would fain have you and your Ragged Mumping
Ministry at St. Germains, tell me when there was a Plot carried on without
Persons of Quality, for Persons of Quality are most capable by their Purses and
Interests to head Parties and Factions in a Kingdom; I pray when the French
King offered to your sweet self the Aid of his Purse and Credit to carry on the
mighty work that you had upon your Hands, should you have slighted that
generous offer of his, and rather excepted of the offer of a Broommans Purse
and Credit in Kent-street, was not the French Kings Purse a longer Purse, and
his Quality somewhat greater: I pray ask my Land-Lady when she has rubbed you
down, and see what an Answer she will give you, come Sir, methinks you should
be able to answer this Question, without making one silly Face at the business.

But if I should ask your Middleton, or your Melfort, or your Carryl, or your
Powis, they would swear by my Gammer Powis's hump Back, That Simnel's Plot, and
the Plot of Perkin, was carried on by Persons of Quality against Henry the
Seventh. I pray ask your mighty Lewis, Whether the Holy League against Henry
the Third of France was not carried on by Persons of Quality? And why might not
your Popish Plot be managed as well by Persons of Quality, as well as the
Popish Plot against Henry the Third of France? But since you are so full of
your Wonders, I will wonder too; and that is, That you, and your Persons of
Quality, were not in a most decent manner hanged, the French King's Purse and
Credit to the contrary notwithstanding. O but they were Men of Virtue, and
Integrity, and unblemished Reputation! What their Reputation was I leave to the
Nation that knew them; and what yours, among the rest, all Europe knows: But
this is certain, That a certain Popish Lord, yet alive, carried a Petition to
the Lord Protector Cromwell, signed by above Five hundred Noble men and
Gentlemen, in which they promised that great Man, that if he would procure them
the Toleration of their Religion by a Law, they would, for his sake, cut the
Family of the Stuarts off, Root and Branch. Now if this be Reputation, or what
Reputation it was for you, while you was beyond Sea, to be in a Plot against
your Brother's Life, I leave to bet^^ Judgments. Come, my old Friend, that you
may not lose your Fee, I w^ll give you the Point, That your Popish Noblemen
and Gentlemen were men of known Worth and Integrity; truly then they were the
more likely to be engaged in your Plot: For such is the Nature of your Popish
Bigottry, and such is the infatuated Heat of its Professors, and such the dread
of their Conscience under the Charms of their Priesthood, so pinching and
terrible are the Chains of their Oaths, such their inbred Enmity to Heretics,
that the more Conscientious and Devout they are, the more Religiously they
believe themselves bound to conceal whatever Designs are on foot for the
Propagation of the Romish Interest, and the Extirpation of Heretics.

Obj. 6. You and your Party may plead farther, and say, The World was told of
several Commissions granted out by the General of the Jesuits, for all Sorts
of Offices both Military and Civil, but no treasonable Papers, nor none of
these Commissions, could ever be seen. Answ. You have hit it, now I suppose you
will be quiet in your Mind, and take an Answer that may become you to receive
and me to give: It was on the Thirteenth of August the Plot was discovered to
the King your Brother, 1678. and you and your Party had from the Thirteenth of
August till the Twenty eigthth of September following, to burn and consume all
such Papers and Commissions as might affect any one of you; and what you burnt
of them you know best. But, Sir, when Harcourt's Papers were seized, there were
no less than Six Commissions ready sealed, with Blanks to fill up with what
Names they pleased, and they were bundled up with this Inscription, R. H. and
our Master's Blessing; in Coleman's Papers above Sixty, in Fenwick's Papers
Four, which were tied up in a Paper, and called, A War for a Buck; and
Ireland's Papers Two, and the Seals that sealed them, which were produced in
Court, Sir William Jones had some of them in keeping; but because they were
Blanks, he made no other use of them than to persuade old Pious that there was
a Design against his Life; but your Brother had Sir Philip Lloyd that stifled
all that he could lay his Hands upon them, to oblige you and your everlasting
Cutthroats: And besides, they not being Marked, the Messengers that took them
would not swear where they found them. And this is another Reason why they were
not made use of against the Jesuits. What a Multitude of Ciphers Coleman,
Ireland, Harcourt, and Whitebread had, was much Amazing to your Brother; not
that he was Amazed at their being in the Conspiracy, but that they had not upon
due Notice given them, by your Brother and your self, burnt them, or otherways
made away with them: But found they were, and between you and Floyd they were
stifled, in order to weaken the Proof of your Villainous Designs against the
Life of your Brother, and the Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. You
have your full Charge as to this Article of the Popish Plot, and you have all
that can be said on your behalf, and the behalf of your Villainous Popish Party;
if there can be any more, I suppose old Hodg, with some of his inferior Bums,
and Scotch Robin, will join their Forces together, and muster up a Word of
Information in order to your Vindication. I pray let them come forth, and they
shall be heard; for I challenge all and every of the Enemies of this
Government, to give the Lie to any Thing that is here inserted; much more might
have been said, but it would fill a great Volume to tell of all your Villainies
relating to this horrid Design of yours, and Villains to destroy and enslave
the Nation. This very Article is enough to render you odious, not only to the
Protestant, but also to the Catholic Princes of Europe, and all others, both
High and Low, Rich and Poor, Jew and Gentile, Bond and Free. How detestable you
must be therefore to God, and all good Men, I leave it to your Conscience to
judge; but you have the Wages of your Villainy, and I wish you all Joy of them.

Well, how do you by this time? What think you of this Article? It is a Tickler
I Will assure you, and it will stand you instead to deliver your self and Party.
Come, what have you to say for your self, and Friends? If you had but a Grain
of Sense you would conclude, That you had lived too long, since You have out
lived the Love and Piety you owed to the Constitution, and Laws of your native
Country, by which it has been supported these Thousand Years; and therefore it
was no wonder that your Government has outlived you, and you most honestly
sent to graze at St. Germains, to behold the miserable Estate of your
Neighbors, to which you would have reduced us. And you hope, notwithstanding
all this, to be Recalled. Alas! good Man, when, I pray you? And by whom? And to
what End? Answer any of these Three Questions if you can, and then you will do
somewhat.

1. Do you think that we are afraid of your Plotting, and making Parties?
Cannot you see by this time that your Fools rather Plot as if they had a
greater desire to be hanged, to prevent their Starving or Rotting in a Jayl,
for the Debts they have contracted by their riotous lewd Living, than to
restore you to the Three Kingdoms? For assure your self they have applied to
wrong Persons, and made use of wrong Methods; by which means they are taken up
for Hawks meat, and are hanged; though at the same time they are a Reproach to
the very Gallows, and dye without any manner of Pity.

2. Do you imagine that Scotch Robin, by cheating my Lady Wilkinson of her
Husband's Books, may collect out of them Matter enough to persuade the World,
in his impudent Lying Pamphlets, that the Nation ought to restore you again? Or
do you think that Scribbling will ever bring you back, since a good Army could
not keep you here? No; nor Sir John Knight's Speech, which in Truth was bitter
enough to have hanged the Rascal, sooner than gained one single Vote for the
Business. Nay, to give them their just due, I find that the Pens that in Times
past were most busy, now lie still; which they would not do, if they thought
Writing would do any good: Even the Writing of Scotch Robin has been of as
little Use as his Preaching.

3. If Writing will not do, do you think that Prating may? Truly your Friend,
Mr. Spit fire, has made a fearful Noise many a fair Time; but whether he is
your Friend, or no, I cannot tell: If he be, surely you need to advise him to
carry his Key about him, to let your Friends know his Meaning, for he is as
dark as Midnight; for my part I understand him not, nor do many of his
Acquaintance, and I do not find that he has made any Convert to your Interest.
But to deal plainly with you, I doubt your Cattle are mistaken in that Spark,
he is a Grum only, and no^ ^ Ja^o^^^e, Truly (...) him ^e what he will, he is
of little or no use to any Party that he shall espouse. Well, you have Mr.
Prate-a-pace, who glories much in the Name of a Whig Jacobite, he runs too and
fro compassing the whole City, and tattles much for you; but I think he exposes
himself more than he can enlarge your Interest: But recommend me to Rhiming
Jack Carryl, since he has lost his Estate he may turn Ballad-Singer, it may be
that may be of some use to you.

4. Can you imagine that Eating and Drinking will do: I pray where is the ready
Darby for to pay the Reckoning? Sir Sweet-face Tell-penny swears by his Book of
old Pensioners that there is not a Shilling to be got, if you would cry your
Eyes out; and so the poor Rogues must either hang, starve, or sell themselves,
and run away with the Money. Nay, Sir John Greazy-Guts swears by the Modesty of
his young Wife, and the Honesty of Squire Bold-face his Neighbor, that your
Friends must leave that way, it being only a Sparkish Frolic, and that
therefore they must enter into a cheaper way of managing your Matters; for
though these trusty Cards of yours cannot afford themselves Shillings to swill
it at a Tavern, yet they are willing to help them to a few Penny-wo^ch of
Farthings to sip at a Coffee-house, which will do as much good as Hodges
Preaching at Sam's to his Spiritual Auditors. And if you could maintain half a
Score of these Fellows to run from Coffee-house to Coffee-house, the World
might be plagued with their Nonsense, but they can never get one Line to recall
you, though you have been graciously pleased to plant your self within call
these Eight or Nine Years: And therefore I know no call you will have, unless
your Irish Understanding be called in question for not putting a Period to your
own wicked Life.

5. Do you think that Hanging up some of your Cattle might do you any Service?
Truly then, Sir Simkin, your old Friend, if he will but exert his Talent, he
can tell how to betray the poor Dogs; but what he will turn to do it there I am
to seek, your Ministry may find some Expedient for this Work. And truly it
might save your Friends beforementioned some Charge, so that they be the
better able to put a traveling Penny in your Pocket, when you shall make a
Gracious Amble to Rome, or some such Place. But now I think on it, there will
not be any need of their being Betrayed; for the Rogues are pretty Pert, and
since they cannot serve you at their own Expense, they are resolved to serve you
their own way. Therefore let them take their own Course, without forcing them
upon Secrecy in their own Defense: For as their Openness can do us little hurt,
so their ambling from Coffee-house to Coffee-house, and picking up Scraps of
News Papers, can do you little good.

To conclude all this Memorial; You may see what a Set of Villains you have
used, and do still employ, to manage with and for you: And I think I have set
you forth pretty well in your proper Colors; and if you will have Patience I
will give you another Cast of my Calling: For I see you may well set a Fifth
Time, and your Clothes will not be the worse for it on your Gracious Back. And
by that time I have finished my Articles, the Nation may see what a Pretty
Jewel we have had of James Duke of York.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
WHereas I Titus Oats Clerk, Doctor in Divinity, now of the Parish of St.
Margaret Westminster in the County of Middlesex, did, in the Year 1685. suffer
Two Cruel and Barbarous Whippings, by which I lay Ten Weeks under the
Chirurgions, and had little Hopes of being preserved; but through the Mercy of
Almighty God, and the extraordinary Skill of a Judicious Surgeon, I
outlived that Barbarous and Inhuman Usage. I do certify, That James Wass,
Citizen and Surgeon of London, was the Person that under God saved my Life,
and none but he: For Application having been made to several of his Profession,
yet none durst to appear to perform that piece of Service, for fear of the then
Tyrannical Government, but he the said James Wass, judging himself bound in
Conscience to do his Duty in his Profession. And I do hereby certify, he never
had any Reward for that piece of Service from me, nor have I been ever Capable
of making him any Return for that piece of Service, and great Kindness to me,
in saving my Life in that sad Condition, under which I then labored. And I do
further certify, That the said James Wass did not only at his own Cost and
Charge perform the said great Cure, but also relieved me in my Necessity, in a
most bountiful Manner, and stirred up several of my Friends to supply me with
considerable Sums of Money, in the Time of my close Confinement; and by reason
of my hard Usage in Prison I had contracted much Sickness and Weakness, the
said James Wass was always ready to attend me, without any manner of Reward,
either for his Medicines or Trouble of Attendance; and had not the said James
Wass frequently visited me in Prison, for ought I know I might have Perished
for want. Witness my Hand this Ninth of April 1697.

Titus Oats.


