THE Late PRINTS for a Standing Army, AND IN VINDICATION OF THE MILITIA
CONSIDERED, Are in some parts Reconciled.

Facile est inventis addere. LONDON, Printed for the Author, School.

THE Late PRINTS for a Standing Army, AND IN Vindication of the MILITIA
considered, are in some parts reconciled.
I Shall avoid all Prefatory Insinuations, because Prefaces and Dedications are
proper for Books and New Matter, which may bring Honor to the Patron, and
Interest to the Author. This is merely according to the Title of a Pamphlet
vamp'd up with some Observations that are perchance more plain than the
ingenious Writings of several accurate Pens in Discourses rather Notional than
Practical, concerning Militia's and Standing Armies, which are now the general
Talk of the Town, and seem to have come to high Debates. I hope the Passions
are over, the Pens having evacuated their Vinegar and Gall, and the Soldier
sheathing his Sword, and confining his Tongue a little closer than the warmth
of his Blood would at first permit. For as an eminent Writer says, Time
asswages Grief and Anger, which Passions Nature is too subject unto.

It is no wonder the King should be uneasy to part with his Army, or his
Soldiers unwilling to be separated from him; for they may be resembled to
Lovers, that came not together without the permission and advice of Friends on
both sides, and such as prompted them to Courage, Amity and Unanimity, for
carrying on so great a Work, as to free Us from the dismal Apprehensions of
Popery, Slavery and Arbitrary Power, which gathered so thick a Cloud round
about Us, that we were in despair of ever seeing the glorious Sunshine of
Peace, and in fear that that darling Child would never have given Us the
Opportunity of singing the Song of Simeon.

If his Majesty had not been inspired with unspeakable Valor and Conduct, and
his Soldiers with a suitable Courage and Affection, it would have raised a
Wonder, which no History has yet afforded a parallel, that so great an Army
should continue Seven Years, and more, without any the usual Encouragements of
War, and hardly their common Pay, or Natural Subsistence; so that before they
have cleared their Hands and Faces, and refreshed themselves after such
Fatigues as our Bodies cannot well bear, besides the Hazards undergone, for
avoiding of which we would have given our All, now on a sudden to be Commanded
home to seek for a Livelihood, is durus Sermo.

The great Question is, Whether a competent Number of the present disciplined
Forces are not absolutely necessary, until the Militia and Trained Bands are
made useful: And since I am entered into the Query, which all the Writers I have
yet met with upon this Subject upon this Sessions have not spoke to
satisfactorily; I desire to say for my self, that though I am unwilling to give
a positive Determination, in so critical a matter as the event only in process
of time shall render either of the Councils safe and honorable; yet I am not
fearful to put into the Boat for an endeavor to Trim, knowing my own Innocence
from designs of Advantage. I as heartily wish the Honor and Safety of my
Country, as those that express themselves in a better Style, and can appear in
a better Figure: Therefore being sensible of my Defects, I never intended to
set Pen to paper on this Affair, until I was called to in the Verge of the
Court, and Queried what was become of some Observations I had formerly made
upon the Militia, which may be a sort of an Apology for scribbling on a Subject
so well handled by great Historians, who have said all that can be said, both
as to the Inconveniences of a Standing Army, and also that the Militia and
Trained Bands have been the only Guards of this Island, and other Countries.
And though the Art and Methods of War are become intricate and political, and our
Neighbors are more powerful and formidable than formerly, yet it is concluded,
a Militia (in a great measure) may be made effectual for our Defense, being
guarded on the Borders with such a Naval Strength as the Parliament have
thought fit to Vote, yet, with submission, I have not found, or met with any
Scheme, or Propositions, how, or in how long time the Militia shall be so
useful, as that the Army may be forthwith reduced to so small a Number as was
in 1680.

I must confess it is the height of my Ambition to be thought, and as much as I
am able to prove my self, a Lover of the Constitution of my Country, the Laws
and Customs of which, I have some little knowledge of, yet not so fully as I
ought, and am not unwilling, or think my self too Old to learn, therefore have
endeavored to read and consider, all that has yet come out in this Meeting of
Parliament, where I doubt not before their Rising, they will hit upon the beast
means for the security of the Kingdom in general, with the Honor and Safety of
the Crown, and the Preservation of Liberty and Property, of every individual
Subject; so that the old Struglings betwixt the Prerogatives of the Crown, and
the Privileges of the People, may not be again contended for, or so much as
Jealousy raised about them: For prevention of which, for the future, I hope it
may not be thought a vain Repetition, to recite what Sir John Denham says in
his Poem called Coopers-Hill.

Thus Kings by grasping more than they could hold,
First by Oppression made their Subjects bold;
And Popular Sway by forcing Kings to give,
More than was fit for Subjects to receive;
Run to the like Extreme, Both by Excess.
For being greater make each other less.
The King and People are near in Simile to Man and Wife' who ought to help each
others Defects, and rejoice at every thing they are successful in; I praise God
for the disposition I have in rejoicing in this happy, and, I doubt not,
lasting Peace, and then I am sure it is Honorable, and may he be Anathematized
that disturbs it, or endeavors to foment a Jealousy betwixt the King and his
People: The Lord Shaftsbury laid a Curse upon those that offered at a
Separation: So long as the World lasts, their will be Failures in Governments;
we see it every day in private Families: But when none of the Seven deadly Sins
are predominant, its near an Assurance those styled Venial, will not bring so
great a Punishment, as Subversion, or Ruin. We are here in this Island more
inclined to Censuring, than Amendments, though we have a general Question
modestly put.

Quis tam Lincius est qui tantis Tenebris nihil offendet. It Is apparent most of
Christendom were concerned in building a Bulwark, and making a Confederacy for
stopping an Universal Monarchy; and that at the same time we our selves had a
distinct hazard, that is, we had as much, or more fear (as we pretended) of our
Religion than Property, our Religion being Reformed from the rest of the
Confederacy: And yet I think I may say few or none of the Confederacy have
heapt up so great Wealth in their Stations, as several Subjects of this Nation
(not by hazarding their Persons either by Sea or Land) but by starving the
Seamen, and Land Soldiers, and their Wives, by making Exactions for ready Money
on the King and his Officers in their Straits, and also disparaging the very
best Funds the Parliament could think of, or give for Reputation, or
Preservation of the Government: Extortion in no Age, ever come up to the like;
Empson and Dudley, Burton and Graham, were not half so notorious in their
Stations; so that if these were stripped to what they had in 1688. and that
given amongst the Soldiers, and their Persons left to run the Gauntlet of the
Army to be disbanded, and then sent to Sea to be keel-haul'd till they have
drunk as much Salt Water as the poor Women and Children have sucked in brakish
Tears, it would make the Gratuities, which the Army is in hopes to receive,
much more Satisfactory; we have suspected some to be Betrayers of the Councils,
but its visible several have been grinders of the Poor, and Disparagers of the
Government, Stock-Jobbers particularly, who, if not severely Corrected, will
Enrol themselves with the Jews, and so in time be more pernicious to the
Government (whilst in Debt) than either Jew or Jesuit: For there are Laws
sufficient already to take up these when ever any Civil Magistrate, or the
Government, thinks fit; This may be thought to be a digressive Invective, yet I
request it may be considered, whether a continued Standing-Army can be kept
without Pay: and whether if the Pay must be near as great as it has been, the
Taxes must not be as great; if so, how can the increase of the Debt be avoided,
a full discourse of which would take up time, almost to a forgetfulness of the
main Undertaking, which may be brought under these Heads.

First, A Consideration of what Forces are absolutely necessary at present for
Preservation of his Majesty's Person with Honor and Safety.

Secondly, How many ought to be in constant Pay and Exercise, for defense of
our Forts, and Maritime Towns.

Thirdly, Whether it be not discretion, to have some supernumeraries always in
readiness, to send to our Plantations, in case of any Mutinies there; or that
they should be in hazard by Bucaniers, or Pirates, or Foreiners, of any kind
whatsoever.

To these three Heads I do not apprehend the Militia was ever employed, nor do
I perceive there is any Thoughts of making the Militia for these Purposes, nor
were they ever naturally Inclined to these Uses: Nor do I see how they can be
Employed in these Affairs; their use being Properly,

First, To Suppress any Insurrections that shall happen within the Kingdom.

Secondly, To Convene and march to that part, or Quarter of the Kingdom, where
an Invasion may be suspected.

For which two Purposes last mentioned, in my Apprehension, the Militia may be
as effectually useful, as a continued Army, so large as will be absolutely
necessary for that purpose; For demonstration of which I must crave a little
more Patience of the Reader, and his Liberty to draw some Observations, wherein
a numerous Army may raise several Inconveniences.

First, it is apparent a Standing-Army is not allowed by any of our Neighbors,
though by their Situation on the Continent, they are enforced to maintain great
Numbers in Pay, and strict Guards to defend each Precincts, like Shepherds with
their Assistants in common Fields to prevent Streakings and Trespasses, which
is a charge and Inconveniency saved us, (God be praised for his Providence)
Nature guarding us with the Sea, which being assisted by humane Endeavors as
the Parliament have wisely considered, I doubt not we are as safe as in former
Ages; Tho we are told of the great Numbers of the French, and the Possibilities
of their attempting us by Invasion, which in Human Reasoning is as remote a
Probability as can be proposed, I do not find they ever attempted it, when they
had more promising Opportunities, than I hope they will ever have again; for I
am inclined to believe 20 or 30000 Men were in readiness in 1688, to have come
over; but how, after what manner, and upon what Account; not by way of Invasion
but assistance, if King James would have helped them over, and accepted them,
which as I have heard he never would. Now, (though I underwent as many of his
Passions and Severities as any one in his Reign) yet since I did Eat of his
Bread, though it was carefulness with Sour Grapes, for I was dismissed by him
of the Employments I bought in King Cb. II. time, yet I will not charge him
with more Endeavors for alienating the Affections of his Subjects, than were
relly agitated, they were sufficient to draw Mortification upon him in this
World, Tantum Religio potuit -- But to the discourse we are upon, neither then
did they offer to Embark, nor in all this long War, (though they took many of our
Merchantmen) had they ever Shipping or Men, fit for the purpose of an Invasion:
we are told it was an Accident, that prevented the danger we were in, when the
Spanish Armada attempted us.

This is to draw us into amusements, and make us conclude our Politicians will
always have Miracles or Wonders, on Foot. Where Is the Peace if we must have
more Troops quartered amongst us than we have had all the War. This looks as if
we had been paying Taxes these Eight Years for the Assistance of our
Neighbors, and so much to the weakening of our selves, as that we might be the
easier conquered by our own Consents. Can it be imagined we have a firm Peace,
when we say and argue the French are in possibility and readiness to invade us?
Have we shak'd hands with our Neighbors in the Peace, so that there is to be
no more Assisting one from the other? I promised my self a firm Alliance,
during this King's Life, at least; And though all our Assistances may be
forgotten of Queen Elizabeth's time, yet I cannot think its forgotten that we
paid them readily and willingly the 600000 l. which was all I ever heard was
asked for the happy coming in of King William. Nor do I imagine they will not
allow their danger all this War to be more to them than us. Brussels, and many
others, have been often attempted, when we were quiet in our Beds. It must be
confessed we were consequentially in danger. Tunc tua res agiter pares cum
proxima Ardet. Our turn no doubt would have been to be attacked by the French,
had we not endeavored to defend the Low Countries, whose submission would have
been our Ruin. But I cannot think they will suffer the French to invade us;
for, if we be ruined, what will become of them? These Discourses make the Peace
but a Cessation, and the French do their work the sooner: These are but
Discourses, I fear not the Event. For if Preparations be now great, and all
things ready, and a Wind to serve their Turn, I cannot avoid thinking that we
shall not be watchful, and in a posture of Defense, and that our Neighbors
also will be wafting over to our Assistance as readily, and as great Numbers,
and with as good affection, (especially if we pay them again) as our Enemies
have malice, whom we say are reduced to such poverty, they were not able to
Cultivate their Country, and necessitated to court our King to a Peace: And yet
on the sudden we have a formidable Scheme of Invasions. We have had in former
Reigns 40000 Black Bills to destroy us. In the Revolution every individual
Person in fear of being murdered by the Irish; and now we shall be in daily
fear of the French, if we have not a Standing Army to defend us. Nor do we
think, that if the French do not come immediately to us, that our other
Neighbors will be more afraid of our coming to them. If our Trading hold or
increase, I am near an assurance we may as soon Transport, as be Invaded: And
if we neither Aggress abroad, nor be Invaded at home, its conclusive a Standing
Established Army is to give Laws at home; and then Old England good night
altogether.

For my part, I shall never be in fear of an Invasion, whilst we rely on God's
Providence, and are awake to use Human Reasoning and Endeavors. But allow our
Neighbors have attempted rash Things; therefore, shall we nurse up unadvised
or non-presidented Policies, which may be like Worms in Children that eat their
Intrails? Is a supernumerary Army to be kept up for mere Fantasms? Did ever a
supernumerary Servant or two kept idle in a Family, do half so much good at a
Chance-time, as his Idleness did hurt in the general?

I hope in time of Peace we shall not be infatuated into Blindness,
Carelessness, and Effeminacy; but shall have a Natural and Political Care,
keeping our Arms from rusting, and our Shipping ready to sail. And our
Ambassadors will be watchful: And if we have not Spies, I hope we have Friends,
that, like Starlings to the Dove-House, will communicate to us when any Great
Design is upon Us. It Is confessed, the King came over with a small Number; yet
King James had Intimation of them; and the Preparations were examined, how
close soever the Design was covered. And although there was never a more General
Inclination here, or Invitation and Preparation for his Reception; yet we see
cross Winds retarded him once; and it was a Wonder, next to a Miracle, that he
should stretch so long a Sea, at that Season, and to a Place which was the best
and only one he could have been successful in; and yet we have heard it was
come very near a Resolution of Returning, tho no Army did or could come near to
oppose Him.

To keep a number of Men for consumption merely of the Product, is like the
Lubbards in Monasteries heretofore; and if that is the main of the Argument,
it is requisite they should have parallel Cloisters, or Cells, and the like
Restraints to keep them within compass: For it is apparent, those we have had
idle in Nurseries for this War, have made horrid incursions into the Civil
Rights, by streaking and making themselves Masters of all the Game in every
Royalty they came near; and have not only broke into all Immoralities, and so
voraciously and prodigally wasted and devoured their Landlords; whereby that
Revenue it self that should pay them and their Quarters, is much shortened, and
will be more; for the Roads will not be passable; and in all roads the
Accommodations are very indifferent, many Public Houses being shut up. It Is a
sad story to reckon how many have been Murdered, and how Magistracy has been
affronted. An Army is to be always busied either in their proper Exercises, or
Works Military; or having leisure from them, if they were employed in cutting
Rivers, or making or mending Highways, they would be fitter for Fatigues in
marching, or their own proper Business.

I hope Employments will be found for those that may be thought absolutely
necessary to be kept on foot at present, even those that are or shall be
thought necessary for Guards about this great Town; which, I confess, I think
ought to be more than was in 80, for several Reasons as I may instance
hereafter: And also Public Works in the Frontiers and Garrisons, will keep the
Soldiers in Health, and make them digest what is wholesome Diet in their
Quarters. I go not upon the distinct Number of Veteran Troops, or Companies,
because I do not find any certain Number insisted upon: Yet I hope I may
observe, That if this Magnificent City spreads her Wings proportionably in
Times of Peace, as she has done in the Times of Jealousies and Fears of having
her Customs and Privileges encroach'd upon, and in danger of being subverted;
and as she has done even in this long War, her Streets being much increased and
peopled to the West and North, and this principally by Foreiners, who are
likely to increase wonderfully more in times of Peace. Not that I would say any
thing to put a stop to the Scripture's Declaration, notwithstanding that the
Numbers of the People are the Honor of the King, and causes Industry in a
Nation; yet, I say, if the Numbers increase by Shoals of Foreiners, we must
either have them absolutely in the Boundaries of our Laws, or have Sentinels
set over them, or Regiments particularly Quartered amongst them.

Pardon me if I am mistaken, when I say, I do not believe the Trained Bands can
prevent an Insurrection there, whenever any Pressure, or Caprichio, should
dispose them to combine; I do believe Wives and Children, and a settled
Habitation, go a great way toward a Security. But if France be so formidable,
as that it is prudent or necessary to watch for keeping them out, I shall be
inclined to conclude, it is as requisite to have a careful eye upon those of
that Nation amongst us: For I am morally assured, England was never invaded,
without a Party within who gave an Invitation. It Is confessed, the City within
the Walls may be kept in Safety and Obedience, by the Discretion of the Lord
Mayor and his Lieutenancy, and may march out with their Train'd-Bands and
Auxiliaries, to join with the Military Force of Middlesex. But the Foreiners,
if combined, may be embodied and formed and fixed in such advantageous Posts,
as one shall find it a difficult matter to attack or subdue them; especially if
the Nation is consternated with an Invasion. And I am sorry there is so
apparent an occasion to fear, that we have too many of our own Natives, that
are so far from dutiful Principles, that they care not how great the
Devastation is, so that they may share the Shipwreck. Plutarch was not mistaken
in saying,

When Discord rules in Realm or Town,
The Wicked gain the Chief Renown.
By this time I think my self concluded to have changed my Mind, and adhere to
the Arguments for a Standing Army, when in reality I am only for requisite and
necessary Guards in and about this City, the Maritim Towns and Seaports,
besides a Reserve for our Plantations; I wish not one Man more: For I do not
think there needs one Troop, or Company, throughout the Body of the Kingdom: I
do really think the Militia may be made so useful, as to secure the Government
from any Insurrection there. And to demonstrate I am not for a numerous Force
in continued Pay and Quarters; by permission, as the part of the City I have
mentioned may reasonably require, I humbly offer this as a rational
Proposition; though I am sure it will be arraigned at first fight, if ever it be
allowed of, or effected (because it was debated, and came near a Determination
in the Reigns of King Charles and King James) that is, Building a Citadel where
the Mews is; which has room also to make Barracks to contain a greater number
than are absolutely necessary; and a few Cannon planted there, will awe all
that part of the Town, better than several Regiments distributed in Quarters.
And moreover, if Regiments be lodged by Reliefs for a Fortnight, three Weeks,
or a Month, at discretion,; they are readier for the Guards, and less
troublesome to the City, by coming and going through all parts to and from the
Parade, and in less danger than formerly of being indicted for a Nuisance. This
may seem a chimerical Notion, coming from a private Person; and if it should be
entertained and set about, without the Advice or Approbation of the Parliament,
it would perhaps raise great Jealousies and Fears: For avoiding of which, I
shall no longer insist upon that Thought.

Therefore let us now enter into a Discourse how the Militia may be made
useful, and far exceed the Number of all the Army now in Pay, with abundantly
less Charge to the Nation, than the Army has been, and must of necessity be,
till the Militia is made serviceable; which must be first by Acts of
Parliament; and those brought into Methods and Exercise, which will require
Time; for Soldiers are not made by Inspiration, as some Pulpitarians are;
Military Men must have Discipline and Exercise to make them useful. And I doubt
it will require more than one Year to make Acts, and put them in practice, so
as that they shall have the intended effect: And till then, I do not believe
any Man will think it necessary, through Jealousy, to have the King and
Government naked.

Some Men think it is no more than to say (now the Peace is concluded) To your
Tents, O Israel -- I wish those Persons would consider, that if we were as
morally assured as is possible, that neither Foreiners from abroad, nor at
home, would think of disturbing us; What a Condition would our innate
Disposition bring us to, if the King should suddenly die (which God forbid) and
no Guard for the succeeding Government, but the present confused Militia! I
have known the Militia themselve very near Battling for a Father and a
spurious, or at least a controverted Son. Our Divisions, Subdivisions, and
Animosities, would make mad Work: We should be suddenly like an Aceldama; which
sad Omen GOD avert.

I am as willing as any Man to hide our own Infirmities; but as Foreign States
pry as much as they can into our Politics; so no doubt they look into our
Morals.

I hope I may be pardoned if I think the King is used in this our Island, as we
our selves are with our Air and Agues, sometimes very hot, and immediately very
cold: One while we admire him, and exalt Him to the Station of a God, and in an
instant, so soon as Safety appears, before the Proclamation of Peace is out of
our Ears, and our Addresses delivered, we are inflamed with Jealousy, and fear
Our Eagle will soar so high in the Sunshine of his Prosperity, that he will
make some sudden Cancellere upon us. I would not be bold with the Royal Hawks,
nor the Noble Game; yet I hope I may, like a Sparrow-Hawk, have a short flight
at the Bush, by hinting at what has been printed: For there was a Book that
made a Great Man more than a Conqueror; and there has been Clauses that seem
to make him less than a Man: For after a large Declaration of a Free Gift,
follows Clauses of Restrictions that makes our HERO less than an Imberbis
Juvenis, who has power to dispose of what his Godfathers gave him. Disbanding
and Manacling was not thought of, when Fears of Popery, Arbitrary Power, and
Acts of Resumption crowded into our Apprehensions.

It was said the last Year, That if there were not settled some lasting Security
for those that had brought in their Money freely, the Moneyed Men, and the
Military, would find, in Peace, delatory Considerations; perhaps both one
Answer, Look to your Hits better the next time.

We have one certain Observation in England, That the Soldier who makes not his
Fortune whilst the Sword is in his hand, shall have no more than a Complemental
Commendation; for in a short time of Peace, and old Soldier will be like an old
Almanac.

It may be freely wager'd, there is not one Man in a hundred that charges his
Memory with the Fears he had in the Revolution, of an Irish-man's cutting his
Throat, though there was not above 3000 to do this all over England; perhaps
not much above 48 Hours before the Town of Berwick, Cape of Cornwall,
Dover-Peer, and Holy-head, had these dismal Apprehensions.

But that we may not always continue in this Dilemma, I would humbly offer
these Two Expedients toward making the Militia more useful:

First, By shortning their Numbers: And,

Secondly, By lengthning their Time for Marchings and Exercise.

And for shortning their Numbers; whereas by a moderate Computation they may
amount in England and Wales, to 90, or 100000 Men: (though at the full Value of
the Lands and other Estates they ought to amount to 150000) Reduce them to
half, that is about 50000: And this will be done by flinging off Quarters of
Horses, and small Contributers to Foot; which causes great Disturbances, and is
one reason so often New Men and Horses appear. But if an entire 500 l. per Ann.
finds a Horse and Horseman, and 50 l. per Ann. finds a Footman; they will the
easiler continue the same Man, and the same Horse, or very good Reason will be
showed to the Lieutenancy or other Officers: And they may be the more strictly
obliged so to do, and with less clamor and trouble fined and be distrain'd
upon for Defaults.

Perhaps mentioning this part of the Militia-Laws may affright some from
reading the remainder of this Discourse, therefore let us a little consider the
Constitution of the Nation, when the Military Force was so useful as to be our
absolute Security. I think Knights Service was the composition of those
Military Forces now commonly called Militia: Which demonstrates, that Masters
themselves appearing in Person for defense of their Country, Families, and
Estates, were much better than their Servants, of which the Militia now seems
to be composed which is a Mistake in practice contrary to the Intention when
Knights-Service was taken away. For when the Crown and Government complied to
give ease to the Gentry and Freeholder, they thought it a Hardship and Slavery
to appear in their Persons, being a Fatigue they could not bear, unless they
were of more robust Constitutions, than they generally were when this was
considered and complied with. Then came the Militia to be composed of
Representatives.

Now it was not suspected, that those who had been thus indulged by the
Government, would ever have been so remiss in sending such slight and shagrene
Men and Horses, for the Defense of the Crown and Government, and their own
Persons and Properties. And this Inconsiderateness, in a long Series of Peace,
was the first cause of slighting of the Militia, and caused the Crown and Court
to seek for further Assistance. And now the Crown is guarded by a Military
Assistance, which it confides in, it is natural and good Reason to keep what
looks like a Certainty, instead of what is generally allowed not to have the
Face or Body of Security. But yet the Constitution is not so much destroyed,
but that it is probable it may be recovered to its former Reputation; and that is
what every Englishman and Lover of the Country and Government ought to
endeavor for. Therefore let us go on to draw Propositions for making them
useful; and as that appears, I doubt not, the King will be inclined to lessen
those which we will now only call necessary Guards, and not what we now, by an
affrighting Expression, call a Standing Army. I would distinguish betwixt
permission for Convenience, or Necessity, and that which is feared to be
established; which I am fully assured the Parliament will never consent to, but
will be their Business every Session, to see how these Pensionary Soldiers may
be lessened -- Jealousies started are not easily stifled. It Is Time that must
make the Militia useful; for which we will go on, upon the computation of 50000
Horse and Foot in England and Wales. For bringing these to be useful, let us
see how an Act may be drawn, keeping as near as may be to those Acts we have
now in being. First, The limited time of fourteen Days in the Year, seems
necessary to be enlarged: For sourteen Days in the Year for Private and General
Musters seems too little, when half their time is spent in their going to the
Rendezvous, or private Meeting, which sometimes are long Marches; or if ill
Weather, there is either want of Refreshment, or they disabled for Exercise,
that their Meeting signifies little more than the expense of Money.

I do promise my self the Number will be sooner consented to, than the
necessary time I think to propose; though I will not desire the enlargement of
fourteen Days in the Year, unless it be upon extraordinary Occasions, more than
once in four Years: For I would propose, that 20000 Men should be marching
every Year to Hounslow, or such Place as the King thinks fit, and there encamp
for a Month or six Weeks; which time of marching out of their respective
Countries, will improve them to such a height of natural Inclination, that
they will appear thereby more useful, than in twenty Years meeting according to
the present Acts. And encamping may make up eight or ten Weeks; and this coming
but once in four Years, will not be so great a Charge, as many may suppose at
first sight: For considering here is much of the number reduced, and though I
proposed that 500 l. per Ann. shall find a Man, Horse, and Accoutrements, and
50 l. per Ann. a Footman, for securing or preventing Changes of Men and Horses;
yet it is not intended they shall be at the whole Charge, and others spared.

I the rather propose Hounslow as the most convenient, not only for the
Goodness of its Situation, but its nearness to London, whereby it might easily
be accommodated out of this Majesty's Stores in the Tower of London, with
Tents, Arms, and Field Pieces: And if His Majesty would add thereto (at his own
Charge) Ammunition-bread, it would be a mighty ease to the Country. I know I am
entered into a Proposition that will be nicely and strictly canvass'd; because
I suppose every individual Person that has been taxed to this War, either for
Lands, Money, Offices, or Personal Estate, shall bear a proportion to the
Charge of maintaining the Militia of their County or City: For I do not
apprehend where the Subject Matter is of that Nature, that every individual
Person enjoys a Benefit, why that Person should not pay proportionably to his
Advantage and Estate

I confess it has been my own Inclination all this War, that the Charge should
have been born and maintained by a General Excise: It will be told me
immediately, this is a Commonwealth Expedient, and Foreign Practice, enslaving
the People, and eating and drinking by weight and measure, giving ordinary
Persons the Privilege of examining my Cellar and Larder, and a greater
Publication and Recording of my Housekeeping, than the Spaniards scattering
the Feathers at his Door when he eats a Fowl. Upon Examination, the Argument
will be found as light as the Simile: For if you examine the Laws that have
been, and are in force at this Minute, you will find your self as narrowly
inspected, as a general Excise will reach; especially if you have the same
liberty in a general Excise, as you now have in the Malt-Act; that is, to
compound it at so much a Head for your Family; and then all your Generosity of
Housekeeping, and Killing your own Meat, runs in; you oblige your Tenants,
weaker sort of Neighbors; or being hospitable to the Poor, or Travelers,
costs you nothing extraordinary; and yet it is as advantageous to them.

This would make a long Digression (if I should pursue it) from the main
Topic; especially if I should endeavor to silence another general Outcry,
Oh! this is destructive to the Freedom and Happiness of Old England! I wish I
could see Old England truly stated; I confess I have drank Her Health a hundred
times, or more; and yet I can only admire Her, as I do Queen Elizabeth in a
Farthingal and Ruff. I desire to know where the Honor of Old England resided
undisturbed, when the Act of Chimney-Money past: I am sure She was not free
from ordinary Visitants, either in Her Rooms of State, or Closets; for Closets,
a Constable, I am sure, (and I think a Peeper) might demand a view. The reach
of your present Laws for the Militia, shall enforce you to discover to 20 s.
what you are worth, or else you shall forswear your self, or bear that Burden
that neither an Old nor Young Englishman would bear, if he could help it. The
Law and matter of Fact is this: The Lord-Lieutenants, with their Deputies, or
any Three of them, may charge you or me to Horse or Foot as they please; and
you must comply accordingly, or swear to the Estimate of your Condition. Now in
the present Taxes, it is in the breast of an Assessor to return in his
Duplicate, what Sum he pleases to the Commissioners, to whom you may appeal.
What then? Your Remedy will not be had without an Oath. The Commissioners
themselves are to withdraw, whilst they are assessed by their Brethren; who if
mistaken in their Estimate, it must be born, or else Swearing must remedy the
Mistake. And this leads me to a Question of the difference betwixt our Old and
New England: In the Old the Oath ex Officio; in the New, Oaths Purgative or
Defensive. The matter is, Whether is England the worse for altering or adding
some few Particulars and Clauses, for making her Militia more useful? Are we
the worse for reforming the Church in Henry VIII. 's time? Are we the worse for
pulling down or demolishing inland Castles and Strong Holds? And upon the
unfortunate Burning the City, would you have had it Built in the same Form as
before? It Is now much better, and it is London still, the same Ground; and St.
Paul's is where it was.

If I have gained the Argument in that Point, I shall go more cheerfully on,
and prove my Position in the Title; that it is an easy matter to add to the
Foundations of Buildings or Governments; and sometimes Alterations are made
very advantageous in the Walls of old Buildings.

As to this Standard of the Militia, I would have it a Militia still, and that
it should have the same full Force, Strength, and Virtue that it ever had; and
if a Red-Coat, or another Color, will do the same thing as a Headpiece, Back,
Breast, Cap-a-pee; why should Men be bruized to death with carrying of furred
Iron, to the tiring and spoiling of their Horses also; especially when it is one
of the chief Ridicules the Disciplined Army makes upon the Militia? There are
many Reflections like those, the Army makes upon the Militia; I have heard most
of them, and can find Commendation for both Army and Militia, and Defects or
Inconveniences in both, having been in both: But not despising or espousing
either, perhaps having not found Pleasure or Profit in either, longer than the
Heat of Youth was in me, I shall discourse of them only as they are useful to
the Government, and People in general, and their joint Interest.

Therefore I come now at last to stick to Reasons, why the Militia should be
paid by a General Stock, of and in the County, proportionably to the Numbers it
shall naturally raise, according to the computed Numbers now, and the
Reducements proposed, and for the Time and Marches aforementioned.

And because the first Objection to the Time and Marchings, to be paid by the
Country will be here in the Exchequer and for Offices, I must declare my self
so much an English man, as to be bold to say, those Offices are more improved
by this long War, than any Employments or Lands in England; not that I envy
them (if they are not ill Men, as has been hinted at) for I would have had one
of the Places my self: But I am apt to believe the Country may save Money, and
the King be as well served. So the King be faithfully and well served, it is
equal to him whether the Officers and Soldiers in the Militia be paid by
Methods which shall be directed by Parliament for payments in the Countries, or
the General Pay-Offices, as it has been this late War.

First It Is certain Money may be saved, which Offices and Officers will
swallow. The Freeholder desires to see who spends the Money he compasses by
turning the Plow at the Lands-end. It Is fine following the Plow in a Sunshine
Day, sucking in, and snuffing up the Freshness of the Farth, but Wet and Dry to
follow and turn the Plow; Hic Labor, hoc Opus est! And after all your Nine
Months Labor carking and caring, you must Thrash out your Compensation. Will
not this naturally make a Man enquire who eats and drinks his 4 s. in the Pound
out of the Quick Stock?

This will raise a Disposition for making the Militia useful, if it be so
methodiz'd, that at the Assizes, or Sessions, every Constable may bring back
the Officers and Soldiers Pay who lives within his Liberties, without Poundage,
Agencies, and several other stoppages: You will find all the Soldiers that
shall be disbanded, solicit to be in the Militia, and wish they may march to
Hounslow. It will be found that the English Nation is not so effeminate,
sluggish, cowardly, or indisposed to Military Affairs, as they have been
charactered perhaps by Three Potentates, who have made use of their Travels to
dazzle their Design of altering the Fundamental Part of the Government, which I
heartily adhere to; though I am not strictly for a Spanish Formidon, who runs the
hazard of twenty Inconveniences for an inconsiderable old Custom.

But now it pleases Providence to afford us the Prospect of a happy and
peaceable New Year, let us endeavor to pick out of the Times past, what is
rationally probable to secure future Generations, from the Calamities these
latter have undergone: To which purpose, let us go on to make our Discipline
equal to our Courage, which has appeared in the Eyes, and has had the due
Character, from the Jedgment and Pronuncition of the Greatest and most
Experienced General in Christendom, our present KING.

There seems to be an absolute necessity, that something material should be
done concerning the Militia. I am not so fond of my own Positions as to press
for their observance: I only set them out as marks for others to try their Guns
against: But if they should be so fortunate as to come within the View and
Cognizance of his Majesty and Parliament, and they give any sort of
Countenance, it may encourage me to a further Industry and Explanation.

Should what has been said as to Numbers, Times and Places, be put in practice
for four Years, I doubt not it will be found a very good Expedient for making
the Militia useful; and consequently a satisfactory way for securing the
Nation. It Is not to be imagined, before it is practiced, how much it will Spirit
the Nation, when the Masculine Martial Disposition shall be assured they are to
appear before so Great a General as we have mentioned; whose scrutinous Eye in
Marchings or Musterings, is the strictest Superior that our England has been
blessed with: And I hope, when he sees an entire Body of English (for I think his
Armies hitherto have been a miscellany of all Nations) he will be fully assured
they will really deserve that Great and High Complementive Character he has
given of the English Courage, which, for the Honor of the Nation, the present
Army has kept up; and I hope the Parliament will resolve on signalizing the
Army's Courage Affection before they part. Were I not doubtful my Head and Pen
would be thought too busy, I would humbly offer that an Act should pass, That
every Soldier that has a Certificate from his Officer, That he has behaved
himself Faithfully and Courageously, shall have the Freedom of every City or
Town Corporate, to set up what Manufactory, Trade, or lawful Industry his
Genius leads him to; or if lame, or super-annuated, to receive a Pension from
his Native Country, or longest Residence before he went for a Soldier. There
was something of this kind, upon the Restoration of King Charles, when there
was also a Provision made for Officers, which happily may be now. But I hope
there will be more care taken for a speedier Distribution; for the
Solicitation and Attendance eat out the Benevolence. And if there be now an
Act, as there was then, for prohibiting the distinguishing People by
Characters, it would take off many Heats that arise, and may increase a better
Affection in the Nation.

I hope these Notions are not erroneous, though they deviate a little from the
main Subject; to which I crave leave to put another Patch, by way of Caution,
that this Method for the Militia be not expensive by the way of vying; for I am
near an Assurance, that if the Position of coming to Hounslow take effect, if
there be not a limitation for Clothing and Equipage, both of Officers and
Soldiers, the Counties, and Officers in each County, will be vying who shall
appear most splendid before his Majesty: For it is not to be doubted his Martial
Disposition will Honor them often with his Presence. It will be a Recreation
to Him at that Season of the Year I humbly propose, from May Day to Midsummer,
which in probability will be healthful and pleasant Marching and Encamping, and
a Season the Soldiers may be best spared from their Countries, returning by
Harvest. It will be a time the King, Nobility, and Gentry may want Business and
Recreation, which makes them dote on the Wells: For the Parliament, it is
probable, will be seldom sitting about that time; nor is there Field-Sports for
the King, Nobility, or Gentry; nor has the Country Gentleman much to do at that
Season. Yet it is pity a Gentleman that loves his Country and is willing to
bestow his Pains, and hazard his Life, should suffer in his Estate, either by
neglecting it, or being at an extraordinary Expense: Therefore for a
distinguishing Mark of Honor, and something of Interest, let him be exempted
from other chargeable Offices; if he himself will plead the Act, that is, from
being High Sheriff, serving on Juries, or being a Justice of Peace, and c. But
I would be understood all Commission-Officers, under a Deputy Lieutenant; as,
Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns. As
for other Field-Officers, Lieutenant-Generals, Major-Generals, Brigadiers, and
c. it is not to be doubted but the King has nursed up a sufficient number, who
have shown their Valor and Conduct in the late War, and will be instructive to
the Militia, whenever they shall appear: And although the sham Buda and
Maestricht were ridiculed in former times; yet if a Namure or Limerick, or
several Skirmishes in the Defiles; such Attacks (as Diversions) every Year they
are encamped, will not be found to be lost Labors.

This Position will help to bring in many of good Estates to be the Officers:
And if it should so happen that some Gentlemen out of Modesty (as there are
many very stout Gentlemen, so modest that they will not offer themselves though
they are willing) should not voluntarily come in, let it be in the Breast of the
King, His Lord Lieutenants, and c. to recommend, invite, and persuade such
Gentlemen as they think proper, but no compulsive Power for Officers: And I
have heard some argue (when I made some Propositions formerly for the
improvement of the Militia) that it was against the Fundamental Constitution of
England, to have any Man pressed; To which Objection was offered, That in case
a finder is not able, or willing of himself to march, or list himself, nor
cannot enjoin a Son, or prevail with a Relation, or a young Neighbor, that is
fit and likely to be a Representative, in such a Case, if the Finder discovers
a fitting Man in the Parish or Neighborhood, that in his Opinion and in the
Opinion of his substantial Neighbors, and of the Parson of the Parish, who may
certify under their Hands, That such a Person is able, and in Personal
Appearance fitting for Soldiery; and that it does not appear to them, that this
Person does get his Livelihood by an open, industrious Means, but it is to be
feared he is a Trespasser in the Night, or at improper times out upon Fishing,
Fowling, Shooting Deer or Rabbits, if not other worse things: Upon such
Information to the next Justice of Peace, he may send his Warrant for him and
enjoin him to list himself; and, in case of refusal, he may send him to the
House of Correction, or the Goal for 12 Months, or till such time as he will
list himself; I am sure it would have eased the Country of many idle Persons,
that have come to the Gallows, and yet would not put themselves into Arms all
this War.

These are but Particles of the Discourse may arise, betwixt the Constitution
and the Modalities; which seems to me like the Carpet-Knights, that arraign
that which they either dare not do themselves, or if they have a Family-Courage
to undertake, they know not how to do; yet to do something more than Argument
is Ajax to Ulysses, Ostente Facta: And we have a new Pronunciator, rather do
ill than do nothing; which is, if you will do nothing by way of a serious
Consideration to make the Militia useful, you must submit to a Standing Army,
which will do little mischievous Tricks, whilst they are idle, and grosser as
Time serves: I can and dare witness, that I heard it in an Argument of several
Officers in a Veterane Regment now in being, That if the King commanded him to
take the Life of any Man, he would do it subservient to his Pay; and this
Topic was currently discoursed amongst several Officers upon the Trial of
Urats. These will in part hint, I am not absolutely a Stranger to my Country,
nor affected to any thing that shall in common Sense be prejudicial; therefore
give me leave to go through one Allusion, and I have done: Here Is King and
Parliament, Subjects, Civil and Military, Military standing Army, or Militia,
who labor, gather, and spin, like Bees and Silkworms, for the Public Good.
Now as Bees and Silkworms are mixed with Drones, Wasps and Grubs; so the
Constitution being a mixed Government, it seems reasonable the Preservation
should be a Miscellany between a Militia, and Regular Troops. This Allusion is
an Epitome of the whole Discourse; The Parliament being the Representatives of
the Nation, I hope will concur with the Desires of the King; or, That His
Majesty will acquiesce in what they think, or apprehend agreeable to the
Interest of Old England, or to our Constitution, or a probable Certainty of
some Settlement: Though I cannot pretend to advise, give me leave to conclude
with the Courtship of Tully; which is better than I can make or express.

Non tantopere mihi considerandum est, Quid tu Optimus in
Praesentia Velis, quam quid semper probaturus sis. --
POSTSCRIPT.
IF this prove not satisfactory to your Pains in the Perusal, you are requested
to believe this Pamphlet was penned in Christ-mas Holy days, when the
Subject Matter was in a warm Dispute; and left to a Friend's Discretion,
whether he would publish it, or not. Whilst this was in Consideration, the
Honorable House of Commons corroborating their Vote for Disbanding the Army to
a former Number; my Friend thought fit to lay it aside, (whilst I was absent,
by a long Journey.) Nor had I Intentions, since my Coming to Town, that it
should comeforth, till I had the View of a Book for making the Militia more
useful: Wherein that Author demonstrates his having read more of the Roman
History, and their Method, than he has seen of the Practical Discipline of this
Age. Not that I censure his Pains: Nor am I fond of the few Propositions here
inserted; They are only as an Addition to the Gentleman, who has made the first
Step toward making the Militia more useful. Which Subject, I suppose, he does
not intend to pursue; because he tells us, he is employing himself in an
Historical Discourse (in Latin and English) of Brutus; or, The History of
Liberty and Tyranny. I hope this will not be construed that I am Censorious;
for I really esteem him a Gentleman of Parts, though I am unknown to him: And
will thus far endeavor to join with him in this Work, that if he will allow
his Labor to be bring ing of Brick, mine shall pass for Mortar; which others
may place, and cement, as they have more Skill in Raising a Superstructure. I
hope we shall not be deeply censured for endeavoring to enlarge the Acts for
the Militia.

I may affirm Hounslow to be a proper Place for Encamping, because I have heard
many eminent Officers, who have been much abroad, say, no Place in Europe
admits of better Accommodations, both for fresh Provisions, and excellent
Water; And so large an Encampment, that 20000 Men may be seen in a Line, upon a
dry Flat; and convenient Room for Exercise, Wheelings, and Marchings.

I know there will be two Objections to this Proposition of Hounslow, with so
many Men yearly; First, The Charge: Secondly, Long Marches; from Cornwall,
Northumberland, Cumberland, and the North and South parts of Wales.

The first is answered by Computation, Whether is easier, For the Kingdom to
have 20000 Men in Pay, by way of Rotation, for Three Months in the Year; or 20
or 30000 in continual Pay, as a Standing Army. Clothing is the same yearly; or
else they will be a dull and ragged Aspect in a Camp. And if 20000 Men come
every Spring, yearly, fresh Men, and fresh clothed, it will be an Honor to the
Kingdom. And in the Rotation of Four Years, 80000 Men are in Discipline. Allow
Eight or Ten Weeks for Marching and Encamping 20000 Men; Then allow the old
Fourteen Days for Exercising those that remain in their Countries for Three
Years; That they meet Two or Three Days every Quarter; the whole amounts but to
Three Months in the Year. And this, I am confident, will keep their Memories
and Motions in Ure.

And to the other Objection, of long Marches; It Is rather a great Help, than
otherwise, for making Soldiers. One Camp, the farther distant from their Native
Residence, will quicken the Spirits, and accomplish Soldiers, more than Seven
Years in their own Country. And as to Cornwall, etc. let them march into the
Camp a Week later, and march out a Week sooner than the Body of the Army. And
if part of the Guards encamp yearly, they will be a Pattern and Example to the
Kingdom in general.

Many Particles, and little Instances, I could have added, which would have
swelled this Pamphlet beyond the present Value. I therefore wave them, till I
see how these are accepted, or improved; and accordingly, endeavor to make the
Courteous Reader better Satisfaction; who subscribe my self,

His Humble Servant, Philo-Patriae.

FINIS.

