(...): OR, THE PICTURE OF THE Late King James Further drawn to the LIFE.

In which is made manifest by several ARTICLES, That the whole Course of his
Life has been a continued Conspiracy against the Protestant Religion, Laws and
Liberties of the Three Kingdoms.

In a Letter to Himself.

PART The Third.

By TITUS OATS, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. to be sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms
Inn in Warwick Lane. M. DC. XCVII.

TO His most Excellent Majesty WILLIAM III. By the Grace of God, And the Choice
of the Good People of England, Of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Rightful
and Lawful KING, Defender of the Faith, and the Restorer of our LAWS and
LIBERTIES, As well as the Victorious PROTECTOR of Oppressed Europe; TITUS
OATS, D. D. His Faithful, Dutiful and Loyal Subject and Servant, most humbly
dedicates this ensuing MEMORIAL.

The Contents of this Third Part.
INtroduction, on K. James's being deserted by the Pope; the Scottish Bishops,
Page 1. etc. Article XXII. He Is charged with Misapplication of the Taxes, etc.
in his Brother's Time, 5. XXIII. With suspending the Laws against Priests and
Jesuits, 9. XXIV. With the Loss of the Dominion of the Seas, 11. XXV. With
refusing the Test against Popery, 13. XXVI. With marrying the Daughter of
Modena, 14. XXVII. With making a French General over the English Army, 19.
XXVIII. With oppressing the Kingdom of Scotland, with the several Means he made
use of, 20. XXIX. With attempting to break the Use of Parliaments, which is
branched out into many Divisions and Subdivisions, 30. Conclusion, giving some
Account of King James's Friends here in England, etc. 94.


ERRATA.
Page 1. and some following Pages for (...) read (...). Page 30. l. antepenu^t.
for with. r. without.

(...): Or, The Third Part of the Picture of the Late King JAMES.
SIR,
I Cannot but acquaint you, that many of your Friends here in England are much
concerned that the Whore of Rome (that is, Mystical Babylon) labored no more
to support you when you usurped the Imperial Crown of this Realm; and that when
God gave the Nation Grace to drive you and your Italian Triggrimate and Welsh
Cub from amongst us, he did not move both Heaven and Earth to restore you
again: And that since you have fought many a bloody Battle for the Honor of
the English Nation, you would not venture one more as an additional One to save
the Crown on your Head. Truly, Sir, Rome's Prelat did not deal well by you, nor
you by your self. You may remember it appeared to your Red-Letter Friends, as
if the Grandeur of the Popish Religion and Superstition had been your Gracious
Aim and Design, and that not without Reason; for in a most decent manner you
lost the Crown, and the little Gentleman his Dominion: Nay, they hold up their
Hands, lift up their Eyes, and curse that old Coxcomb Innocent XI. as the worst
and basest of Men, that betrayed the Interest of the Church, in not doing his
Duty to which he was obliged, viz. in seconding such a Glorious Design and
Undertaking: But this thing he never did, nor do I believe any of his
Successors ever will; for in my Conscience I believe they have too much Sense
to attempt the Support of a falling House, notwithstanding the Conduct and
Courage they may pretend to, in Cases that are of that Weight and Difficulty.
It Is true, Odescalchi pretended he was to act, but 'twas according to his own
Reason, not according to your Sense, which if he had followed, he might have
abdicated Rome the very Day you were driven out of England: Therefore what a
Varlet you had to do withal judge you. Truly he saw that you were losing, and
that you did in time in a comfortable way quit the Kingdom of England, and
therefore ought to have sacrificed even the Papacy on your behalf: But he was
so far from that piece of Heroic Justice, that I am persuaded the old Priest
would scarce have sacrificed a Sop in his Dripping-Pan to your Service. Well
then, what is next? Since the Church left you, I pray what has the French
Monarch done for you? I must confess he has done more for you than the Church
did, for she left you betimes, but he allows you a good Pension, and has not
as yet taken it away; he does not give and take away Pensions at pleasure, and
say, he has no Money; no, it is below him. But what is the Reason he does not
come over with you, and fix your sweet Bum in the Royal Chair, and return (as
you said he would) to France again, without putting us to the Charge of a Jack
of small Beer for his Pains? Or since both the Pope and French King have not
done their Duties, what is the Reason that you, being a Man of Courage, (ask Tom
Jenner else) that has fought so many bloody Battles for the Honor to the
English Nation, and on behalf of the Crown, (tho Old Hodg, and a Conclave of
Inferior Clergymen consulted all the History of your Life, but could not find
one Word of it, except that which saved them from the Gallows) did not fight
one single Battle to keep the Crown upon your Head? You might have done it, and
your Clothes have sat never the worse upon your Back. Well, you had the Courage
to run, and needs must when the Devil drives, and so there is the End of an old
Song.

I have thought upon your Case with as much deliberation as ever the Cathedral
Logger-head of a Priest did of getting a Bishopric, by threatening us with
disputed Titles, and an endless War, and yet could never make any thing you
ever said or did to be of a Piece: Therefore I shall ask you a few Questions,
and hope you will give me the Satisfaction that one Gentleman ought to give
another; I do not mean thereby to challenge you, for I am no Swords-man I
assure you, and I think you never took any great delight in one, unless it was
to hang by your Side. As for your Enemies, I think you scarce ever fought with
any, unless it were at the Old Bailey, King's Bench Court, or Western-Circuit,
where the Odds were ten thousand to one on your Side: therefore I mean by
Satisfaction, a plain honest Answer to the following Questions.

1. I remember the villainous Bishops of Scotland took it as a great Affront,
that our Parliament in England could not reconcile the Security of the
Protestant Religion with the admitting of you to be King. Now these Bishops,
poor Rogues, had clear another Notion of the Business, and thought it might be
done with as much ease, as for an English Man to catch the Itch in a Scottish
Laird's House, and therefore went roundly to work, and procured your Brother to
call a Parliament, and constitute you High-Commissioner; which was no sooner
said but done, and your Succession settled; and truly you appeared very
formidable in that Kingdom: Nay, the Government there did in a manner protect
you from the Parliament in England that would have excluded you; Nay, Dr.
Nasty-Gusts, the then Bishop of Edinburgh, found they had done the Business so
well, that he blessed God the Parliament of Scotland had made such a happy
Progress in reducing the Laws of Scotland to the Will of the King. Now after
all this Pother that was made about you, pray how came it that you found no
more Friends in Scotland? Truly at one time I thought the Courtiers there would
have pulled out both their Eyes to have served you; yet when you stood in need
of them, there were but few that appeared for you. Truly poor Pilgarlick did
stand and wonder at the thing; and advising with a parcel of honest Fellows
over a Dish of Coffee at a Coffee-house near the Old House, out of which the
Prince of Orange warned you to be gone without any more to do; one of the
Company was very frank in the Point, and told the Company plainly, that Fear
and Interest were the two great Hinges on which the Actions of Mankind did
turn, and thereby insinuated that Fear made them stand for you against the
Parliament of England, and Interest made them be against you with K. William.
Well, what then? Truly I thought with my self, that the Princes of this World
ought to be virtuous to a very high degree, and to have a Magazine of
Assurance, because their Favors are more acceptable than their Persons are
beloved. I confess Princes are in a fair way to be beloved when they put
themselves in a Posture of doing much good; and that Prince is sure of the
Affections of his People, who will endeavor with all sweetness to gain their
Hearts. I have therefore this one thing to say, that if you had secured your
Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, you might have done mighty things. I pray, Sir,
why did you not cultivate your natural Qualities, in order to have secured you
an Interest in that Kingdom? Truly the Reason is plain, because you had none
about you but mercenary Rascals that ruined you by their Flatteries. And did
you not find your self in a most forlorn Solitude, notwithstanding their Scots
Caresses, when you really stood in need of their help? And should K. William
have any of your Rogues about him, I can not but think they would serve him as
they did you, leave him when he has most need of them.

2. You having conversed in Scotland, and the Bishops there hanging about you,
and giving you all the Scots Government could afford, I pray resolve me what
Religion those Rogues were of? Certainly if they were Protestants, they have
showed themselves to have as little Brains as your Worship; for I find by their
management of themselves whilst you afforded them your Gracious Presence, as
well as before and since you left us, they neither understood the Interest of
their Traitorous Hierarchy, nor of Religion. In a word, one would think by the
Current of their Actions, they had been a parcel of Irish Teagues tricked up
with the Dress of a true Scots Clergyman; for they must surely be judged Sots
to the highest Degree, if ignorant of the Disgust they had caused in the People
of that Kingdom, by embracing your Gracious Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, in favor of the villainous Popish Crew.

It may be you will say, that to your own knowledge they were Protestants at the
Bottom. To this I answer, That what either your Brother or you ever said,
weighed no more with me than if you had sworn Mary Queen of Scots had lived and
died an honest true English Virgin. But what is it to the Point what they were
at the Bottom? I am sure they and you were a parcel of Sowce-Crowns, to think
the Scots would long endure Popery and Arbitrary Power always to domineer over
them. Truly Experience has taught us, (tho you and your villainous Scots
Bishops were above such Teachings) that the poor Scots wanted but a Leader of
Resolution and Bravery, and they had thrown off your Brother's Yoke and yours
long before the Prince of Orange's coming.

Object. You may say, because they wrote to you, and told you that the
Enterprise of the Prince of Orange was a detestable Invasion, therefore you
judged them Protestants, they also having been always against such things.

Answ. It seems they were for Passive-Obedience and Non-resistance: For I do
not find that they, or any of their Admirers, stirred one step to serve you;
and you know that Gracious Doctrine has saved the Credit of many a Coward in
the World; and therefore your Brother and you promoted it with all the Zeal two
such Babes of Grace could show, lest the true Protestant Interest should have
stormed Babylon, and all the Hellish Crew she has nourished ever since your
Restoration till this Day. But they were pleased to say, that the Glorious
Enterprise of the Prince of Orange was a detestable Invasion. What! did this
bespeak them to be Protestants? Well then let me tell you, that your Great Ally
might as well wear the Name, and all the French Court, and your villainous Party
here at home, for I believe they have said so ten thousand times: But I do no
more believe they were Protestants, than I believe Old Hodg an honest Man, or
R. Ferguson to be without three false Quarters. I pray, Sir, what did they do
for the Protestant Interest? We had seven Bishops (good Lord) went to the
Tower, and all for the sake of the Protestant Religion: I was not a bit sorry,
nor should I have been if all the twenty six had gone upon the same Account,
tho they had lain by it as long as I and the rest of my fellow Prisoners did in
the King's Bench for the Testimony of a good Conscience: But what your
English-Bishops did for the Interest of the Protestant Religion, I will leave
to better Pens; but for your Scots Tools, did they not by their Treachery and
Lewdness render themselves the Abomination of the People?

3. I pray let me ask you a third Question, What was the Reason that,
notwithstanding the Advice of your Devilish Jesuits to the contrary, you would
not stay and see the joyful Sight the People of England saw, and that after so
many Divisions occasioned by your Brother's Reign and yours, viz. Our King and
the Parliament so happily united together? You say you ventured your Life on
behalf of the Nation; and since your Grace and Favor was such, as not to
strike one Stroke to keep the Crown upon your Head, you might have been so
good-natured as to have staid and seen our King leaving his Interest to the
management of his Parliament, on purpose to take care of theirs and his, and
the Welfare of all Europe. The King (God bless him) remitted Chimney-money, and
entirely threw himself upon the Affections of his People, and you threw your
self upon the Affection of the French King. I pray try his Affection, and let
me know by the next how he uses you, and why you would not gratify your sweet
self with this goodly Sight.

4. Your Villains are ever and anon checking me with my being convicted for two
pretended Perjuries, especially a Friend of yours in a certain Place where your
Name is sometimes mentioned, but not much to the Advantage of you or your
Villainous Crew. You being a Man of great Judgment and Conscience, I ask you
whether or no for such a Villain to be in a Conspiracy against the Life of the
King with three Cousin-Germans at once, or to have a Hand in, or justifying the
forging of a Seal to hold an Estate, or suborning of Witnesses to swear that
that was as false as any thing under the Sun could be true, whose own dear
Relation died upon the Spot with a false Oath in his Mouth, ought not rather to
have held his Tongue, and let me alone, and sat down with silence, till he had
cleared himself and Family in the first place? The Fellow had once a Command,
but wanting Courage, Conduct, Honor and Honesty, he was fairly dismissed. If
you are willing, I suppose he is ready to serve you in a mean Capacity, a
Footman rather than fail, being conscious in himself that his Reputation in the
World will not engage him to a much greater Trust: Nay, Sir, he may make a
Priest if you please, for I think he is too lewd to be a Layman.

I have more Questions to ask you, but I will not give you the trouble now, but
ask you only how you do, and how my Landlady and the little Cub have their
Health? I suppose you have kept a merry Christmas at St. Germains; and I hope
you will keep Christmas there or elsewhere abroad till you draw your last
Breath. I understand the French King takes much pleasure in your Company; I do
not envy his Happiness in the least, and shall no more mourn for it than an old
Friend of yours did for his Father's Death, after he had cheated the old
Gentleman of a fair Estate, and left him four hundred Pounds per Annum as a
sine Cura* the better to enable him to drink Ale in his old Age: He now and
then bellows for you as loud as some Cattle do when they want Fodder, with whom
he has had to do in his Lifetime. O had the Courage of his Hands kept pace
with the Rhodomontades of his villainous Tongue, for ought I know he and Sir
John Fenwick might have done Wonders toward your changing the Air you live in.
I have seen him hugging that Traitor as the Devil hugged the Witch; and being a
dutiful obedient Child to his old Sire, you would do well to send the Tiler's
Son to learn of him. But I hasten to your Charge, and proceed to the twenty
second Article, which you will do well to consider.

Article XXII.
YOUR Brother and you were very industrious in misapplying of the Taxes and
Subsidies given by Parliament: When they gave Money for any one or more
particular Uses, it is well known that for the most part they were not
answered, to the great hazard of the Kingdom: But here I must particularize.

1. The Parliament in lieu of several Advantages the Crown made, by which
public Housekeeping was maintained in your Father's Reign, to the Glory of
the English Nation, gave the Hereditary Excise, and took those Advantages away
by Act of Parliament, who thought of nothing less than that the Public Tables
should have been kept up: But you and your Brother having traveled abroad, and
having not been much troubled with the smell of Victuals, when you were come
home you began your Show with open Housekeeping; but it was so offensive to
your tender Stomachs that it was laid aside, judging your manner of living at
Bruxels more suitable to the Constitutions of your Bodies: And upon laying down
of Housekeeping, you know what use the Hereditary Excise was put to, against
the Intent and Meaning of the Act of Parliament that settled it.

2. The Customs were given by Parliament in a great measure for the Support of
the Navy, which is the Bulwark of England: But how they were applied to that
Use, let all the World judge; part of the Customs of England having been paid in
Pensions, and a great part for secret Services. I am sure when the King had
occasion either to repair or fit out a Fleet, or build Ships, a particular Tax
was made for those Purposes.

3. Your Brother was forced to borrow a great Sum of Money of the City, nay
several in the Year 1664, at which many stood in admiration how he should lie
under such a necessity of Money. It Is true, there was a great Army to be paid
off and disbanded, but for that the Convention had made a good Provision, had
it not been misapplied; and he had the Excise settled on him, valued at 500000
l. per Annum, the Customs then valued at 600000 l. the Chimney-Money 150000 l.
the Arrears of twelve Months Assessment commencing the 25th of December 1659:
The Post Office, which was valued at 50000 l. per Annum; and the Arrears of the
Excise and new Imposts: And in the second Session of the Long Parliament, he
had given him 1270000 l. and a Benevolence, and 60000 l. to the poor Cavaleers,
to gratify them in some measure for drinking the King's Health, and a farther
Relief to the poor maimed Officers who had served your Father in the late Wars
he wickedly raised against his People; and also four entire Subsidies by the
Laity, and four by the Clergy; besides the forfeited Estates of those that put
your Father to death, whether in England or Ireland. Now seeing after all this
your Brother was in Debt so soon after his Restoration, can we conclude any
otherwise than that you joined together to spend those Revenues, Taxes, etc. in
other ways than the Parliament intended? Pray how much did you receive out of
the Treasury for Secret Service, to maintain a whole Regiment of Trapans, from
one end of the Kingdom to the other? If there was such a necessity of
trapanning, why was not the Parliament moved for an Establishment to keep those
Rogues (that drew poor Men into Plots, and then swore against them, nay for
hearing the Treason they themselves spoke) in constant pay? But when the
Parliament had given Money for the Honor and Safety of the Government, you
spent it upon these Men that disturbed its Peace, and rendered it vile and
contemptible: And the Money given to fit out a Fleet, was expended chiefly in
rigging up a Fleet of Land Fireships, a parcel of nasty Whores that were even
the Scandal of their own Profession of Whoring, as also the much admired Pimps
and Bawds.

4. You know the Parliament at Oxford in 1665, gave a mighty Tax of 2500000 l.
by which we thought the War against the Dutch would have been carried on with
great Vigor and Application, the Money being given for that End; and truly we
did provide a Fleet, but then what Use 1250000 l. was put to, the Seamen not
being paid, is worth the knowing. You may remember little was done in the War
in 1666, it being famous for Sir Robert Holms's admirable Expedition to the
Fly, where he burnt 150 Fisher-boats, and the never-to-be-forgotten Fire of
London: But your Brother and you having occasion for the aforesaid Sum, you
fitted out no Fleet in 1667, for your Mother had assured your Brother and you,
that the French King had told her the Dutch would not be out that Year, and so
we lay still: But the Dutch provided for War, and came to save us some Charges,
and burnt our Ships in Chatham-Harbour. But, Sir, I observe, that tho your
Brother was merry and feeding his Ducks, yet there was not a Penny of Money,
and therefore the Parliament was called, and when the time of their Sitting
came, they provided Money for the Dutch who wanted our Money; and we wanting
Peace, were forced to take such a Peace as the French King would give us.

Now, Sir, do but observe, that had we applied the Money given to carry on the
Dutch War to that use, our Ships had not (to our great Dishonor) been burnt in
Port. But, I pray, what use was 1250000 l. put to? You know your Brother had
contracted a great Debt with Cleveland that nasty Whore, and another Debt to
the Pimps, who, poor Rogues, had had no great matter of Pay in two Years; and
the poor Men that fired London were not to be slighted, for the Labourer was
worthy of his Hire. Your Priests complained, and their Mouths were to be
stopped; and the Queen Mother must have a Present for interposing with the
French King for that base Peace: So that truly there was little or no Money
left. Thus you may see what was the dismal Effect of this misapplying the
Public Money. Nay, Sir, you may remember that the Seamen came down in great
Bodies to you for Pay; and some of them were in a most gracious manner
apprehended, and hanged for only asking for their Own, which they had so dearly
earned with the hazard of their Lives.

5. I must not omit telling you, that after the Peace with the Dutch was
concluded, tho but a base one, yet we that espoused their Cause at that time,
were exceeding glad of the Peace: There was a Triple League concluded between
the Swede, the Dutch, and our Selves, for which great Sums of Money were given,
as well for a Compensation to the King's Grace in making it, as to help him to
support it, in order to bridle the French King's Insolence: So that your
Brother had two Millions and a half Sterling in one Year's time for this Triple
League; but it is well known that upon the strength of this Stock a Peace was
clapped up with the French King, the Triple League shamefully broken, the second
wicked War made upon the Dutch, and the Exchequer shut up, and all this through
the Misapplication of the Treasure of the Nation.

Sir, let me observe this to you, that your Brother by this Triple League had
gained much of the Love of his People, and you your self shared in it too, tho
you had no hand in that League, unless it were to break it, which the People
did not see for some time. The Design of your Sister's coming being very dark,
it past only for a bare Interview: But Coventry was a considerable Gainer,
whilst another lost 2200 l. in the Treaty of Nimeguen; and Coventry had 10000
l. and above 100000 Pistols of the French King, for his special Service in that
Affair: All the Ministers sent to Foreign Courts to damn that good Work, were
rewarded, even Sir William Lockyard escaped not the French King's Favor for
the Service he did in that Affair: But tho your Brother had not only reconciled
his Parliament to him, by severely treating the Earl of Clarendon for all the
good Service, and united them so to him by this League, that they were ready to
give him all they had, yet the Tables were quite turned when they saw into his
Proceedings, and hated him and you too as such Villainous Tools to satisfy (if
possible) the French King's Pride and Ambition: Nay, some of your Favorites
were so offended at these ungodly Miscarriages, that they could not but declare
their Resentments of this villainous Misapplication of the Treasure of the
Nation, that it cost them their Places in the Committee of Foreign Affairs.

6. Remember that your Band of Pensioners gave the King another small Spell of
1250000 l. for his extraordinary Occasions; one would have thought those
Liberal Givers designed it for carrying on the War, but it was so ill a One,
that those Scoundrels were ashamed of it, and would not say it was for that
Use, tho they had a pretty deal of Cabbage out of it for their own
extraordinary Occasions. How was the rest spent? Was it applied to the fitting
out your Fleet? No, there was a French Supply for that, and this was made use
of for an Army that was to have paid themselves out of the Treasure, not of
Amsterdam but of London; which being smoaked in time, the Army was in part
ordered to be disbanded, and Money given for that Use; but you made bold to
send them into the French Service, and the Money was made use of to other
Purposes of far greater Advantage to the Conspirators at Whitehall.

7. There was a Tax of 600000 l. given for building and furnishing of Ships
with very great Ease; for your Pensioners were willing to confirm their
Continuation, or else they had been undone; and since their Hand was in, they
gave the additional Excise of Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for three Years:
Which Liberality of theirs was an absolute Orvietan against a Dissolution. I
pray, Sir, what Ships were built that were of Service? I think you had better
have called it an Act for the extraordinary Occasions of the villainous
Builders, for they got part of the Money, and we but a few useless Ships: Nay,
I think some of the Ship Money was applied to supply the extraordinary
Occasions of Portsmouth, that nasty Whore, and the rest of the Pimps and Bawds
at Whitehall: And upon the strength of the Additional Excise, you and your
Conspirators most bravely matured your Counsels, in order to make the Nation
die the second Death.

8. There was 1200000 l. given your Brother to enter into an actual War with
France, yet with that you clapped up a more close Alliance with France, and with
the Act you and your Conspirators begged a Million of Money; this is another
instance of your Misapplication of the Nation's Treasure. But this by the way
observe, that this Peace which you and your Conspirators made with France was
but a Treacherous one; and it manifested both your Brother and you to be such
Persons with whom the Nation's Money was not to be trusted, since the trusting
you with such immense Sums tended so much to the endangering the Kingdom.

9. Your Pensioners finding there was no War made against France in pursuance
of the said Act, and that the Army was a great Grievance to the Nation, gave
six hundred and odd thousand Pounds to disband them; yet with that Money you
rather augmented your Forces, and kept up your Army to the great hazard of the
Peace of the Kingdom. Nay, Sir, in a word, to order the Money in a Bill so as
to prevent its being embezeled, was argument enough to make it miscarry, for
you chose rather to go without it than it should be appropriated to any
particular use.

10. The Pensioner Parliament having been your Drudges for eighteen Years, and
beginning to have their Eyes a little too much opened, it was high time to part
with them: therefore having granted the aforesaid Sum of 600 and odd thousand
Pounds to disband the Army, and the additional Duty upon Wines for three Years,
and being that Sessions disposed to give no more Money, your Brother having
sworn on the 29th of December (laying his Sacred Hands upon Portsmouths bare B
-- for the greater solemnity of the Business) that he would dissolve the
Parliament, came to the House on Monday the 30th of December 1678, and
prorogued them to the 4th of February; but on the 25th of January that
Parliament was by Proclamation dissolved, and the same Day Writs issued out for
the Meeting of a new one at Westminster the 6th of March following, which was
just forty Days between the Test and Return.

This Parliament being sat down, and finding the Army was a great Grievance to
the Nation, and like to be of fatal Consequence if maintained, passed a Bill
for the raising one hundred and ninety odd thousand Pounds to disband it: and
tho this was but a new Parliament, yet they understood your Brother's old
Practices, and yours too, of putting the Moneys to uses never intended by
Parliament, and therefore resolved never to trust you any more in the Matter of
Money; for as this was the least Tax, so it was the last that ever your Brother
saw from any Parliament in his Reign.

11. Another demonstration of the Point in hand, was the immense Sums Chiffinch
and the Privy Purse issued out for those Uses the Parliament never intended,
who designed the Money they had so freely given to defray the public Charge of
the Nation: but since Chiffinch had the disposal of so much, why did not the
Parliament give that Rascally Pimp, and the Whore his -- who was Whore and
Papist enough (as well as a Duchess) to serve you, Sir, a swinging Sum for
their extraordinary Occasions, for they were both Laborers in this Vineyard?
And truly the work of the Night lying upon their Hands somewhat too hard, they
took in a Rogue that was a Fellow Laborer with them till the Death of Charles
II. And who had the gracious Opportunity of robbing his Closet we cannot tell;
but old Chiffinch, if alive, could: and, Sir, if you will have it examined who
robbed yours, I believe a little Matter might find you out the Man; I have seen
the Rogue go to Chappel-Prayers, now Mass is out of Fashion, as devoutly as any
Pimp or Bawd about Whitehall ever did in yours or your Brother's Time.

But, Sir, you may see the just Judgment of Almighty God upon you; for as you
joined with your Brother and a parcel of thorow-pac'd Rogues to embezle the
Nation's Money to support a Crew of Pimps, Bawds, Whores, and Traitors,
Cutthroats, and Murderers; so your grand Pimp, and his villainous Deputy,
embezled (...) your Brother and you entrusted him or them with, to other Uses
and Purposes than ever you intended: for how Chiffinch could acquire such an
Estate honestly, since his way of living was so profuse, I cannot tell, unless
by these Courses; and whether that little scabby Rascal could attain to the
Estate he has without fingering some of your Jewels, when you did us the Honor
to leave us, I pray, Sir, let us join together to examine: if we carry our
Cause, it may for ought I know, be a Traveling Penny in your Pocket when you
leave St. Germaini.

Article XXIII.
YOUR Brother and you joined together to have all the Laws made against the
Popish Priests and Jesuits suspended. Truly, Sir, there need not many Arguments
to satisfy the Nation of the Truth of this Charge. For,

1. What Numbers came into the Realm notwithstanding the many severe Laws made
against them in the Times of Queen Elizabeth and James I. and that not
secretly, but barefacedly owning themselves to be such?

2. How many taken up by your Brother's Warrant, in Rose-Alley in Holborn, and
other Places, were discharged contrary to all Law, and the common Practice
thereof?

3. How many were protected by the Queen Dowager, and entertained as if they
were in her Service, which she could not have done, had not you and your
Brother withheld the Laws from being executed against them?

4. Those that did not know your Brother's and your Religion, apprehending some
of these Priests, were well chid by you; and several of them that owed Money,
you set their Creditors upon to their utter Ruin.

5. If the Justices in the Country did, according to their Oaths and Duty,
attempt the putting the Laws in Execution that were made to prevent England
being overstock'd with that sort of Vermin, were they not turned out with this
Brand, of being disturbers of the Peace of the Government? Witness Mr. Arnold,
Mr. Scudamore, cum multis aljis.

6. If any of your Brother's Whores, Pimps, or Bawds, or yours, were pleased to
turn Papist to oblige you, and continue in your Favor, had not they leave to
keep a stiff-rump'd Priest, or so, to help them in their great Affairs of
procuring a Catholic By-Whore, or Whores, with whom through Confession they
were acquainted? And, Sir, did they not pimp at a more reasonable Rate than
Chiffinch or his Deputy did, in order to promote the Catholic Cause?

7. Did you not support and maintain a great number of them, to the Tune of
eighteen Pence a Day, at St. James's, for the Service of your Italian Comrade,
at the Expense of the Public, for secret Service? And what secret Service they
did, Mrs. Junipor can tell, I suppose, as well if not better than your sweet
self: and these being well paid, was it not your Care to have them Men of good
Parts, tho of little or no Learning?

8. Did not your Brother and you, and your Council, put a Test upon these
Priests, that they should be true to yours and the French King's Interest, and
not refuse any Service in order thereunto that lay in their Power?

9. Were not these Priests your Spies and Trapans about the Kingdom, to draw
Men into Plots and Conspiracies? And did they not do your Business in those
Cases with that Dexterity, that you gained your point of murdering several
Persons, and rendering the poor Dissenters obnoxious to your Pensioner
Parliament, in order to get severe Laws made against them, whilst your
villainous Romish Priests slept in a whole Skin; and Meetings of Protestants
used with all the Violence imaginable, whilst these Men walked about the
Streets, going from House to House, and exercising their Functions with
impunity? Whence it is plain the Laws were not let loose against them.

10. When the Popish Plot was discovered, and several Priests, Friars, Monks
and Jesuits were Indicted, Arraigned, Tried, Convicted, and Condemned, were
they not discharged out of Prison? And were not Alderman Pilkington, and Mr.
Shute, when Sheriffs of London, commanded to discharge them out of Newgate, and
upon refusal of such an Arbitrary and Illegal Command, committed Prisoners to
the Tower? And were they not then pardoned, as also several Priests in the
King's Bench, and diverse parts of the Kingdom, tho some did at that juncture
dance the Rope full sore against your Brother's Will and yours? And those who
you procured to be pardoned, were suffered to come into Prison to insult over
us poor Protestants, who were committed to Prison for the Truth and Testimony
of a good Conscience.

Article XXIV.
THE Loss of the Dominion of the Seas was wholly owing to the Treachery of you
and your villainous Party. It Is true, your Brother did attempt the Security of
the Seas, in supplying the defect of his Coin by a few Copper Farthings,
whereby his Sacred Resolution was made public, of claiming and preserving the
Dominion of the Seas: but finding that sort of Metal would not do, he changed
them into Lead, and so the Business was done to all intents and purposes, as if
your Minister Ned Petre had contrived the Business himself, without the help of
his Fellow Laborer of Pensilvania in that mighty Work. But I shall be very
plain in this Point, and show the Steps you took, whilst Lord High Admiral of
England, to betray the English Nation into the Loss of the Dominion of the
Seas, which was never attempted till your Brother was called Home by the People
of England, in company with your self, when you were advanced to that great
Place of Trust, which you held for several Years to the Nation's great
Dishonor; and when you quitted the Employment, you procured Persons of your
own Nomination to succeed you, who like Villains pursued the Measures you gave
them in executing that Office, by which the aforesaid Loss was, to your Heart's
content, in a great measure completed. I remember shortly after your Brother's
Restoration, the French King obtained leave of him and you to bring 12 Ships of
War through the Channel; but I do not remember of late Years he ever asked such a
Boon of either of you, nor indeed do I find that any of his Men of War did
willingly observe you so far, as to give ours the Honor of the Flag, or strike
to us in the Channel. Now pray observe,

1. Did you not, instead of able Seamen of known Experience and Courage, prefer
a parcel of ignorant and cowardly Rascals, Footmen, Pages, Pimps, etc. to be
Captains and Lieutenants, to the great discouragement of the Seamen? And for a
Man to be an able Seaman, was enough to incapacitate him for a Commission, you
judging the Commands of the Royal Navy too great and high for such Men. Did not
your Creatures then and since say, that the King's Castles were not built to be
commanded by Tarpawlins? And what Conduct there was since your disposing of the
Commands of the Fleet, is well remembered, as also how ridiculous it was judged,
both by the Dutch, French, and other Nations, that did, and still do advance
their Navigation.

It is true, when your Brother came home, he found a Noble Navy in good Order,
and the Fleet in good Hands: But as Captains and Lieutenants died, or were
discharged the Service, either by Age or otherwise, the aforesaid Rogues were
put in their Places, who when they came home from any Voyage, have many times
put themselves under the protection of the Friars, that with peace they might
spend their Money in Whoring and Drinking, and have lived so lewdly as to be a
Reproach even to the Friars where they sheltered themselves.

2. As you took no Care of good Officers, so neither of the Breed of Seamen,
for all the Fishery of England is sunk to nothing. You let the French ravish
the New Foundland Trade, by which that Fishery is lost, and the Greenland
Trade is gone, and the Northern Fishery is come to nothing, as is also the
Iseland Trade. The French and Dutch are Masters of these Fisheries, and we have
nothing now lest but the Yarmouth-Fishery, which is fallen above 70 in the
Hundred. It is most notorious that your Brother and you were Enemies to the
Happiness, Glory and Strength of the Nation, and therefore made it your
Business to destroy every thing that might contribute to the Advancement
thereof.

3. In order to lose the Dominion of the Seas, as you took no Care of the
Increase of Seamen, so how were those that you impressed aboard the Fleet under
your Command, used by your Land-loping Rascals, that could signalize themselves
no other ways than by breaking the Seamens Bones? Nay, their Warrant-Officers,
it may be, did not escape their Hands. This Usage made Men choose rather to lose
their Pay, and run from their Ships: An Instance of which we had in the
Success, a Fifth-rate Frigot, (besides other Ships) where 50 Seamen, together
with the Watch that looked to them, went away in the Night because of their ill
usage by these mean Rascals that knew not the Worth and Value of a Seaman. This
was the Disease that raged in a great part of the Fleet, which made them quit
the English Service, and go into Foreign Services, where they expected better
Usage.

4. How have our Seamen been destroyed by those wicked Wars you made against
the Dutch, and base Compliance with the Pirates of Algiers, etc. in suffering
our Seamen to lie in Captivity till they died, or were useless, unless they
could redeem themselves at the Market-price? By this means we lost the use of
several hundred Seamen. The last good Peace that was made, was by Sir John
Lawson, but ever since we have been betrayed by your Villains in that
Particular. I remember that several times Letters Patents were granted to
collect the charitable Benevolence of well-disposed People; but that when
considerable Sums have been gathered, they have been put into the Hands of
Cheats, who perverted the Money to their own Uses, and let the poor Seamen
perish in most miserable Slavery.

5. How have you taught the French to understand our Coasts, and way of
fighting, and building Ships? Your Brother and you furnished them with Timber,
Builders, and Models of our Ships; nay, you permitted them to rob and plunder
us, to beat and murder our Seamen, and never would seek Redress: How could you
expect the Dominion of the Seas upon these Terms?

6. Was it not your Brother's Design to debauch the Nation? And did you not
place in the Fleet such Commanders as debauched our Seamen? by which means in a
great measure they lost their old brave English Courage. When our Seamen grow
Effeminate, and lose that Courage which with God's Blessing made them
victorious, England is but in a lamentable Condition.

7. You punished, or at least discountenanced such Officers as stood for the
Honor of the Flag. How often did the French refuse it? And when some
Broad-sides were exchanged, and the French came off by the Lee, their
Ambassador used to complain, and the Captain was severely checked, if not
turned out: For you were converted to such a Degree of Zeal to the French King,
that we must lose the Dominion of the Seas, rather than the Holy Alliance with
that Monster should in the least be entrenched; and in the Private League your
Brother made with that King, the Business of the Flag was not mentioned; and
how indifferent your Brother and you were in the Case when it was in relation
to the French, is not yet forgotten.

Article XXV.
YOU stand charged with refusing the Test that was provided by Parliament, and
passed (tho very unwillingly) by your Brother to prevent Popery. Truly we could
not but laugh in our Sleeves when we saw your self with a sort of Irish
Magnanimity quit your great Employments for a Religion that makes Men Fools,
and renders them as the Sport of the Age: But great Examples go a great way in
such Cases. When the Popish Party saw your Resolution to quit all rather than
your Religion, (scarce worth the keeping) several of them took up the Cross,
and quitted their Employments also, rather than be false to your Cause and
Interest: They did not do as your Brother did, retain the Popish Religion, and
yet ever and anon (to get a little Money of the Parliament) was content to pass
a Bill, or emit a Proclamation or two to the Prejudice of that Religion his
Soul was most affected with, if with any. Alas good Man, he was for securing
the main Chance: If he had not complied for a little Money, the Noble Fleet at
Whitehall must have lain by the Walls without rigging, to the great
Disparagement of the old Trade of Whoring: But as for your part, you were
resolved to give up your self to Rome, and the French King, which you could not
have done if you had swallowed the Test. Therefore as a great piece of
Self-denial, away go all Employments, by which you had ruined the Nation; for
you questioned not but to carry on your Conspiracy against the Protestant
Religion and Interest, by the help of your good and loving Brother,
notwithstanding your acquittal of them. And,

1. You engaged the French King to a closer Friendship with you, by which you
were sure, not only of his Interest, but his Purse, to assist you against your
Enemies and his, even that Parliament that advanced this new State-Purgatory in
opposition to you and your cursed Villains, by which they had declared
themselves the French King's and your mortal Enemies, who both of you drove on
so furiously to have that Parliament dissolved, in revenge for their laying
such a Stumbling Block in the way of your Self and Party: For as long as these
Purgatory-makers were in being, it was scarce possible for you to subdue the
Northern Heresy, that had so long domineered in the World: And he and you
proposed by that Method to be put into such a Condition as should enable you to
give the Protestant Religion such a Blow as it had not received since its first
Birth; and to give you your due, your Design of ruining the Protestant Religion
was not ill laid; and had you not over-done, your Design would not have been so
soon undone.

2. By your not taking the Test, you engaged a Party of Case-hardned Villains
to espouse your Cause and Interest; and for true proof of their Integrity, they
entered with you into a strict Conspiracy against our Religion, Laws and
Liberties: For seeing they had met with such a terrible Blow from that
Parliament, they were resolved to try what they could recover by way of
Reprisal from the Dutch, and hoped some good would come of continuing the War
with them; but finding themselves defeated there, you and they resolved, with
the gracious Consent of your Brother, that England it self rather than fail
should be made a Reprisal: Which Design prospered so well upon your Hands, that
you went on as merrily as might be in your Plous Work; and accordingly exposed
the Nation to the Fury of the French: And had old Clifford had the Grace not to
have hanged himself, he would have appeared a very deserving Person, and
eminent in that Holy Confederacy. However, you did not fail of your Enterprise
in some measure of ruining the Nation, because of the Protestant Purgatory that
was found out for its Service, tho you could not find such a one in all your
Romish Library.

3. By this Example you engaged a great number of Priests and Jesuits to infest
the Kingdom, in order to storm the Church of England, and would have ravished
her, poor Gentlewoman, had she not held up her Smock to save them the trouble;
and these Varlots, with the Argument of your Stedfastness to the Catholic
Religion, perverted very many of the lewder sort of People, both Male and
Female: And seeing such a Number brought into your Ark, you used to say, you
doubted not of an Army of Roman Catholics to establish the Popish Religion.

4. You made these Villains thus perverted so bold and daring, that they drove
on with such Fury, as it was scarce possible for a Protestant, that was any
ways known to be zealous for his Religion, and for the Interest of his Country,
to walk near Whitehall or St. James's, without the danger at least of being
affronted or beaten: Whence it was that even that Purgatory-making Parliament
thought they had not done enough to expel that Religion, (whose Professors in
all Kingdoms stuck at nothing to establish their Superstition, and to that End
have troubled the Peace of the Christian World; and had at that time, by your
espousing their Cause, sufficiently strengthened, as was feared, their villainous
Party to the overthrow of the Protestant Interest) but resolved to use farther
means to prevent the Practices of these Rascals that were so notoriously wicked
as not any longer to be born.

One would have thought this Purgatory-Act should have done the Business, yet
it was backed with a multitude of Gracious Assurances to the Nation from your
Brother (a Person of great Integrity and Honor in his Promises) to maintain
and defend the Protestant Religion; for a Testimony whereof observe and
remember that the Cliffordian and French Designs were carried on
(notwithstanding the Test-Act) in 1673, 74, 75, 76, 77, and part of 78, in as
pernicious, tho different manner from your first Design, whose Method you were
forced to change by reason of that Act, which was so made as to execute it
self. And the Means of introducing that Religion seeming then at a stand, you
thought of a new Project, that in all probability might not attract that Envy
that the preferring of Papists in several great Places of Trust had done, yet
that the same Ends might be more certainly and easily, tho not so soon
obtained. Which brings me to

Article XXVI.
IN order to strengthen the Popish and French Interest, you were pleased to
take to Wife the Daughter of the Duke of Modena, whom you have and hold to this
Day, which was in it self a Scoundrel Match; but that it might appear somewhat
considerable, the French King declared her an adopted Daughter of France, and
promised to give her a Portion suitable thereunto, for her Father could not give
her a Groat: And whether he gave her a Portion or no at that time, I cannot
tell; if he did not, I suppose you will eat it out before you leave St.
Germains. Your Brother consented to the Match, without much difficulty, by a
good Lord, a Friend of yours, who consummated the Marriage by the Royal Consent
and Authority of your Brother, according to the Form used amongst Princes, as
your good Protestant Brother was pleased to express it.

Before this precious Bit of Italian Flesh could arrive in England, your
Conspirators who advised this Marriage, perceived that the 20th of October
would come, and that it might probably receive some Obstruction from the
Parliament, and that some other things were prepared against their meeting for
the curbing your Rogues, who were grown (as observed to you in the First Part)
damnably Insolent; for the Check the Test-Bill had given, was far less than the
Encouragement from this wicked Marriage: And that a fatal Blow might be given
to the Preparations of the then House of Commons in prejudice of your
Conspirators, you procured a Prorogation to the 27th of October 1673, whereby
to put an End to that Session, and all the Business unperfected in March 1671/3
should fall to the Ground. But pray what was the Matter? Why must some good
Bills fall to the Ground that were so well prepared in March 1672/3? Why truly
your Reasons for the Prorogation, if I am not much out, were these three.

1. To prevent and remove from your Brother all Temptations to break the
intended Marriage, and the French Alliance, the Parliament being like to use
their utmost endeavor to hinder the Consummation of that Marriage, which might
render the Popish Religion and the French Alliance impregnable. You know, Sir,
that Cardinal Howard promoted the Match to serve the Catholics, and the
Catholic Religion was your end too, since you were converted to such a degree
of Zeal, that Coleman your Secretary knew not his Head from his Heels, or
whether he was awake, or in a Dream: and then to strengthen the Interest of the
French King must be your design, since his Interest and yours were so
inseparably united, that he that was your Enemy, was an Enemy to his Interest;
and he that was an Enemy to his, was to your Interest also. Now what a wicked
Parliament was it that would have separated such an Interest, and oppose such a
Religion, in endeavoring to prevent so hopeful a Match, whereby, 1. The Folly;
2. The Malice of you and your Party did appear?

(1.) The Folly of your Party did appear, for that Parliament did never fail to
give Money whenever called for, if they were but indifferently well used; and
the King was generally unwilling to let a Session go off without some
Pocket-money for the modest Gentlewomen at Whitehall: therefore your Partisans
should rather have adjourned the Marriage, than prorogued the Parliament, who
having notice of the Conspiracy, (which you had managed more like an Irish
Teague than an English Statesman) were very angry at the King's breach of his
Word and Royal Promise made to them in March before: Therefore notwithstanding
the King's Speech, October. 20. for a swinging Supply for carrying on the War
against the Dutch, the Parliament would vote nothing but an Address against
this Match of yours with the Daughter of Modena; for they considered the Nation
was not able always to lie under the dispensation of parting with Money, to
secure the Popish Religion, and French Interest: And as a preparation to the
Address, you know they passed this Vote, viz. This House taking into
consideration the Condition of the Nation, will not take into any further
Debate or Consideration any Aid, Supply, or Charge upon the Subject, before the
time of the Payment of the eighteen Months Assesment, granted by a late Act of
Parliament, entitled, An Act for raising the Sum of 1238750 l. for the Supply
of his Majesty's present Occasions, be expired, unless it shall appear that the
obstinacy of the Dutch shall render it necessary; nor before this Kingdom be
effectually secured from the Danger of Popery, and Popish Counsels and
Counselors, and other present Grievances be redressed.

You having by your little Vermin given out with all Folly and Impudence, that
you stood in no need of a Parliament but to give Money; by this Vote they were
even with you, who with your Crew were so nettled at their Vote, that you were
resolved to give them a remove from your Councils: but that it might not seem
altogether upon the account of denying Money, you let the Parliament proceed,
and the Address was prepared with Reasons against this Match of yours, which I
have laid down in my first Part, and therefore wave them now; the Parliament
being assured that this Marriage at that time was not so far concluded, but
that for Reasons of State it might be rejected, as has been practiced in diverse
Nations, and even by the French themselves in several Examples, as manifestly
appears in the French Histories.

I having an Opportunity of discoursing about the Match, the Jesuits condemned
the Conduct of your Friends at St. James's, in deferring it till the Session
was so nigh, and then putting the Parliament off; whereas the Marriage ought
rather to have been suspended till the Parliament had given Money; and one
Million well husbanded, would have enabled your Brother to set up Arbitrary
Power, for the French King would have stood by him: And further, That your
Counselors had been too open in the steps they took in this Match, and had too
publicly boasted of the Advantage they should have by it, both as to France
and Religion, and had too much undervalued the Parliament, since you could not
at that Time subsist without one.

(2.) As your Party showed their Folly, so their Malice; for as the King was
unwilling to part without Money, and also to quit the French Interest, all the
Grievances of the Nation must be postpon'd, which were judged by you to be but
Trifles; if any difference did arise, it was their Faults to insist on such
small things: therefore with Indignation you procured them to be prorogued,
that they might recollect themselves, and basely comply with your wicked
Designs of destroying the Dutch, and advancing the Fr. Interest in this Match,
that they might for the future be of no use to you; for a moderate Sum of
Money, a Million or two, would, by the French King's Assistance, have been a
competent Stock to open Shop withal, that our Laws, Liberties and Religion too,
should have perished at one stroke, such was your Rage against us at that Day.
Your Bullies about the Town had the aid of your Purse to swagger against the
Parliament, and to admire the French King, and tell us how happy we were by
being embarked in the French Interest through this Match; and why should a damned
Parliament be suffered to sit till it was consummated beyond the Power of their
interposing in it? And the King was not to be trusted in this Affair, if a
Parliament were to sit, for he would be wheedled by the House of Commons, upon
the account of Money, to break off this hopeful Match, yea, and with the King
of France too; but keep him without a Parliament, and he would do any thing to
please the French King or your self. Now, Sir, from all this we may conclude
how foolish and malicious your Crew did show themselves in the Prorogation of
the Parliament, that the King might not be engaged by them to break off that
Match to the projudice of the Popish Religion, or the French Interest.

2. This was not the only Reason, for you had another before you, viz. The
consideration that the Bill for ease of Protestant Dissenters (whereby a major
part of them should have Liberty of Conscience, and be capable of
Church-preferment) had passed the Commons, and was sent up to the Lords in
March 1672/3, where it then remained, and would not long stick, as you and your
Party feared, before it would obtain the Royal Assent; which if once effected,
you foresaw the uniting the Protestant Interest would tend greatly to the
suppression of Popery, and consequently no hopes of that Religion's being
replanted here: but if you could any how prevent the passing that Bill, you
doubted not for all the Parliament could do, to be safe amongst so many
Dissenters, and drive on your Designs underhand for the destruction of all
Protestants. From hence, Sir, let me observe,

(1.) That this was a time when you and your Party were not for Liberty of
Conscience, because the uniting of Protestants by Liberty would be very fatal
to you, and therefore you got the Parliament prorogued, that this Blessing
might not fall upon you and your Friends. But how comes it to pass that you
gave God thanks that it was always your Judgment that all Men ought to have the
Liberty of their Consciences in Matters of Religion and Worship? Were not you a
most notorious Hypocrite to say so?

(2.) You must needs be engaged in a most Hellish Design against the Protestant
Religion, and your Party be resolved to proceed-no farther in any other Work,
but that must be destroyed, or else what needed so much Care for proroguing the
Parliament, that the Bill for Liberty of Conscience, then in the House of
Lords, might of course come to nothing? By which Prorogation you so offended
the Parliament, that you lost at least the Gift of a Million of Money.

(3.) It argued you certainly very full of Revenge, that because your Brother
was forced to break his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, you would
procure the Prorogation of a Parliament to break the Bill for it, tho it was
more legal and commendable in the Parliament, (notwithstanding the Loggerheaded
Reasons given against it in 1664, in a Session of the same Parliament) for by
it we saw plainly that an Arbitrary Declaration for Liberty of Conscience was
the Sense of your Soul, but a legal Liberty of Conscience you hated from the
bottom of your Heart, and would rather incur the Displeasure of a Parliament,
than they should have the doing of that which they would not suffer your
Brother, your Self and wicked Party to do in a most illegal manner, without the
Authority of Parliament.

(4.) I perceive at that time it was the Sense of the Lords, as well as of the
Commons, that such a Bill was necessary to secure the Protestant Religion, and
therefore it would have passed that House, and the King have given his Royal
Assent to it, if there had been but a Million or 1200000 Pounds in the Case:
Therefore that they might be better informed concerning the Convenience of your
Italian Match, and the Inconveniency of that Bill for Liberty of Conscience,
you obtained a Prorogation, tho your Brother, good Man, lost a swinging Tax by
the Bargain.

(5.) That you gained your Point in reference to Liberty of Conscience; for
Time you know is often Life to a Cause: And as the Protestant Interest run high
in the Session of Parliament in 1672/3, and this Act came from the Commons to
the Lords in favor of them, who had passed it but for want of Time, and
another Bill passed against Popery by which Clifford fell, and you and your
Party put out of Humor; so that Clifford's Fall might be gentle, an end was
put to that Session, the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience was broke or
cancelled; and in revenge you put a stop to the passing the Bill that would
have established Liberty of Conscience by a Law, by breaking up the Parliament
from October. 20. to 27. and then to Jan. 7. following. In this Recess you not
only completed the Italian Design, but so ordered the Matter, that when the
Parliament met in January, all Favor to Dissenters was killed as dead as a
Door-nail, and not one word of reviving the Bill for Liberty of Conscience was
heard of; but on the contrary our Prickear'd Priests were instructed to preach
this to be as true as the Gospel, that now there was no more Danger from the
Papists, but that the Phanaticks were the only dangerous Enemy; and you and the
Devil's Brokers had found out a Scots Lord, and 2 Men who then made a mighty
Figure at Court, that were impudent and desperate enough to put the King's
Affairs on so narrow and weak a Bottom: Nay, Old Lawderdale, rather than fail,
becomes a Patron of the Church; and who but he with his Guts was cried up by
our Parasitical Pulpit-hunters? Nay, I will say this for Clifford, that tho
Villain enough, yet his Principles were very generous in comparison of your new
Set of Juglers, whose Business it was to ruin those this Year they had
supported but the last; nay, give them their due, they would never forgive a
Man that had been but once in the Right. Those, Sir, were your trusty Cards,
and they agreed with our Spiritual Guides, and Roger their Master, not only in
Principles, but Passion too; therefore you presently joined with them in
directing the Judges to put the Laws in Execution against Dissenters; which was
done as you required.

(6.) Our Holy Churchmen, as their Zeal was much increased by your Influence
to suppress the Dissenters, so their Zeal against Popery was to all Intents and
Purposes extinguished, as if you and your Italian Mistress had been naturally
dead: For if any of the young Fry had preached against it, he was rebuked as
too Pragmatical and Saucy; and truly so they were that presumed to preach
against a Religion your Brother and you had ventured Soul and Body to advance,
in order to pox the whole Nation, both Men and Women: for the French Disease
was so Epidemical, that a Man could scarce find fair Quarter, no not in
the-Church or Chancel, unless he was of the French Interest. Thus you may
remember what Success attended your Design in proroguing the Parliament, by
which the Liberty of Conscience intended was defeated, and how its Defeat, with
the Consequences thereof, prospered upon your Hands. But what signifies all
this, since there was a French Interest, the Romish Religion, and an Italian
Comrade to support all? So much for your second Reason for proroguing that
Parliament.

3. And lastly, Your great Design in carrying on this Match by the Prorogation
of the Parliament, was to create a Jealousy between the King and them,
exasperating him with their Impertinency; and by your prevailing with him to
countenance that wicked Match, you exasperated the Parliament against the King:
For tho that Parliament should for ever after that Match have denied to give
Money, yet you were so sure of the French King, that you hoped by the help of
his Forces to have brought Popery in upon us, and with it Arbitrary Government;
the first of which your Popish Tools cried up as the best Religion, and our
High Church-Rogues in conjunction with them, cried up the last as the best of
Governments; yet at the same time they would deny it to be practicable here,
unless it pleased God to find out some way for both these great Churches to
unite together to suppress Phanaticism. But the Parliament saw into your Game,
and observed your Steps: You sunk much in their Opinion, therefore you resolved
they should sink in the King's Opinion, which occasioned so many Prorogations
when you and your Party had any Villainy in hand. I might have said more to this
Point, but that I have spoken to it in my First Part.

Article XXVII.
YOUR Brother and you made a Frenchman General of your Army, to the great
Dishonor of the English Nobility. This French General was then Count
Schomberg, and one of the Mareschals of France, and he was chosen to bear that
Trust before many valuable Noblemen we had at that Day. It Is true, he was a
great Soldier, and worthy to have commanded a better Army than you had at
Black Heath; but when he saw what Vermin you and your Crew had got together,
and that their Design was to plunder the City of London, and not to fight
against the Dutch, he fairly quitted his Post, and left you; tho, Sir, it is
not to be forgotten what Designs you would have engaged that Noble Person in,
for you proposed to your self and Friends that he being a French Man, would
have joined with you in the Design of Arbitrary Government; but when the thing
was put to him, he abhorred it, and would not therefore continue in the Command.

But what a Dishonor was this to the Nobility of England, that not one of them
could be found to take upon him such a Command? 1. Were they such Cowards that
they dare not undertake it? Or, 2. Were they so unskilful in the Affair, that
they could not with Honor do it? Or, 3. Was the Design so villainous, that they
were not to understand any part of it? Were you-resolved upon the French
Government? Then Schomberg you judged would join with you in that Affair: Or
were you resolved that Popery should proceed? Then you had the Judicious Major
General Fitzgerald that was to have done it. I believe, Sir, you despaired of
any of our Noblemen joining with you in these two Parts of your Design, Popery
and Arbitrary Power, and therefore sought for other Persons that might give
better hopes of approving themselves fit for your turn; which turned to an ill
Account, for it bred ill Blood in the Nobility against you and your villainous
Party.

Article XXVIII.
YOUR Brother and you oppressed the Kingdom of Scotland in order to ruin the
Protestant Interest there. Be pleased, Sir, to call to mind that when in the
Year 1660 it pleased God to restore your Brother to the Throne in that Ancient
Kingdom, the news of it was grateful to that People, hoping his Restoration
would prove a great Blessing and Comfort to them; and he had been so, if you
and your wicked Party had let him taken such Measures as would have settled
that Kingdom in Peace and Quietness. There are several Particulars relating to
that Kingdom worthy your Consideration; and supposing you may by Mrs. Abigail's
leave have now some time of thinking, I pray remember,

1. Upon your Brother's Restoration, notwithstanding the Troubles and hard
Usage the Scots had met with from your Father, (which cost him his Life at
long-run) and from Monk who for several Years had acted the part of a Tyrant in
his Government of that Kingdom, yet they took no advantage of these
Miscarriages, but with all cheerfulness put their Necks under your Brother's
Yoke of Absolute Prerogative, of choosing all Officers of State, Counselors and
Judges, in making War and Peace, and calling and dissolving Parliaments and
Conventions of State. It is well known how they had been provoked to renounce
your Father's Government, and put themselves under the Protection of some other
Prince, and might have defeated your Brother's Pretensions to that Kingdom,
since he renounced the Covenant he swore to maintain: But they forgot all this,
and gladly received him their King, and for Peace sake parted with many
Immunities which that Kingdom anciently had, hoping thereby to have engaged him
to be a Nursing Father to their Church, as then constituted according to the
Examples of the Reformers, and (as they judged) to the Word of God.

2. You cannot but remember that this was not the only Demonstration of the
great Loyalty of that People: For tho it is well known that a limited Power in
the Prince, and the support of it by the Peoples Purse, was the just Balance
of the Government of that and all other Kingdoms; yet forgetting all
Differences in your Father's Reign, they testified an affectionate Zeal to your
Brother, in making the Revenue above double what your Father or he possessed;
and had they given themselves up to an entire Vassalage, he could scarce have
desired such a Bounty; nay he thought it such a piece of exuberant Liberality,
that he was pleased to declare it was enough, and that he would have no more:
Yet the Commissioners that held the Parliaments, (notwithstanding the King was
sensible of the greatness of their Benevolence) have drawn forth several Taxes,
(pretending the King's great Necessities) even beyond the Ability of that
People.

3. They also complied with the desire of your Brother (by your procurement) to
submit to the Bondage and Slavery of a villainous standing Army, which they
called in an Act that raised it, An humble Tender to his Sacred Majesty, of the
Duty and Loyalty of his ancient Kingdom of Scotland: And as a Testimony of the
same, they did offer to the King 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse sufficiently armed,
with 40 days Provision, to be ready upon the King's call; and in the same Act
they declared, that if the King should have farther Use and Occasion for their
Service, the Kingdom would be ready every Man between Sixty and Sixteen, and
hazard their Lives and Fortunes, if called for by his Majesty, for the Safety
and Preservation of his Person, Authority, and Government. Sure one would think
you had given them some State Philtre, to create in them such a slavish Loyalty
and Love to your Brother's Person and Government.

4. Nay they went a step farther to please your Brother and your self, being
resolved not to fall short in expressing their Loyalty and Affection to him:
therefore do but observe them in another Act of Parliament, wherein they most
dutifully and humbly recognize his Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and declared in
the said Act, That the ordering and disposal of Trade with Foreign Nations, and
the laying Restraints and Impositions upon Foreign Imported Commodities, did
belong to his Majesty and his Successors, as an undoubted Privilege and
Prerogative of the Crown, and that therefore they might do therein as they
should judge fit for the good of the Kingdom.

5. These People certainly were bewitched with the thing called Loyalty, and
made it appear to the World that they placed the Security of all their
Interests more in their Confidence of the King's Goodness, than the firmest
Provision of the best Laws: for tho in the Parliament held by your Father in
Person, in 1641, many Acts were signed by him for settling their Religion,
Properties, and Liberties, which the deepest Consideration and Maturity of
Judgment imaginable, grounded upon long and well-weighed Experience, many and
well-managed Treaties, and the Mediation of England, could afford and furnish;
yet because the Glory of those Laws appeared to these Blockheads to be stained
by the remembrance of some previous Contentions, wherein they thought
themselves very unfortunate, by having your Father differ from them, to please
your Brother, at one blow they repealed the whole Proceeding of that
Parliament, and all the Laws then and there made for the Preservation of
Religion as aforesaid.

6. Those whom God will destroy he delivers up to Madness first, and s he did
these People, in evidencing an unparalled Submission to the King, and a
Resignation of all that was near and dear to them into his Hands: for tho that
Nation since its first Reformation from Popery, did continually oppose Prelacy,
yet after they had destroyed it, and enjoyed their Church under a Constitution
and Ministry according to their Hearts desire, in compliance with your Brother,
they parted with the Presbyterian Government, and reestablished Episcopacy, to
the Amazement of most Men; so acceptable was he to the Scots Parliament at that
Time. And for the carrying on your cursed Designs, you know how your Brother
made James Sharp, Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Farewell, and another whose Name occurs not
at present, to renounce their Presbyterian Ordination, who were made Deacons
and Priests, and then consecrated Bishops by the Bishop of Winchester, and two
others of that Gang: and four Scots Prelates thus made, the King fixed the
Government of that Church by Archbishops and Bishops, as in his Father's time
in 1637, who had the same Authority derived to them as they had in your
Grandfather's Reign: so by Proclamation bearing date Sept. 6. 1661. the
Presbyterian Government ceased to be to all Intents and Purposes; and the
Council suspended the Meeting of the Presbyteries till they had received Power,
not from Heaven, but from the Archbishops and Bishops, who were in a short
Time to enter upon their Government. To complete this Work, the Parliament in
the 2d Session reinstated the Bishops in the exercise of their Functions, and
restored them to all their Privileges, Dignities, Possessions, etc. Now one
would think this Compliance of the Nation should have obliged your Brother and
you to have treated them in some measure suitable to their Loyalty and slavish
Resignation of themselves.

Your great Instrument in carrying on this blessed Work of inslaving the
Kingdom of Scotland in these particulars, in order to your farther Designs, was
the Earl of Middleton, the first High Commissioner after your Brother's return,
who was most violent in pursuing this Change: but by his impetuous Violence in
this mighty Work, (on which he much valued himself) he rendered himself
obnoxious; and despising Lauderdale, who took hold of some of his Miscarriages,
in a short Time he was unhorsed by him; and Lauderdale procured the Commission
of Lord High Commissioner for the Earl of Rothes, by whom Middleton's
Parliament was dissolved; upon which Madam Van Harlot, their new Church,
appeared in its proper Colors, and being made Triumphant, it is well known what
Pranks the Whore played, what Tumults her Guides excited, and what Tragedies
her Reverend Clergy acted in your Brother's Reign. Nay, old Hodg was not so
much as advised withal in the Case; and every thing was carried on with that
Fury, that had not Sir Robert Murray come in to the Relief of the People, who
were on the very brink of Destruction, they must have inevitably perished. But,
Sir, I will not dwell here any longer, only tell you that Lauderdale was the
third Lord High Commissioner of Scotland, by whom a lamentable Scene of
Rogueries were acted, and by whom you made your blessed Steps to ruin that poor
Nation.

1. Your first Step to ruin Scotland, was the making Middleton and Lauderdale
so excessively great. In truth, to give the Beasts their due, as the Scottish
Nation was not able to bear their Greatness, so neither they to bear their own.
You remember that before Lauderdale was Commissioner, by reason of his being
sole Secretary of State for that Nation, and Court-minister, he had the
absolute Rule and disposing of the Affairs and Concerns of that Kingdom, which
gave great Offense to the Scots, who in the particulars abovesaid had showed
themselves so abominably Loyal as to quit their Religion, Laws, and Liberties,
to please your Brother and you. As for Middleton, he was invested with such
Powers, that Lauderdale was jealous of his Greatness, who seeing him exercise
his Power to the utmost, imagined there would be nothing for him to do, and
therefore (as I said) justled Middleton out; by whose Greatness Scotland, by
Consent of Parliament, delivered up all, as if Hallifax himself had issued
forth Quo Warranto's against their Franchises, both as to Liberty and Religion:
and you having had enough of Middleton's prostituting himself to your Brother's
Will and yours, exit Middleton, and enter Lauderdale, a case-hardened Rogue, a
Villain fit for the Devil's Service to all Intents and Purposes; who the more
easily to complete your wicked Designs, you may remember did basely debar his
Contrymen from speaking with the King otherwise than he pleased, for fear
they might tell Tales of his exorbitant Power, by which he disobliged them in
the highest; and by reason of his being mostly here at Court, the Scots
Noblemen and Gentlemen were subjugated to a base and vile dependence upon his
Creatures and Favorites, nay oftentimes upon his Servants, with whom it is
well known they transacted for obtaining and dispatching Gifts, and
Sign-manuals, and that it was by the said Lauderdale's Servants that
Protections to Debtors were so villanously obtained.

Give me leave, Sir, to put you in mind how hurtful he was to the Nation as
High Commissioner of that Kingdom; in order to which we may note, that the
Office of High Commissioner is altogether extraordinary, and for a particular
Occasion, viz. The holding of a Parliament in the King's Absence, therefore
scarce known in Scotland till James I. came to the Crown; and when the Session
of Parliament was upon its determination, that Office also determined with it.
Now when you had made Middleton so great, he brought in that Innovation of
adjourning Parliaments for a long time, that he might tamper with them to
betray the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the People; whereby he most
illegally continued his Commission in the Interval of Parliament, so that he
might fit and prepare that poor People for Destruction. Truly he had gone a
pretty way in it; and that he might finish his Work, and serve your Purposes
upon that Kingdom, he did (as I said) lengthen the Adjournment of that
Parliament for about two Years or so, a thing never before known in Scotland;
for which, Sir, your old Bandog Lauderdale accused him as a Criminal to the
King and you, with the reproachful Title of a Subverter of the Government: But
however, the Matter was hushed up, for Middleton having done your Business so
well there, in time he was rewarded with the Government of Tangier. But when
Lauderdale got into the same Station, he far outwent Middleton in continuing
his Commission, for he spun it out for four Years and a half; for which there
was no manner of Necessity, if you consider but the State of Affairs then in
that Kingdom: Nay, it was so far from being necessary, that it was a notorious
Grievance, for by it he not only hindered the Proceedings of the Parliament, but
endeavored to frustrate all its Meetings; which as it was a known Violation of
the Ancient Constitution of that Government, so the unnecessary Continuance,
and Arbitrary long Adjourments of the Parliament, contributed exceedingly to
the increase of the Peoples Burdens and Distresses.

Truly, Sir, it is plain that the villainous Deportment of that Lauderdale was
such, in the Trust your Brother and you reposed in him, which in time appeared
to be his best Security: And why so? The Reason, Sir, is plain; for what he had
proudly plotted and contrived through his matchless Ambition, (being conscious
to himself that he might be reckoned withal for his devilish Proceedings in
that Station) he was under some necessity of maintaining by his Power, in a
most tenacious way, that he might perfect the Ruin of that People, making good
the old Proverb, Over Shoes over Boots, it would be all one at the Gallows at
last: So that the Relief of that poor and abandoned People, from the Disorders
which you and your wicked Party had made in that Kingdom by those two Men,
remained only with Almighty God, there being no Hopes from your Brother.

Therefore, Sir, after the Adjournment of a Parliament, which was held (if I am
not misinformed) in 1674. and adjourned in December that Year, Duke Hamilton,
the Earl of Tweddale, and some Gentlemen (being sensible of the notorious
Villainies of old Lauderdale, and to prevent his Lies from taking place with the
King) repair to the Court in England, with the Approbation of those to whom
they communicated their Intentions, being confident they should be delivered
from the Oppressions occasioned by Middleton and Lauderdale; and hoping the
King would receive their faithful Representation of the Affairs of that Nation,
both as to Religion and Government. But Lauderdale, who was an Enemy of all
Righteousness and Truth, omitted no Obstruction he could lay in the way: For,
1. by a Proclamation he procured that no Scots-man should go out of the Kingdom
without License from the Council, that so the King might not have the Truth of
Affairs laid before him, whereby to see the State and Condition that poor
People were in, in order to give them some Legal Redress. Again, 2. it is well
known he employed a pitiful Rascal at Berwick, as a Spy to intercept all free
Correspondence; who being empowered by him, did seize and search Sir William
Carnegie a Member of Parliament, and detained him (a Lord of his Name you well
remember) in his Passage through that Town to London. 3. Lauderdale having by
means of this Rogue got some Packets intercepted, he like a base Villain
transmitted them to our Court, not considering the Violation done to the common
Intercourse and good Understanding of the two Nations, nor regarding that
Tenderness which honest Men have for the Honor of their Country, and obtained
of the King for this Fellow for such Rogueries (instead of a Pillory or
Gallows) the Reward of 50 l. Sterling to be paid out of the Exchequer in
Scotland, to the great Satisfaction of the King, your Self, and wicked Party.
4. By the same Means, and in the same Place, he endeavored to affront Duke
Hamilton and his Company in their Passage, by questioning their Retinue, and
refusing them a Night's lodging; which was not known to the Governor of that
Town, he being absent: But at the return of these Noble Persons, both Governor
and People of the Place testified their Respects to them. 5. This Lauderdale
incensed the King and you against a Gentleman Duke Hamilton sent before him, as
one that had been a Sequestrator in the Time of Oliver, (sometime
Lord-Protector of these three Nations) and a Person disaffected to the
Government: But notwithstanding all these Obstacles, and many other
Discouragements, the same Persons arrived at Court, and did with all Submission
and Sincerity, and in all Faithfulness and Truth, acquit themselves, giving a
full Account of the State of Affairs both as to the King's and Countrey's
Interest. What was the Event of all this? Truly they were dismissed with fair
Words, and had positive Promises that the Parliament in Scotland should meet
and sit an the Day appointed, that Grievances should be redressed, and that the
Commission Lauderdale held as Commissioner should be revoked. Upon which they
hasten home, (the Duke with extraordinary Difficulty, both in respect of the
rigor of the Season, and his weakness of Body) that they might attend the
Parliament in their respective Places on the 3d of March, to which Time the
Parliament was adjourned, which was the very next Day after their arrival. But,
Sir, instead of a Session so much expected by the People, you and this wicked
Wretch procured of your Brother another Adjournment, tho the Member^ waited
four Months, and were all got together in hopes the King's Word would have been
kept; and so the Parliament was put off till October the 14th following. Upon
this I pray remember the Carriages of this notorious State-Villain, by which
you might see the Nature of the Beast, that you your self at last hated.

1st. Call to mind, that to please you and your Villainous Party, he did in the
most insolent manner undervalue Parliaments, which he discovered by that
rascally Expression to the King against the Earl of Middleton, lessening what
he had done, as if he had not been serviceable enough to Baal; Sir, if you had
sent down a Dog with your Commission about his Neck to your Scots Parliament,
he would have done all the Earl of Middleton had done; who one would have
thought had been Villain enough for doing what he did in the Innovations he
brought into Scotland, both in Church and State: But it seems, Sir, you found
Lauderdale to be a Rogue of a deeper Die, and therefore Middleton was laid
aside, and Covenant-Lauderdale made use of to carry on Designs more wicked than
ever Middleton was acquainted withal.

2ly. Call to mind how he treated some of the Scots Members of Parliament with
most unsufferable Insolence; for truly had he done as much by me, I should,
upon Consideration of his other Virtues, have done his Country and my own that
Service that two Parliaments by the Means of your Power could not do. But, Sir,
to return to our Scots Parliament Men, he sent one to Prison, whose Name was
Mr. William Moor, because he desired (after the Order of the English
Parliament) their Acts might be at least thrice read before they were voted, or
somewhat to that purpose; and using the word We for I, said Lauderdale to him,
What, are there any more in your Arse? Which base speaking provoked most of the
Members as very indecent and unmannerly, and not to be used to Gentlemen. I
will say that for the Earl of Middleton, that he understood how to use a
Gentleman, tho bad enough; but this Rascal, when in Power, understood no body.

3ly. I suppose, Sir, you have not forgot his-slighting Duke Hamilton in the
most contemptible manner, and most of the Ancient Nobility of the greatest
Interest and Value in that Kingdom, whom he did not so much as allow to be
named among the Commissioners chosen for the Treaty of Union betwixt the two
Kingdoms, tho many were named that ought not to have been, unless in a dead
Warrant, which was his desert for many a fair Year, and you your self thought
so at last.

4ly. After your Brother and you had made him thus great, you may remember how
inconstant this Villain was to those with whom he professed the greatest
Friendship; for in the time of his Greatness he acted according to his Humor
and Advantage, not according to the Measures and Rules an honest Man should use
in Conversation with Mankind, witness his dealing with the late Duke of Ormond,
Earl of Shaftsbury, Earl of Rothes, Tweddale, Sir Robert Murray, and others,
whom (as it served his Turn) he carest with all open Flattery, or rejected,
when you had given him direction to slight and contemn them.

5ly. To serve the wicked Designs of you and your Conspirators, you may
remember how he neglected the Interest of his Country, and gratified a parcel
or beggarly Rascals that depended on him for Bread, by procuring them Gifts
upon the Forfeitures of the Penal Statutes then in Force: As to Sir John
Moncreif a Gift of the Fines upon those who were convicted for Nonconformity in
the Shires of Fife and Perth; and to one Scot of Ardress, and Major Bothwick, a
Gift upon the Maltmen and Brewers; and to the said Bothwick another vexatious
Gift commonly called of Peck and Bole. These were known Rogues and Spies for
him, and were great Persecutors of the People of God in those Parts: and to one
Carmichel he gave large Sums to accuse Sir Patrick Hume falsely, since a Peer of
that Kingdom; this Carmichel since that died of a languishing Disease in the
King's Bench Prison, where he confessed to me upon his Deathbed his many
Villainies against the People of God in that Kingdom.

6ly. Give me leave to put you in mind of his horrid Profaneness; witness his
Compliment to that Firstborn of all Villainy and Falsness the Archbishop of
St. Andrews, that was executed for his many Villainies, by a number of injured
Men that could not have Justice done otherwise; to whom Lauderdale was pleased
to say, Come in my Lord, sit down here at my right Hand, and I will make all
your Enemies your Footstool. This was so profane, that those who heard the
Villain utter these words, trembled, and were so filled with Horror, that one
of them was sick almost to death. Nay, Sir, you your self was pleased to say,
that Lauderdale had an odd way of profaning the Scriptures, which was not to
be endured by a chaste Ear.

7ly. You have heard his rascally, insipid, and malicious way of jes^ing, at
and against his old Practices and Acquaintance, when the Villain was a
Professor of Religion: One Day at his Table he said, He could pray and cant as
well as any Nonconformist in the Christian World; and to entertain his Company
in contempt of the Most High, he began a Complaint to God, and in derision
would confess his Covenant Breaking, and other Sins; at which many of his
Companions left him (tho perhaps otherwise lewd enough) for fear the House
should fall upon them, and they perish with him for his abominable Wickedness.
You may remember how he used his old Acquaintance that kept their Integrity in
Religion, how he insulted over them when they appeared before him in Council,
by a reproachful remembrance of former Practices in religious Duties; so that
some of 'em have used the old Proverb concerning him, No Turk like to a
Renegado.

This, Sir, was a fit Tool for you to use for introducing your base Designs of
Slavery into that Kingdom, in order to establish Popery. Alas, Middleton was
but an Ass to this Fellow, for he had some Grains of a Gentleman; but this
Villain was the Compound of all Unrighteousness, and an Enemy of God and
Mankind: This was the Man you advanced by Middleton, and by him and your sweet
self Scotland was bravely bridled and sadled to your Heart's content. Thus I
conclude the first step you took to the Ruin of that Ancient (and your Father's
native) Kingdom. Concerning these two Men it may be said, that Middleton served
Baal a little, but Lauderdale served him much.

2. A second Step you took to ruin that Kingdom, and your Brother's Government,
was the filling the Courts of Judicature there (especially their Session, which
is the Supreme Court of Justice) with ignorant and insufficient Men. This, Sir,
was the Method you pursued, not only in England, but in Ireland; and therefore
I should have much wondered if Scotland had escaped that Grace and Favor of
yours, which was generally speaking pretty impartial: For why should the
Administration of Justice be in better Hands there than it was here? You were
resolved that the doing of Justice in the three (...) be of a Piece, and
therefore played your Game there (tho with more (...) as you did here. To prove
this, you procured your Brother's Letters ^^ Lauderdale to constitute one Sir
Andrew Ramsey one of the Lords of the Sessions who never was bred up to the
Law, but to Merchandising: Which extrava^^ant Proceeding being complained of in
Parliament, as of dangerous Consequence, Ramsey parted with his Place,
resigning it up to Lauderdale, and was said to have more Knowledge than the
other three: And by reason of the Insufficiency of the Lords of the Session
thereupon, Partiality so manifestly crept into that, as well as other Courts of
Justice, that the Foundations of Law and Justice were much shaken, as was once
ready to be proved in full Parliament in that Kingdom in the Time of
Lauderdale's Ministry. Now, Sir, you may see it was not a Fault in a Man to
serve the late Protector, if he would but join with Lauderdale and you to
subvert the Government of that Kingdom, and enslave the People, in order to
establish Popery: For this Ramsey had been Provost of Edinburgh in the
Protector's Time, and complied with him to the height of being knighted, and
after that got to be reknighted, and reentred Provost, by the Favor of Earl
Middleton, to whom he was a villainous Tool in assisting him to defraud the
People of their Religion, Laws and Liberties, all at once: But upon Middleton's
Disgrace, this Fellow strikes in with Lauderdale, who had a greater Sacrifice
to offer to Baal than Middleton had yet offered, with whom and the Tradesmen of
Edinburgh, by his long-practised Arts of Flattery and Bribery, he so mightily
prevailed, that continuing Provost for ten Years, in that time he so domineered
over the poor Citizens, and so enriched himself by their Rents and Moneys at
his Pleasure, that by Lauderdale's Assistance and yours he cheated the King of
near 20000 l. Sterling, and had an Opportunity of obtaining to be constituted
one of the Lords of the Session: And tho he with the other three (who, as I
said before, were more unskilful in the Law) made such Havoc, that Lauderdale
himself could not keep him in that Station, so many notorious Corruptions and
illegal Proceedings being proved against him and them, yet there was not a
Change made in that Court without some difficulty. And after all their signal
Villainies they were let fall by your self and Lauderdale as Men that had
overdone your Business.

3. Another Step taken to ruin the People of Scotland, was the Gift of a Part
of your Brother's Revenue, called the King's Casualties (which is the Wards and
Marriages) to another of your Creatures there, procured by Lauderdale through your
Interest with the King, tho contrary to all the Laws of that Kingdom in that
Case; which was not only prejudicial to the Government, but extremely vexatious
to the People: For these Casualties were an Arbitrary Revenue, and paid or not
as the King pleased: Therefore the giving it to any one Man to make his most of
it, was both against Law and Reason, and the Interest of the Subject. This
Creature of yours was the Earl of Kincaerden, who, the more to oppress the
People in this Point, was by the King's Letters by you procured, joined in
Commission with Lauderdale in the Treasury, and also with the extraordinary
Lords of the Session, by which they went on without control to grieve the
People. Sir, It is apparent to those that understand the Constitution of that
Kingdom, that this Gift of the Casualties was never known in Scotland till
attempted (...) Ministry, who not being so bad as to join with you in such a
piece of ^^^^^quency, it proved one Cause of his Disgrace.

4. You know it was your Rogues Design here in England to diminish and debase
the Coin and Plate of the Kingdom, the direful Effects whereof we feel at this
Day, and for which this Nation is bound to curse the Names and Memory of you
and your wicked Adherents. Thus you proceeded in Scotland, (tho your Father's
own dear Country) where you corrupted the Mint and Coinage: For by the King's
Letters the Lord Hatton (Brother to Lauderdale) was constituted chief in that
Office. I think they call the Master of the Mint General; but if I am mistaken
in the Names, I may be in some measure excused. But as to the thing I am sure I
am in the right, for the Corruption of the Mint and Coinage was so great, that
the Scots People grew very uneasy, and made a fearful Complaint in Parliament,
proving in that August Assembly, that for several Years they had found to their
sorrow the intrinsic Value of the Silver Coin sensibly diminished both in
Weight and Fineness, to the great Damage of that Kingdom: Nay, the thing rested
not here, but to vex the People, care was taken by Hatton to over-charge the
Country with a sort of base Coin, without considering the Weight and Value of
that sort of Money, to the manifest hindering of the Trade of that Kingdom; and
it was an Artifice your Conspirators used for enslaving that People, to
impoverish them, so that you might the more easily bring them under the Yoke of
an Arbitrary Power.

But, Sir, that you might help on this Lord of the Mint in depraving the Silver
Coin, you may remember the Dutch Dollars, commonly called Leg-Dollars, (usually
imported by their Merchants, and current with them at 58 d. per Piece) were
cried down by your Bandog Lauderdale to 56 d. for no other reason, but because
he procured your Favor to obtain a Command from the King for so doing, that
the said Dollars might be brought as Bullion into the Mint, for the Advantage
of the Lord Hatton his Brother, and your Favorite. And notwithstanding the
great Complaint of the People, there was nothing done: But upon the Adjournment
of the Parliament, a Sham-Trial was obtained, and the Lord Hatton indemnified,
tho it was proved that none of the Money coined in his Time was either Weight
or Standard.

5. A fifth Step you took to overturn the Government of that Kingdom, and
defraud that People of their Religion, Laws and Liberties, was a certain
Monster your Brother and you set up, a Body of Villains called the Lords of the
Articles. The most valuable and considering Men of that Nation (some of whom I
have had the Honor to be acquainted with) have judged this Body of Men to be
nothing else but a virtual Subversion of the Power and Liberties of Parliament,
and highly prejudicial to the King and Kingdom. I pray, Sir, observe,

1. That this meeting of the Articles, when reestablished by you and your
Conspirators, consisted of 8 Bishops chosen by the Lords, and 8 Lords chosen by
the Bishops, 8 Commissioners of the Shires, and 8 Burgesses chosen by the 8
Lords and 8 Bishops: to which the Commissioner added the Officers of State.

2. That those who contended for this Body of Men, have asserted, that not only
all Business must be by the Lords of the Articles, and them only, registered in
Parliament, but also that if in the Debates upon their Reports any new thing
should be started, the Parliament ought to take no notice of it further than to
return the whole Matter to the meeting of the Articles, to be there entertained
or suppressed at their pleasure.

3. It is manifest from all the Records of that Ancient Kingdom, that the
Original Constitution of this Meeting, or Body of Men, was at first by the free
appointment of their Parliaments, who thought fit to name certain of their
Number for framing such Overtures as were offered for the Public Good, into
Articles, in order to be turned into Laws, according to the Ancient Form: And
therefore it being at first devised by the Parliament as a simple Expedient for
Order and Dispatch, it was not always used, but the Number was changeable, as
also its Method, according as the Parliament saw Cause.

4. You could not be so ignorant but that at one time or other, when you was in
that Kingdom, you must be informed that as this Body of Men was in effect the
Committee of Parliament to prepare and bring in Laws, so that there was another
of more ancient Date, called the Committee of Complaints, or the Lords of the
Grievances, which was of use in all times, and never laid aside till the second
Session of the Parliament called in 1661, in the time of Middleton's Ministry.

5. The Act of Parliament of K. James your Grandfather, appointing four of
every State to meet 20 days before the Parliament, to receive all Articles and
Petitions, and deliver them to the Clerk of the Register to be presented to the
Parliament for their Consideration, that things reasonable might be formally
made and presented to the Lords of the Articles in Parliament-time, and
frivolous Matters rejected, does no ways countenance that exorbitant Power
these Lords of the Articles did assume to themselves; it being manifest by the
Order therein set down of preparing Matters by a Meeting beforehand, and their
subsequent forming and presenting by the Parliament to these Article-men, that
the Parliament's Power of first receiving, and then committing Matters to that
Body of Men, was not then so much as the Subject of the Question: But the only
thing intended was the orderly setting down of things in Parliament, as is
apparent in the words of that Act of your Grandfather, That no Article or
Petition wanting a special Title, or unscribed by him that presented the same,
shall be read or answered in that Convention or Parliament following the same:
Which was, Sir, a Provision so clearly preparatory to the Meeting and Business
of the Lords of the Articles, that it is very strange your Brother should be so
imposed upon by you and your Conspirators to prove this pretended Meeting had a
Prerogative above that of the Parliament; and it has been affirmed by several
Persons of that Kingdom, that understood the Scottish Parliament and
Constitution, that this villainous Authority was never intended by the King or
Parliament to be in the Lords of the Articles; nor had they the Impudence to
pretend to it till they were countenanced in that Pretension by you and your
Conspirators.

6. You cannot but remember that Lauderdale had a great Influence on that
Parliament that was called in 1663, when a particular Act passed for settling
the Constitution, and choosing Lords of the Articles for the time to come; in
which it was expressly provided that the Lords of the Articles are to proceed in
the discharge of their Trust in preparing of Laws, Acts and Proposals, and
ordering all things remitted to them by the Parliament; which words remitted
them imported no more nor less than that the Power of proposing was in the Body
of the Parliament, and that the Lords of the Articles were to act upon the
things referred to them by Parliament, as a Committee of Parliament.

7. And lastly, These Lords of the Articles were but the Parliament's Delegates
and Servants; and therefore how could they determine the Points the Parliament
was to debate, or not, as they should see fit? Therefore, Sir, if you consider
but a little of this Matter, you will find that your Fellow-Conspirator, by
attributing so much to these Lords of the Articles of Power and Prehemince over
the Parliament, designed in time to destroy the Use of Parliaments: For what
was the Liberty, Authority and Dignity of a Parliament, if thus trampled on by
these Miscreants, who were by this Insolency become a great Grievance to the
Kingdom?

Truly, Sir, I cannot but think that this Conspirator Lauderdale by his many
Villainies, had put himself under some Necessity of those Men, and was prompted
by some cogent Reasons to promote that exuberant Power in them. For, 1. I
suppose he could not but be filled with the Terror of the Guilt he contracted
through his wicked Proceedings, and therefore might rationally suppose these Men
(through the base Compliance of the wicked Bishops) would be a Refuge to him, as
they always were to Rogues and Traitors in that Kingdom: And truly had he not
improved the Use of these Tools, his Actions might have been set in order
before him, in order to his severe Punishment by a faithful Parliament. And, 2.
he knew that some warm Men (as he called them) had an itching to have him by
the Collar, and only forbore him because of your Brother's Respect and Kindness
for him: These Reasons were sufficient for him to keep up the Power of those
Lords; for the Parliament was so kind, that when there was a vacancy in the
Committee of the Articles, he had the nominating of one to succeed. 3. Because,
contrary to the Custom of the Parliament there, he caused all such Members as
were not named Lords of the Articles, to be excluded the Meetings of the Lords
of the Articles, which you know was to no other End, than that the Parliament
being less prepared, might the more implicitly go along with their Conclusions.
Thus you may see what a Grievance these Lords of the Articles were.

Sir, by this time you cannot but see what havoc you made of the Laws and
Liberties of Scotland, by those two great Villains Middleton and Lauderdale. I
might have enlarged upon this Subject, but 'twould fill a Volume to give
account of every little Passage of yours there in order to enslave that People,
and establish Popery in that Kingdom.

Article XXIX.
YOU stand charged with many villainous Attempts to break the use of
Parliaments, and ridiculing that way of Government. O, Sir, it was the more
hateful to you, because it preserved Liberty and Property, which of all Men in
your Day you most hated: But you were not the first Man of Figure that hated
Parliaments; for your Father of ever-notorious Memory hated them, and therefore
tried Conclusions with Parliaments for 12 Years together. It Is true, he did
call that blessed Parliament in 1640, that would have redressed England's
Grievances, had they not been prevented by the factious Spirits of some whose
Zeal was not according to Knowledge. Dr. Gauden tells you that your Father
called that Parliament in November. 3. 1640. Not more by the Advice of others, or
by the Necessity of his own Affairs, than by his own Choice and Inclination. I
could expect no better from a Baal's Priest than to begin with a Lie: For what
Man that lived in that Time knew not how the Case stood with Charles the First?
And besides, if I had not Access to a King, yet I could discover his
Inclinations, either by those that were about him, and in favor with him, or
by the Current of his Actions; all which, I say, testified to the World your
Father's strange aversness to a Parliament. Those that were near him, and most
in favor with him, were Courtiers and Rascally Prelates, Vermin whose chief
study was to find out how he stood inclined, and to imitate him exactly; and
that which was his Will, was their Doctrine concerning Parliaments: and so it
was with you. But that I may proceed in some Method, I shall show, 1. That
Parliaments are the Right of the People. 2. That they are an essential Part of
the Government. 3. That you hated them, tho such, and by consequence was an
Enemy to the Government of England.

1. That Parliaments are the Right of the People of England, which they may
claim in order to have their Grievances redressed, the common Safety of the
Nation provided for, and their Religion, Laws and Liberties secured: For call
to mind, with delight if you can, the wonderful Discovery, and undeniable
Confirmation of the Popish Plot, which designed so much Ruin and Mischief to
these Nations, in all things both Civil and Sacred, and the unanimous Sense and
Censure of so many Parliaments upon it, together with some Acts of Public
Justice upon many of the Traitors. The Nation was not without hopes, that since
that cursed Design of introducing Popery and Slavery, and the Murder of your
Brother, was discovered for the space of 30 Months at least, some effectual
Remedies should have been applied to prevent the Attempts of your Cutthroat
Party upon us, the better to secure the Religion and Government of the Nation,
and the Person of the King: But by sad Experience we found, that
notwithstanding the vigorous endeavors of three Parliaments ^o provide proper
and wholesome Laws to answer both Ends, by your influencing a pack of Villains,
you and your Party were so prevalent as to stifle in the Birth those Righteous
Endeavors of our Parliaments, by many surprising Prorogations and
Dissolutions; whereby the Fears and Dangers of the People daily increased, and
the Spirits of you and your Party heightened to renew and multiply fresh Plots
against the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Realm. I will lay down some
known Maxims that relate to a King and Parliament of England. 1. You know the
Kings of England can do nothing as Kings, but what of Right they ought to do.
2. The King can neither do wrong, nor die. 3. The King's Prerogative and the
Subjects Liberty are determined by Law. 4. The King has no Power but what the
Law gives him; and is called King from ruling well, Rex a been Regendo, viz.
according to Law, and is only a King whilst he rules well, but a Tyrant when he
oppresses. 5. That the Kings of England never appear more in their Glory, and
Majestic Sovereignty, than in Parliaments. 6. That the Prerogative of the
Crown can do no wrong, nor can it be a Warrant for so doing.

Now, Sir, having laid down some Truths relating to the Kings of England, give
me leave to lay before you some that relate to the Parliament. 1. Then I say,
that the Parliament of England constitutes and gives a Being to the Government
of England. 2. A Parliament of England is to the Government what the Soul is to
the Body, which is only able to apprehend and understand the Symptoms of all
Diseases threatening the Body Politic. 3. A Parliament is the Bulwark of our
Liberty, the Boundary which keeps the People of England from the Inundation of
Tyrannical Power and Government. 4. Parliaments do make new, and abrogate old
Laws, reform Grievances, settle the Succession, grant Subsidies, and in a word
may be called the Great Physician of the Kingdom. From all which it appears, if
Parliaments are necessary in our Constitution, that they must have their Times
of Session and Continuation, to provide Laws essentially needful for the being
and well-being of the People, and for redressing all Public Grievances
arising, either for want of Laws, or of undue execution of those in being, or
otherwise: And suitable hereunto are those Provisions made by the Wisdom of our
Forefathers, as recorded by them both in the Common and Statute Law.

1. Sir, you was an excellent Man at the Common Law, and so were your Gang at
St. Germains; and tho they have little occasion for it there, yet I may refresh
their Memories; for having had so much leisure to study the Excellency of the
French Religion and Government, our Common Law may be forgotten by them: Nay,
Rhyming Jack Carryl himself, since the loss of his Estate, may have resolved to
forget the Law, since he will not have so much occasion for it as he might have
had, if he had chosen Sussex instead of St. Germains, and so may be at a loss
to inform you. I therefore give you a touch or so, not that I pretend to cure
the King's Evil of the Common Law what it says concerning Parliaments. I pray,
Sir, remember what old Coke says, (one of your Grand-father's Judges, who was
a famous Lawyer, and persecuted by him for you know what, but never had the
Courage to run away) he tells us in one of his Law Books, (which your old
Friend Jenner swears he never understood) That the Common Law is founded in the
immutable Law and Light of Nature, agreeable to the Law of God, requiring
Order, Government, Subjection and Protection; containing certain ancient Vsages
warranted by the Holy Scriptures; and because given to all, is therefore called
Common. Sir, if you will send for your old Drudg Frank Withens, I dare aver he
cannot give you a better for his Life. But you will say, What is this to
Parliaments? Well, Sir, since this may pass the Understanding of your
Dispensing Rogues, I will tell you what he says in his 9th Book in the
Preface, they are his own Words in the Book called the Mirror of Justice, in
which appears the whole Frame of the Ancient Common Laws of this Realm from the
Time of K. Arthur, An. 516, till near the Conquest; which treats also of the
Officers, as well as the Diversity and Distinction of the Courts of Justice,
(which are Officina Legis) and particularly of the High Court of Parliament, so
called from Parlerlament, speaking judicially his Mind: And amongst others, he
gives us the following Law of K. Alfred, who reigned in 880, and ordained for a
Usage perpetual, That twice a Year, or oftener if need be, in time of Peace,
they shall assemble themselves at London to treat in Parliament of the
Government of the People of God; how they should keep themselves from Offenses,
should live in quiet, and should receive Right by certain Laws and holy
Judgments. And thus (says this Great Coke) you have the Law of K. Alfred, as
well concerning the holding this Court of Parliament here every Year at the
City of London, as to manifest the threefold End of this Great and Honorable
Assembly.

(1.) That Men might be kept from offending, that is, that Offenses might be
prevented, both by good and provident Laws, and by the due Execution of them.
Truly, Sir, here is Grief in one Hand, and Sorrow in the other; for your
Brother and you, you hated the one, and despised the other. Provident Laws you
hated, as much as you did an honest Woman; and the other you despised as much
as you did an honest Man: And you were never more at ease, than when through the
want of a good Law, or so, you and your Party were not only emboldned, but
enabled to do Mischief.

(2.) That all Men might live safely and quiet. This is another End of
Parliament. Old Wright, your quondam Justice of the King's Bench, used to say,
That the Man that resigned himself up to the Will of his Prince, was always
safe and quiet. But yet that Loggerhead of a Judge, with Old Hodg and all his
Inferior Crew, could never find one such Saying in the Reports or Institutes of
Judge Coke; for the Saying was so silly, that a Man must have judged it to have
been his own, unless he had humbly borrowed that wise Saying from (Sir) your
sweet understanding Self; for he understood as little of the Design and End of
a Parliament as your self: The Wretch is gone to his Place, but as for Law and
Parliaments, no Man (no not Jenner himself) understood less than his Worship.

(3.) That all Men might receive Justice by certain Laws and Holy Judgments,
not by Proclamations, or French Edicts, as you and your Brother did design, but
by certain Laws, to the end Justice might be the better administered, that
Questions and Defects in Laws might be by the High Court of Parliament
explained, and reduced to certainty. Your Brother and you, if you had
understood this, would not have sent for a set of Rogues clothed in Purple to
have gained their Opinion about suspending the Penal Laws against a parcel of
Papists and Popish Priests; no, you would have applied your selves to
Parliament to have explained the difficult and dark Parts of the Laws in force
against those Men; but you loved Darkness, and dark Judges, and therefore what
you did was dark; for (Sir) your Brother and you little thought and believed
that the High Court of Parliament was the Supreme Court of the Realm, and that
it was a part of the Frame of the Common Laws, and that in some Cases
Parliaments do proceed legally according to the Course of the Common Laws. Had
your Brother or you understood or believed the Antiquity of Parliaments, you
would not have preferred a Privy Council before them; nor if you had valued the
Dignity of Parliaments, would you have preferred the Opinion of a parcel of
Lambskin Rogues before a plain and positive Law; nor if you had learned the
Sovereign Jurisdiction of Parliaments, would you have followed the Advice and
Direction of your villainous Ministers of State, tho against the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government. I wonder you did not take the Villains along
with you to St. Germains, your Ministers, Judges, and your Counselors, Learned
in the Law, your Wrights, Jenners, Miltons, Withers, Sawyers, and the rest of
the Hellish Crew: I do not name them all, but you might have had the Honesty
not to have left them to disgrace their Profession, which is well improved
since I saw you last, and to have procured an Apartment for them* that your
Ministers might have thought upon some better Politics, and your Roguy Judges
and Lawyers might have understood the Law a little better than scribere est
agere: If that Bird had been but hanged up in a Cage in your Presence Chamber,
he would have sung another Tune: For all his Brave-alls, he and the rest of his
Crew might have found some Expedient or another to have helped you to some
other Kingdom, since by the Law of some of them, and the Politics of others,
they fairly walked you out of three Kingdoms at once. I do not see any great
Reformation of their Manners, or any great Improvement they have made of their
Law since you was graciously pleased to take up your Residence at St. Germains;
and if you had taken the Vermin along with you, there might have been a parcel
of Dragoons that might have drub'd them to their Books; so that by their
Scribere's and Agere's they might have found some convenient Government for
you, which they might have kept you in to better purpose, than did by their Law
and Counsel keep you here: Nay, if you had advanced them a little above their
Neighbors, they might have seen the difference between a Declaration of
Indulgence, and a Statute Law for Liberty of Conscience, and between an Act of
Parliament and a Proclamation. A good Whip (dear Sir) would have been of
admirable Use and Instruction; for it would have made them to understand, and
they would have told you, tho somewhat too late; 1. That Parliaments are part
of the Frame of the Common Law, which is founded on the Law and Light of
Nature, right Reason and Scripture. 2. That according to this Law of Equity and
Righteousness, Parliaments ought freely to meet, for the Common Peace, Safety
and Benefit of the People, and Support of the Government. 3. That Parliaments
have been all along esteemed the Essential Part of the Government, as being the
most Ancient, Honorable and Sovereign Court in the Nation, which ought
frequently to meet and sit for the making and abolishing of Laws, redressing
Grievances, and to see to the due Administration of Justice. 4. That as to the
Place of the meeting, it ought to be at London, not at New Market; at London,
not at Windsor; at London, not at St. Germains, because London is the Capital
City, the Eye and Heart of the Nation, as being not only the Royal Seat, but
the principal Place of Judicature, and Residence of the chief Officers and
Courts of Justice; where also the Records are kept, as well as the principal
Place of Commerce and Concourse in the Nation; and to which the People may have
the best Recourse, and where they may find the best Accommodation. 5. They
would have instructed you in the Antiquity of Parliaments, which have been so
Ancient that no Record can give an Account of their beginning. Upon my word I
will tell you, that a little Chastisement upon these Villains, by a parcel of
your Dragoons, would have wrought a mighty Change upon them. Therefore (Sir)
since you have nothing else to do, send for them; you shall have every one of
them that are above Ground; and if they do not answer Expectation, then hang
'em all, and I do think they should be content: For Passive-Obedience and
Non-resistance, and the Divine Right of Ignorance, are so fixed in their Bones,
that nothing but a good dragooning Flux will fetch them out.

In a word, Sir, now it is easily known why your Brother in his Reign did not
suffer Parliaments to meet and sit, for those Ends for which a Parliament was
at first constituted; for such Rogues as I have mentioned, used to teach him
the same Doctrine that they taught you, only with these different Effects,
which wrought more upon you than it did upon him: For all the brave Notions
they gave him of Prerogative and Absolute Power, and the Excellency of the
Romish Religion above all other Religions, could neither give him Strength
enough to get Old Catherine with Child, nor Courage enough to run away. Now the
same Doctrine that your Lawyers, Judges, and Ministers of State taught you, had
these wonderful Influences upon you of getting a Child for us, or shamming one
upon us, and running from us without the Aid and Assistance of an old English
Parliament. The Rogues were running after you; it had been no great matter if
he, she, or they had been hanged that stopped them. But the Vermin by this time
are come to themselves, and can tell you for a need, that not to suffer
Parliaments to sit to answer the great Ends for which they were instituted, was
and still is expressly contrary to the Common Law, and so consequently of the
Law of God as well as the Law of Nature; and thereby Violence has been by your
Brother and you offered to the Government it self, and an Infringement of the
People ^^ndamental Rights and Liberties. We have in some measure made our
selves ^^^aration for the Damage done us; but more of that in its proper place.

2. We have laid before you what the Common Law says concerning Parliaments;
therefore it will (in the second place) be convenient to observe what our
Statute Law acquaints us withal concerning Parliaments. I know you had a great
Love to our Laws; and therefore I suppose you have read them, that when you
come again you may make better use of them than you did before, and not have
the Courage to dispense with them as you did before. Old Jenner thought a Wife
and nine Children was an admirable Argument for the Dispensing Power, and
swears when you come again, he will never set up for an Expounder of the Law
any more; he will rather turn Priest, to put you into the way of gaining the
Kingdom of Heaven, since he expounded the Law in so learned a manner as to make
you lose the Kingdom of England. But to the Point:

The Statute Laws (the Learned say) are Acts of Parliament, which are or ought
to be only declaratory of the Common Law; which, as you have it told you, is
founded upon right Reason and Scripture; and I think our Learned in the Law
have told us, That if any thing be enacted contrary thereunto, it is null and
void, and of no Effect. Certainly Jenner and the rest of the Dispensing Crew
were bewitched, in not telling you that any Dispensation against Law was in it
self null and void: But there was a Wife and nine Children in the Case, and Law
was not his Business. Truly for all his hussing Speech to the President and
Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, he knew as little Law as your self that
sent him down: But since some of the Villains were ignorant of the Law, and the
rest of them that had some Law and no Honesty, did not inform you, I pray let
me entreat your Patience, and observe what I say to you. There are several
Statutes that require frequent meetings of Parliament agreeable to the Common
Law.

1. The first of which is 4 Edw. III. cap. 14. in these words; Item, it is
accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every Year once, or more often if
need be. Alas, that good King never sent to the French King for leave to call a
Parliament, nor did he sell him a Session of Parliament for a small Spell of
300000 l. per Ann. it never entered into the old Judges Noddles in his Reign,
that Parliaments were to be held sooner or later, oftener or seldomer, as the
King pleased; no, it was your Lambskin Crew you set up in Charles the 2d's Time
that taught that Doctrine: Nay, there were a Set of Rogues in your Father's
Time who favored that Heresy in the Government, that the meeting and sitting
of Parliaments was at the Will and Pleasure of the King; but your Rogues went a
Note above Ela, for they would have the Laws to be dispensed with, or
suspended, when the gracious Pleasure of the King was such.

2. I have another Statute Law in my green Bag, that is at your Service, it is
36 Edw. III. cap. 10. read it, and if you do not put on your Dispensing
Spectacles, you will find the Law to speak these words: Item, For the
Maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redressing of diverse
Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every
Year; as at another time it was ordained by a Statute. What Statute, good Sir?
I pray ask your Dispensing Judges; let them look into their Law Books, not upon
their Wives and nine Children, nor (...) durante been placito Commissions, and
they will find this Statute of the 36th of that King has reference to the
Statute of the 4th of the said King abovementioned.

Well, Sir, what is the English of all this? Your Judges have told you what the
French of it is already to your Cost: Now it shall cost you nothing if we tell
you the English of it, viz. That a Parliament ought Annually to meet to support
the Government, and to redress Grievances happening in the interval of
Parliaments, that being the great End proposed in their said meeting. Now for
Parliaments to meet Annually, and not be suffered to sit to answer the Ends,
but to be prorogued or dissolved, (as Gammer Carwell or Nell Waal should
direct) before they had finished their Work, was and would be nothing but an
eluding the Law, and striking at the Foundation of the Government, and rendering
Parliaments altogether useless. You know there is no great difference between
having no Meat at all, and having it in abundance without being suffered to
eat; so I think it is to no purpose to have frequent Parliaments, and they not
suffered to sit and do the Business of the Nation, for which they were sent by
the People, as well as called by the King. You had got such a Trick in your
Brother's Time to put off Parliaments, that I doubt if we should try you once
more, and take in those durante been placito Rogues, you would never leave it
off: First you got one Session put off, and a truly loyal Band of Pensioners
dissolved; then three Parliaments dissolved one upon the neck of another, as
you and Nell Waal pleased. Now our Forefathers, and our Ancient Kings of
England, to prevent Arbitrary Power, and such intolerable Mischiefs as these,
did heartily agree to have a Proclamation made in Westminster Hall before the
End of every Session, not to dissolve the Parliament to get a Sum of French
Money, but to tell the People that all who had any Matter to present to the
Parliament, should bring it before such a Day, for otherwise the Parliament
should determine. This was done in the Reigns of Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 6. So
that you may see, and so might that Villain Jefferies, that the People were not
to be eluded or disappointed by surprising Prorogations and Dissolutions, to
frustrate the great Ends of Parliament.

But, Sir, suppose all your Brother's Crew of Judges and Ministers of State,
nay I would allow him half a dozen Priests, and Dr. Finch the Warden of
All Souls into the Bargain, who is an excellent Preacher and Pimp to the Whore
of Babylon and Arbitrary Power; nay I will allow you to have the French
Parliament held at New Market in 1677; and suppose they should have roared with
open Mouth, and said there was no Record, nor Statute upon Record extant
concerning the sitting of Parliaments to redress Grievances: What then? And
suppose Finch the last 29th of May had told such a Story as this in his
loggerheaded Sermon, where he applauded the eminent shining Virtues of Charles
II, above those of his Royal Father and yours, his Chastity, Integrity,
Peaceableness, and the like; and provided all he had said were true, that
Charles was a Man of those Virtues, and that there were neither Common nor
Statute Laws extant for the sitting of Parliaments; yet by Warden Finch's leave
it is more certain that Parliaments are to sit and redress Grievances by the
Fundamental Laws of the Government, than that his Father presented the Grand
Seignior with a Pendulum Clock so small, that the Grand Seignior hung it at his
Ear, as the Ladies here used to hang their Pendants at theirs.

It may be, Sir, you will ask what Reason I could have to believe the sitting
of Parliaments for redress of Grievances was our Right by the Fundamental Law
of England? I tell you, Sir, why, because the Government must be lame without
it, and a Prince and his villainous Ministers might have done what they pleased,
and their Wills might have been their Laws. Your Brother and you bid fair for
such a Government, had your Friend Coleman's Advice been taken, and had K.
Charles signed his Declaration for dissolving the Parliament. Coleman had not
Jenner's Courage of running away, and so the Declaration was not signed, but to
your great Comfort he was graciously left to dance a Christmas Gambrel at
Tyburn for his great pains in the mighty Work your Brother, your Self, and he
had upon your Hands. Therefore, my good Friend, it was provided for in the very
Essence and Constitution of the Government it self; this we may (if Frank
Withens and the rest of your Crew will give leave) call Common Law, tho
Jefferies once was pleased to call it a Common Where: This (notwithstanding the
filthy Expression of that impudent Villain, that had neither Law, Manners, nor
Honesty, but the Impudence of ten carted Whores) is of as much Value (if not
more) as any Statute, and of which all our good Acts of Parliament, and Magna
Charta it self, are but declaratory: So that tho your Brother, or any King
else, had been entrusted with the formal Part of summoning and pronouncing the
Dissolution of Parliaments, which is done by Writ; yet the Laws that oblige the
King as well as the People, have determined when and how it is to be done. This
is enough to show you, that your Brother as King shared in the Sovereignty that
was in the Parliament, and that it was cut out to him by Law, and not left at
his Disposal: I must therefore tell you that Thomas and Francis, and the rest
of the Bloodhounds, and murdering Dispensing Judges, were much out in point of
Law, when they told your Brother; that Parliaments, both as to Calling and
Dissolving, were at his Will and Pleasure.

3. There is another Statute, viz. 25 Edw. III. cap. 23. that was Law in your
Brother's Reign, which the Judges, if they had been acquainted with the Law,
who truly (except a few that had but little Honesty, and were generally
Strangers to the Law) must have told him and you too, did oblige him and you to
suffer the Meeting and Sitting of Parliaments: Therefore I make use of that
Statute to prove that the Meeting and Sitting of Parliaments is the Fundamental
Right and Privilege of the People of England. This Statute, Sir, was called the
Statute of Provisors, and was made to prevent and cut off the Encroachments of
the Bishops of Rome, whose Usurpations in disposing of Benefices had occasioned
intolerable Grievances: In the Preamble of which Statute it is expressed as
follows.

Whereupon the Commons have prayed our said Sovereign Lord the King, That since
the Right of the Crown of England, and the Law of the Realm is such, that upon
the Mischiefs and Damage which happen to this Realm, he ought, and is bounden
of the Accord of his said People in his Parliament, thereof to make Remedy and
Law in avoiding the Mischiefs and Damage which thereof comes, that it may
please him thereupon to provide Remedy. Our Sovereign Lord the King, seeing the
Mischiefs and Damage before-named, and having regard to the said Statute made
in the Time of his said Grandfather, and to the Causes contained in the same;
which Statute holds always its Force, and was never defeated or annulled in
any Point, and by so much is bound by his Oath to do the same, to be kept as
the Law of this Realm, tho that by sufferance and negligence it has since been
attempted to the contrary; and also having regard to the grievous Complaints
made to him by his People in diverse Parliaments holden heretofore, willing to
ordain Remedy for the great Damages and Mischiefs which have happened, and daily
do happen by the said Cause, etc. by the Assent of the Great Men and Commonalty
of his said Realm, has ordained and established.

Come, Sir, what say you to all this? Where is your Holloway, your Withens, and
your Walcots? And where is Tom Jenner, with his Sorrow in one Hand and his
Grief in the other, an ignorant Rascal like the rest of his Brethren? Where is
your Herbert, your Heath, and your Milton? Some of them are gone to their
Places, but they lived long enough to enslave the People; and those that yet
live, owe a Debt for their Rogueries, the Gallows groans for their perverting
of Justice and Judgment. Where are your murdering Judges of the West? Some of
them yet live: They might (without the Consent of a pair of Spectacles) have
seen, and might without fear have told you, they could not choose but see what
was contained in this Preamble now recited. Were the Rogues ignorant? Then why
did not your Pemberton, your Scroggs, your Levins, your Charlton, and the rest
of that Crew, instruct your Brother and you what was contained and pointed at
in this Preamble? But alas, they did not; they were able enough, but they had
rascally durante been placito Commissions, that indisposed them to be plain and
honest in that Affair; they were more afraid of losing their Places, than of
being damned for not doing their Duties: But since they had not the Honor,
Honesty and Conscience of upright Judges, give me leave to be plain with you.
Therefore, Sir, observe,

(1.) The intolerable Grievance and Burden occasioned by the illegal
Encroachments of the Sea of Rome, to which Yoke you and your Villains
endeavored to reduce and subjugate these Kingdoms. You fired our City, and
murdered our Friends; you promoted Men of Villainous Principles, and worse
Morals, to the Judgment Seat, and made them Vassals to your Will and Pleasure;
who, if they complied not, were reproachfully dismissed their Employments, and
ruined if possible: Nay, if any of them attempted but to prosecute Popery;
alas, they were not for your Turn, for your Design was by them to revive that
intolerable Grievance, by encouraging the illegal Encroachments of the Sea of
Rome.

(2.) Observe the many Complaints the People had made, who in those dark Times
under Popery groaned under such Burdens: What Burdens, I pray you, under the
Encroachments of the Sea of Rome? Why truly in disposing of Benefices. Ay, it
is a good Observation, for the Pope would present none but such as should
advance his usurped Power and Interest; and if the People were so bold as to
complain of these things, were they not a parcel of Rebels and Traitors for
their pains? No, they complained without being called or treated as such. What
Remedy had they? A Parliament. Now, Sir, had not we as much need of an Act of
Provisors against you? for in your Brother's Time, how many of your Rogues were
presented to the best Livings in the Realm at your Procurement; and how many
Villains were made Bishops by the Whores Cleveland and Portsmouth, and the
Pimps and Bawds at Court? Did not we stand in need of Statutes of Provisors?
Name me one Man of these that were not to advance the Power and Interest of
France, and to wink at the Progress and Growth of Popery. Had we not reason to
complain? Yes: To whom? to the King? No, he was engaged for Popery and the
French Interest, and Arbitrary Power, as well as your self: His Metropolitan
Whores were Papists to please him, or he one to please them: Therefore to what
purpose was it? We had none to complain to but a Parliament; and how you used
them, we have not forgot; and how our Application to them was not only useless,
but dangerous, is not unknown. In a word, Sir, the Condition of the
Complainants in the Time of Edw. III, tho they lived in the dark Times of
Popery, were in a far better Condition than we were in your Brother's Reign;
for notwithstanding the Religion of Edw. III, his Interest was his Peoples, and
therefore held frequent Parliaments, to whom they might complain, and from whom
they might find Redress, without being judged Traitors and Rebels to the
Government.

(3.) Observe the Endeavors used in vain by former Parliaments to redress the
same, and to bring their Laws in being to have their Force and Effect. You know
that when the Kings of England were wicked, then to gain the Point, they used
to fly to Rome for Countenance, and advance that usurped Power to the Prejudice
of the People. So it was with your Brother and you, when you had a Design in
hand to enslave the Nation; then you set up the Power and Interest of France,
and none were to be preferred in our good Church but Villains, that were
case-hardned enough to join with your Brother and you in ravishing the Peoples
Rights and Franchises. Had we good Laws in being against Popery? They were
suspended. Had we any good Laws against the growing Greatness of France? Yes,
we got one poor Act of Parliament against France, and that was eluded. Nay, now
I think on it, we got an Act to enter into an actual War against France, with
which your Party did impudently beg Money from France. We got a poor sorry Act
for the Liberty of the Subject, called the Habeas Corpus Act; this was by you
and your Villains evaded; so that we were under a necessity of Complaining.
Those in the Time of Edw. III, had redress; we had none, till we drove you and
the French Interest and Popery out of the Kingdom.

(4.) Observe the Acknowledgment of the King and Parliament, that the
Obligation to this Duty was upon the King, who you know is entrusted by the Law
to preserve the Peace and Liberties of the Realm, and to rectify all
Miscarriages in the Government: Which is apparent, 1. From the Right of the
Crown, obliging him to pass good Laws. 2. There were good Laws committed to his
Trust in full Force, which he was to execute. 3. There is the King's Oath to
pass new Laws for the Peoples Safeguard which they should tender to him, as
well as to execute old Laws already made. 4. From the Sense of the People
expressed in their Complaints. And, 5. From the Mischief and Damage that would
otherwise ensue; and therefore it is said, that by the Desire and Accord of his
People he past this famous Law, the Preamble of which I have recited to you in
part.

4. There is another Statute worthy of your Consideration, and pretty much to
the same purpose; you will find it in the 2d of Rich. II. in No 28. Also the
Commons of England in Parliament desire, that forasmuch as Petitions and Bills
presented in Parliament by diverse of the Commons, could not heretofore have
their respective Answers; that therefore both their Petitions and Bills in this
present Parliament, as also all others which shall be presented in any future
Parliament, may have a Good and Gracious Answer, and Remedy ordained thereupon,
before the departing of every Parliament; and to this purpose a due Statute be
ensealed (or enacted) at this present Parliament, to be and remain in Force for
all Times to come. To which the King replied thus, The King is pleased that all
such Petitions delivered in Parliament of Things or Matters which cannot
otherwise be determined, a good and reasonable Answer shall be made and given
before the departure of the Parliament. This King, you know, left not a very
good Name behind, being drawn away from loving his People, just as you and your
Brother were by a set of wicked Rogues; yet before they had ravished this
Prince, and weaned him from his Peoples Love, he made this excellent Law: in
which, Sir, you may observe, 1. A Complaint of former Remisness; their Bills
afore-time have not been passed, and their Grievances unredressed, by
unseasonably dissolving of Parliaments before their Laws could pass. 2. That a
Law might pass in that very Parliament to rectify that Abuse for the future.
And, 3. that it should not pass for a Temporary Law, but to last for ever,
being of such absolute Necessity, that before Parliaments be dismissed, Bills
of Common Right might pass: to which the then King Richard did freely agree.

5. I have another Proof, which is from that great Oracle of the Law the Chief
Justice Coke in Institut. 4. B. p. 11. asserting, That Petitions may be truly
preferred, tho very many have been answered by the Law and Custom of Parliament
before the end of the Parliament. This that Great Lawyer delivers not as his
own single Opinion, but tells us that what he laid down in this Particular,
appeared in an Ancient Treatise de modo tenendi Parliamentum, in these words
faithfully translated; The Parliament ought not to be ended while any Petition
depends undiscussed, or at least to which a determinate Answer is not made.
And again, That one Principle of calling Parliaments is for the redressing
Grievances that daily happen. Further yet concerning the departing of
Parliaments; It ought to be in such a manner (says Modus Tenendi) demanded,
yea and publicly proclaimed in the Parliament, and within the Palace of the
Parliament, whether there be any that has delivered a Petition to the
Parliament, and has not received answer thereto: If there be none such, it is
to be supposed that every one is satisfied, or else answered unto at the least,
so far forth as by the Law he may be. This Custom was observed in after Ages,
as you heard before. Once more, and I have done: Observe what this Great Judge
says concerning the Authority and Antiquity of this Ancient Treatise called
Modus tenendi Parliamentum, which we often make use of in our Institutes:
Certain it is, this Modus was rehearsed and declared before William I. called
the Conqueror, and by him approved for England; upon which, according to the
Modus, he held a Parliament for England, as appears 21 Edw. 3. Fo. 60.

Well, Sir, how do you by this time, and how does my old Mistress and the
little Welsh Gentleman? Are you not satisfied of the Necessity of the Meeting
and Sitting of Parliaments? I pray call Tom Jenner, and Frank Withens, those
two Rascals, and all the Crew of Villains that misled your Brother and you, or
were misled by you; for they were willing Vermin, I confess, to do what they
were bid, upon pain and peril of losing their Places: And lest these Scoundrels
should be too ignorant, let us call in Old Pemberton that did several Jobs of
Journey-work for your Brother and you; he impudently tried Fitz-Harris, tho he
was impeached in Parliament, which Scroggs would not undertake; and he tried
the Great and never-to-be forgotten Lord Russel; and how he carried himself,
let the World judge: I am sure my Ld Russel was murdered: But I have heard
Pemberton talk as like a Villain as any of the rest, which was not because of
his Ignorance. I say, let us summon them all that remain in the Land of the
Living, for the Devil has not fetched them all yet; and tho they are not
prating upon the Bench, yet the Rogues are getting a Penny at the Bar: These
Vermin I dare say with a little drubbing will aver, that it is most certain
these wholesome Laws are not only in full Agreement with the Common Law, and
declarative thereof, but fully agree with the Oath and Office of our Kings, who
have that great Trust by the Law lodged with them for the Good and Benefit, and
not Hurt and Mischief of the People. But if these Dunghill Rascals should be
fullen, because not employed once more to oppress and murder the People under a
Form and Color of Law, and refuse to satisfy you, I will with that little Law
I have, propose these three things upon the whole of what has been said upon
this fifth Head.

1st. These Laws are very suitable to the Office and Duty of a King, and the End
for which he was instituted by God himself, who commands him to do Justice and
Judgment to all, especially the Oppressed, but not deny them any request for
their Relief, Protection or Welfare. It had not been below you to have obeyed
the Laws as a Subject, nor your Brother to have kept them as a King; and had he
relied more upon his Parliament than he did upon your Counsel, and that of his
wicked Ministry, he might have lived to this Day: But you and your Crew
persuaded him he was above Laws, and that the Statutes of the Realm signified
nothing no longer than they would serve his Turn; who therefore made no
Conscience of the Sitting of Parliaments for redress of Grievances.

2ly. These Laws relating to Parliaments do also fully agree with the
Coronation Oath your Brother took, and solemnly made to his People, viz. To
grant, fulfill and defend all rightful Laws which the Commons of the Realm shall
choose, and to strengthen and maintain them to the utmost of his Power. But,
Sir, suppose any of the Learned in the Laws of the Realm should stand at your
Elbow, as Tom Jenner, or Old Holloway, or any of that Crew, and tell you that
your Brother did not take any such Oath: To this I may say, that if he did not,
the Nation had the more wrong; but I never heard yet that any had the Impudence
to deny it. I confess when you shuffled on the Crown, it was said some things
were abated, for which those concerned in that Ceremony ought to have been
hanged.

3ly. Those Laws do also fully agree with Magna Charta it self, which has been
confirmed to us by 40 Parliaments at least, which says, We shall deny nor
defer to no Man Justice and Right, much less to the whole Parliament and
Kingdom, in denying and deferring to pass such necessary Bills the Necessities
of the People call for. Had Old Brown had but half the Honesty of an Irish
Rapparee, he would not have consented to your Brother's dropping of a Bill in
the Year 1680, it was entitled, An Act for repealing an Act of the 35th of Q.
Elizabeth; a good Bill to have preserved the Protestant Dissenters: But your
Party had some barbarous Murders and Outrages to commit, and could not well go
on with their Show unless such a Bill as that of Q. Elizabeth was in Force; so
that it might now and then aid and assist your everlasting Holy Cutthroats in
their bloody Conspiracy against God and his Christ.

Object. But you may say, That your Brother and Father, and several other
Princes, have otherwise practiced, by dissolving or proroguing Parliaments at
their Pleasures, before Grievances were redressed, and public Bills of
Common-Safety passed, because to dissolve and prorogue at Pleasure, is a
Privilege which belongs to the Crown.

Answ. This word Prorogue is but a newfangled Business, a thing brought up in
latter Days; but as for dissolving Parliaments at Pleasure, that has been the
Practice of our former wicked Kings, by the Advice of their Roguish Ministers
and Judges, who laid aside all Law, Honor, Honesty and Conscience, to
prostitute themselves to the abominable Lust of a filthy Prince, who designed
nothing less than the Ruin of the Kingdom. What your Father did I will not here
concern my self; but what your Brother did by your Procurement, is my Province
at this Time.

Your Brother when he held his French Parliament at New Market in 1677, where
most of the Rogues and Whores of the Court were present, and your gracious Self
waiting on him, did much aggrandize himself by that Glorious Assembly. Upon
April 16. the Parliament at Westminster was adjourned till May 21. following.
Immediately upon the Recess the Duke of Crequi, and that modest, sober, chaste
Man of God the A. Bp of Rheims, and Mons^eur Barillon, and a Train of 3 or 400
Persons of all Qualities, appeared there; so that the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal of France, with so many of their Commons, made it look like an
old-fashioned French Parliament. And the Parliament at Westminster had been
adjourned for their better Reception: But what Address they made to the King,
or what Acts passed at that Noble Parliament, I cannot tell, they having not
been yet published: But I suppose they were these that follow.

(1.) An Act for continuing his Majesty's Subjects in the Service of France.
(2.) An Act for enabling the Duchess of Cleveland to use the Archbishop of
Paris for her Father-Confessor, etc. (3.) An Act to discharge her Grace from
farther Attendance upon the King. (4.) An Act to constitute the French
Gentlewoman to be Whore in her room, and a Spy for the French King. (5.) An Act
to enable Nell Waal to be Woman and Bawd in ordinary to the said French
Gentlewoman, and his Sacred Majesty. (6.) An Act to supply the Extraordinary
Occasions of that Whore Portsmouth, and her Woman Nell Waal. (7.) An Act to
enable the Duchess of Portsmouth, in order to her Health, to possess and enjoy
a certain Apartment in a House-Royal called the Lock, situate at the end of
Kent-street, and Nell to have the Reversion after her decease in case of
Necessity. (8.) An Act for the further Supply of French-Money, in order to
enslave the Kingdom, of 3000000 Livres per Annum. (9.) An Act for enabling
James Duke of York to go on with his Conspirators in the Conspiracy against the
Laws, Liberties and Religion of the People of England, and to demand the French
King's Purse, Credit and Interest, for his Help and Assistance. (10.) An Act to
invest Edward Coleman with the Sum of 20000 l. and a good Pension from the
French King, for his great Services done, and to be done, for the Catholic
Religion and French Interest. (11.) An Act of Abolition of all Claims and
Demands from the Subjects of France, on Account of all Prizes made of the
English at Sea since the Year 1674 till that Day, and for the future. (12.) Act
to supply the extraordinary Needs of the Pensioners at Westminster. (13.) An
Act to continue the Sham-Alliance with the States General of the
United Provinces.
There were, I suppose, several Private Bills in favor of the Pimps, Bawds,
and Whores, that were not sworn in Ordinary, but passed the Royal Assent, as I
may suppose, because at that time all things between England and France moved
with that punctual Regularity, that it was like the Harmony of the Spheres, so
consonant with themselves, tho I could not hear the Music. I pray, Sir, let us
know in your next Declaration what other Secret Bills were passed in that
August Assembly, wherein the Affairs of Peace and War were transacted with the
greatest Confidence; and when, good Boys, they had done their Master's
Business, with your Brother's Aid and Help, they were adjourned from New Market
to London, where they dissol^ed themselves without your Brother's Prerogative,
to make way for the Westminster Parliament, and so rubbed off with all
Demonstration of mutual Affection and Friendship.

Alas, Sir, these were Matters of that Import, that they required all
imaginable Expedition and Secresy; and it would have been the highest
Presumption for the poor Pensioners in the Westminster Parliament to have
intermedled with them. Alas, if they had been admitted to end the Work, it
might have ended in their own Dissolution, in order to a courageous running
away.

You say by way of Objection, Your Partisans made that which your Brother and
other Kings did by their Prerogative Royal, dissolve Parliaments before
Grievances were redressed and necessary Bills past, because things did not move
with that punctual Regularity between your Brother and them, that was between
him and the French King. I pray what was the Reason? Had they not had
Gratuities at the Charge of the Nation? Or, had the Duchess of Portsmouth
jilted them out of the French King's Blessing, which the Duke of Crequi and the
Archbishop of Rheims brought them of 200000 Lewis d' Ores? Who can tell what
to say to these things? It is no wonder then that Crew of Voters were grown
resty, and did not move regularly. Well, what then? the Parliament must not sit
till some State-Clockmaker had mended their Motions, and made them go true; the
House then had some good Bills, over which they roared only, and then were sent
Home by a blast of Prerogative-Breath.

Had your Brother any other Prerogative but what the Law gave him, and what he
was invested with at his Coronation? If he had, let us know it; but for once I
will grant he prorogued and dissolved Parliaments at his Pleasure to serve you
and your Cutthroat Crew: It does not therefore follow that he had a Right so
to do, according to a Maxim I learned almost 30 Years since, A facto ad jus non
valet consequentia, especially when such Prorogations and Dissolutions are
against so many express and positive Laws, such Principles of Common Right and
Justice, and so many particular Ties and Obligations to the contrary.

Your Brother might, by the Advice of wicked Statesmen and villainous Judges,
pretend to a Prerogative the Law had given him, of which nothing ever was
known, unless revealed by some French Maxims learned abroad in his Travels: Yet
such a Prerogative could not justify such Practices; for if he had been
invested with such Prerogatives by the Law, yet the Law could give none to
destroy it self, and those it protects.

But Old Hodg and his Inferior Clergy may interpose and say, Had not King
Charles his Prerogative founded upon Law? Who questions, Sir, but the Kings of
England had their Prerogatives? Yet observe what Old Bracton says, Page 487.
That tho the Common Law allows many Prerogatives to the King, yet it allows
none by which to hurt or prejudice any. Therefore with the Learned in the Law I
will assert, That whatever Power or Prerogative your Brother had, ought to have
been used according to the true Intent of the Government, that is, to preserve
the People and their Interest, and not to hinder a Parliament in reforming
Grievances, and providing for the future Execution of the Laws; and whenever he
applied his Prerogative to frustrate these Ends, by the Advice of you or any
wicked Person, it was a Violation of Right, and the Breach of his Coronation
Oath, since he stood obliged to Pass or Confirm those Laws his People should
choose in the Time of his Reign.

6. Your Brother and you had little or no regard to the Laws: All the Cry of
your Villains was Prerogative, and nothing was endured that was according to
Law: Therefore, Sir, I will give you a Proof, by Dr. Gauden's leave, from the
Words of your own Father, who when in Prison began to recollect himse^f a
little, and gave your Brother this Advice when he should come to the Crown;
That Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting, rather than
exacting the Rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse than Legal Tyranny;
nor would he have him entertain any Aversion or Dislike of Parliaments, which
in their Right Constitution with Freedom and Honor, will never injure or
diminish his Greatness, but will rather be as interchangings of Love, Loyalty,
and Confidence between a Prince and his People.

Surely, Sir, if the Reports and Opinions of the best Lawyers could not, yet
the Counsel of his Father the King, or his Father in God, might have wrought
upon him and you: But the Truth is, in the Time of Richard II, there were some
Flaterers and Traitors that presumed, in defiance of their Countries Rights, to
assert such a boundless Prerogative in the Kings of England, as Chief Justice
Tresillian, and others, advising him that he might dissolve Parliaments at
Pleasure, and that no Member should be called to Parliament, nor any Act past
in either House without his Approbation in the first place; and that whoever
did advise otherwise were Traitors: But this Advice was no less fatal to
himself, than pernicious to his Prince. To which let me add a Saying of your
Grandfather in his Speech to his Parliament in 1609, in which he gives them
Assurance, That he never meant to govern by any other Law than the Law of the
Land: And tho it be disputed among them as if he intended to alter the Law, and
govern by the absolute Power of a King, yet to put them out of doubt, he tells
them that all Kings, who are not Tyrants or Perjured, will bind themselves
within the Limits of their Laws; and they that persuade the contrary, are
Vipers, and Pests both against them and the Commonwealth. Thus, Sir, I have
plainly proved, that Parliaments are the Right of the People of England, and
that no King, without the Breach of his Coronation Oath, can govern without
them. I come now to show,

II. That they are the Essential Part of the Government. Truly, Sir, I have had
occasion to prove that as a necessary Consequence of the foresaid Right: but
something may be offered to prove this Point, which will aggravate your Crime,
and the Villainy of your Party in attempting to render this Essential Part of
the Government useless. Therefore, Sir, when you are at leisure, consider with
your self the Constitution of the Government, which your Brother did wound, and
you attempted utterly to destroy, but therein lost your self and this
Government, which would have been worth your keeping. Take a View therefore of
the Constitution of the English Government, where the King is the Head, from
whom the Government it self receives its Life, as he from the Law receives
his Power: He has the Care of the whole, and it is his Interest to seek its
Welfare: The Strength of the Nation is his Strength, and the Riches of the
Nation his Riches: The Glory and Honor of the Nation is his Glory and Honor.
So on the contrary, when the Nation is weak, he is weak; if it be impoverished,
he is impoverished; if it lose itss Honor and Glory, he loses his likewise.
But lest Passion, Mistakes, Flatteries, or the ill Designs of some about him,
should make him forsake his Zeal, and follow a destructive imaginary Interest,
there is an Estate of Hereditary Nobility, who are by Birthright the Kingdom's
Counselors, whose main Interest and Concern it is to keep the Balance of the
Government steady, that the Favorites and great Officers exceed not their
Bounds, and oppress the People, that Justice be duly administered, and that all
Parts of the Government be preserved entire: yet even these may grow insolent;
a Disease to which great Men are liable, or may by Offices, Hopes of
Preferment, or other Accidents, become (as to the Majority of them) rather the
obsequious Flatterers of the Court, than true Supporters of the Public and
English Interest. Therefore the Excellency of our Government affords us another
Estate of Men, which are the Representatives of the Freeholders, Cities,
Boroughs and Corporations of England, who by the old Law were to be chosen
yearly, if not oftener, whereby they perfectly gave the Sense of those that
chose them, and did the same as if the Electors were present, coming so newly
from them, and so quickly returning to give account of their Fidelity, under
the Penalty of Shame and no further Trust. Therefore, Sir, consider,

1. If the Constitution of the House of Commons had been destroyed, 'twould
have been impossible the Sense of the Nation, and their Complaints, and the
Grievances of the People should have beer represented. To what Estate of Men
must we have had Recourse? Must it have been to the Nobility? It may be they
might not have understood our Grievances, being in a Sphere above the Rank of
Common People. And the House of Commons being the Constitution, how could Money
be raised to support the Government without them, unless by a total Subversion
of the whole Frame of our Constitution? for by the Law the sole Power of giving
Money remains in the House of Commons, none being concerned in that but the
Commons of England.

2. Those that would overthrow the Constitution of the House of Commons, will
not stick to subvert that of the House of Lords, who are so essential a Part of
the Government, that to part with them, was to part with the second State,
which is the Wisdom and Counsel of the Nation, to which their Birth, Education,
and constant Employment in every Parliament being the same, fits and prepares
them. I have read of a House of Commons in the 2d Parliament of Mary I. that
was bribed to consent to the receiving and owning of the Pope's Power; but I
never yet heard of a House of Lords that were so bribed: and the House of Lords
in 1649 being voted useless, the Commons run into so many Factions, that put
General Cromwell to the Necessity of taking upon him the Government of the
Nation by a single Person, by the Name and Title of Lord Protector. Those who
would destroy the Constitution of the House of Lords, do endeavor the
Destruction of the Balance of the English Government.

3. Consider, the King gives Life and Vigor to all the Proceedings in
Parliament; the Wills and Desires of the People, tho approved by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, without the King signify nothing; unless he bids them be
an Act, they are abortive. Therefore he that shall attempt the Subversion of
any of the other two Estates, is no more a King but a Tyrant, and useless to
God and Man. You see that your Father undid himself to all Intents and
Purposes, by following such Measures as subverted his own Government; and so
have you: and if you will not believe it, you may ask the French King, and he
will soon satisfy you of the Matter. But from hence, Sir, you may see that you
cannot destroy any one Estate in this Government, but the whole is subverted;
and therefore I may lay down this Proposition, that Parliaments are the
Essential Part of the Government. In a word then, to conclude this Head, let me
ask you or any of your Plotters these two Questions.

(1.) If this be so, that by so great Authority (viz. so many Statutes then and
now in Force, the Fundamentals of the Common Law, the Essentials of the
Government it self, Magna Charta, your Brother's Coronation Oath, and so many
Laws of God and Man) the Parliament ought to meet and sit to redress
Grievances, provide for Common Safety, especially in times of Common Danger;
and that this was so in a most eminent manner, none can doubt that did believe
the King, so many Parliaments, the Cloud of Witnesses, the public Judicatures,
their own Sense and Experience of the manifold Mischiefs acted, and the
apparent Ruin and Confusion that threatened the Nation by the restless Attempts
of you and your bloody Party: Then, Sir, I ask you, Whether, after the People
of England had the Point of the Dagger thus set to their Breasts, and the Knife
at their Throats, Cities and Habitations fired, Invasions and Insurrections
threatened to destroy the King and Government, your villainous Popish Party did
not design to destroy the only Remedy hoped for, under God, to give us Relief,
that is our Parliaments, who with so much Cost and Pains were elected, sent up,
and entrusted for our Help, and to turn them off without answering the Ends for
which chosen, by those frequent Prorogations and Dissolutions? Consider, Sir,
the Point in hand: Were not the People of England justified in their important
Cries, humble Petitions to the King your Brother, fervent Addresses to their
Members, and earnest Claims for this their Birthright, pleaded with all the
Modesty imaginable, which the Laws of the Kingdom (consonant to the Laws of God
and Nature) had given them? How impudent then were your Abhorrers of such
Petitions and Claims? What can Withens (who was expelled the House for the
same) say for himself? What can the Rascal plead in behalf of himself and a
rascally Crew that joined with him in signing an Address of Abhorrence; and
that Villain Jefferies, who did that in London which Wythens had done in
Westminster? Which brings me to a second Question.

(2.) If it be fo, that by so great Authority Parliaments ought to meet and sit
to redress Grievances, etc. what shall we say to those who advised your Brother
to this high Violation of their Countries Rights, to the infringing so many
just Laws, and to the exposing the Public to those desperate Hazards, even
almost a total Ruin; which was done with all the Impudence and Barefacedness
imaginable, the Advisers not having the least Remorse upon them?

If K. Alfred (as Andrew Horn in his Mirror of Justice tells us) hanged
Darling, Segnor, Cadwine, Cole, and forty Judges more for judging contrary to
Law, and yet all those faise Judgments were but in particular and private
Cases; what Death did those deserve who offered Violence to the Law it self,
and all the sacred Rights of their Country? If the Lord Chief Justice Thorpe i^
Edward Ill's time, for receiving the Bribery of 100 l. was adjudged to be
hanged, as having made the King break his Oath to the People, how much more
guilty were they that made your Brother break his Coronation Oath, and
persuaded him to act against all Laws for holding of Parliaments, and passi^g
(...) therein, which ^e was so solemnly sworn to do? And if the Lord Chief
Justice Tresillian was drawn, hanged, and quartered, for advising the King to
act contrary to some Statutes only, what did those deserve that advised your
Brother to act, not only against some, but all the ancient Laws and Statutes of
the Realm?

Moreover, Sir, I would say this further to you, if you will have a little
Patience: If Blake the King's Counsel, only for assisting in the Matter, and
drawing up Indictments by the King's Command against Law (tho it is like he
might plead the King's Order and Command for so doing) was drawn, hanged and
quartered; what was due to them that assisted your Brother in the total
Destruction of all the Laws of the Kingdom, and as much as in them lay, their
King and Country too? And if Vske the Undersheriff (whose Office it is to
execute the Laws) for but endeavoring to aid Tresillian, Blake, and their
Accomplices, against some of the Laws, was also with five more drawn, hanged
and quartered; what Punishment did they deserve, that not only aided your
Brother, but endeavored to subvert all the Laws of the Kingdom? And if Empson
and Dudley in the time of Henry VIII. tho of the King's Privy Council, were
hanged for procuring and executing an Act of Parliament contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and to the great Vexation of the People, when
yet they had an Act of Parliament on their Side; what ought to have been done
to those who had no such Act to shelter themselves, and who not only acted
contrary to, but to the Destruction of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom? I
can expect, Sir, no Answer from you but this; The Men that did these things,
should surely have died; if they had been discovered, they should have perished
without Mercy. Is it so? then I come to the last Particular to be debated, and
that is,

III. You are the Man, and your Party was the Party that did endeavor to break
the Use of Parliaments by inveighing against that way of Government. In a word
therefore I shall descend unto Particulars, and show you, 1st. That your
Inclinations were not for Parliaments, or that Way of Governing. 2ly. What
those Parliaments were that you and your Party procured to be dissolved. 3ly.
What Arts and Methods you used to expose the three last Parliaments your
Brother held in 1679, 1680, and 1681. 4ly. Your Unreasonableness in so doing.
5ly. The ill Consequences that attended the Dissolution of those Parliaments.
6ly. What Pretenses you and your Party used for procuring the Dissolution of
those Parliaments, with Answers thereto.

First; Your Inclinations showed you an Enemy to a Parliamentary Way of
Government; and this appears in the following Particulars: 1. From your Nature
and Temper. 2. From your Usage even of the Pensioner-Parliament. 3. From the
Notions and Practices of your traitorous Party in relation to Parliaments. 4.
From the daily Breaches you made upon our Laws. 5. By your Unwillingness to let
that Parliament meet and sit. 6. By the Opinion you had of their Affection to
you.

1. From your own Nature and Temper, which I shall set forth before you, in
relation to, (1.) Your Religion; (2.) Your Politics; (3.) Your Morals.

(1.) Let us consider your Nature and Temper in respect to your Religion, and
this will prove your Aversion to English Parliaments, and that way of
Government. Your Nature and Temper inclined you to set up the Popish Religion.
How was this to be done? was it by an English Parliament? If any of your Party
should suppose this, let me tell you the Supposition in it self was Nonsense.
Your Religion was such (and I am persuaded you are no Changeling) as went not
altogether in the Old Primitive Apostolical Way of Preaching and Praying, and
teaching all Nations, etc. but Scourging, Wracking and Broiling Men into the
Fear of God. Nay, is not your Religion such, that for its own Propagation it
will make its Champions divest themselves of Humanity, and act worse than
Devils, in order to be Saints? Now, Sir, where could you get a Parliament to
have established such a Religion by a Law? And can any Man judge you in love
with Parliaments, who are such Enemies to this excellent Religion of yours? I
pray, Sir, reflect upon your Servant Coleman's Words in his Letter to Father La
Chaise, the French King's Confessor: We have a mighty Work upon our Hands, no
less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the utter
subduing of a Pestilent Heresy, which has domineered over great Part of this
Northern World a long time: there were never such Hopes of Success since the
Death of our Queen Mary as now in our Days; (What Reason gives Coleman for this
Doctrine?) when, says he, God has given us a Prince, who is become (I may say
to a Miracle) zealous of being the Author and Instrument of so glorious a Work:
but the Opposition we are sure to meet with is also like to be great, so that
it imports us to get what Aid and Assistance we can; for the Harvest is great,
and the Laborers but few. Here was a mighty Work, and a mighty zealous Prince
engaged in this Work. I pray, Sir, why did you not apply to your mighty Band of
Pensioners in your Long Parliament for Aid and Assistance? No, your Religion
would not comply with that, nor their Religion advance your mighty Work: tho
they were Villains enough in some Sense, yet you did not think fit to trust
them with the managing this mighty Work, or to let them know your mighty Mind
and Zeal in this great Work. To whom then do you apply your self? Why truly to
the mighty Lewis, the French King: for do but observe your Agent's Words in the
same Letter, where he says; That which we rely upon most, next to Almighty
God, and the Favor of my Master the Duke, is the mighty Mind of his Christian
Majesty, whose Soul inclines him to great Undertakings. Truly, Sir, I think the
Case is plain, that the subtle Jesuits had formed a Design to bring in Popery,
and to kill the King, which they would never have been such Sots to attempt,
had they not been sure you would engage in this mighty Work. Yet you were not
privy to it: Let who will believe that, I cannot; for do you think the Jesuits
and Coleman would have engaged in that mighty part of the Conversion, had not
they seen into your very Heart and Soul? Now upon the whole Matter, can any one
think, if there were no such thing in Nature as a mighty English Parliament to
have joined with your mighty Zeal in the mighty Work you had upon your Hands,
that ever the Religion which you professed would incline you to be in love with
an English Parliament, that was ever averse to Popery and Slavery since the
Reformation? And because of your Aversion to an English Parliament as an Enemy
to your Religion, you apply your self to the French King, which I am sure was
not consistent with a hearty Love to an English Parliament.

(2.) Let us consider your Nature and Temper as to your Politics, and by that
I shall show your natural Aversion to Parliaments, and a Parliamentary way of
Government. As your Religion, so your Judgment leads you to Arbitrary
Government: for it was not only Rome's Religion, but the French Mode of
Governing that was your Design, and the end of all those Counsels you had with
your Jesuits, and your Servant Coleman, who was a main Agent in that Affair;
yet when your glorious Enterprise was discovered, you graciously left him to be
hanged for all his good Secret Services done you in furthering the mighty Work
you had upon your Hands.

But some of your Party may say, That in opposition to a Parliament it was
impossible to bring in Popery and Arbitrary Power, it being inconsistent with
the Rules of Policy to attempt such a thing in England. To this I answer:

Let the Popish Crew say so if they dare: I am certain they must belly their
Consciences in this point, whatever they do in other Points in their Politics,
the hellish Popish Plot being a plain Demonstration that your Cutthroat
Papists did believe it possible, or else Coleman and others would not have on
your Behalf so far engaged the French King's Aid and Assistance in the Affair:
for you attempted to be restored to all your Commissions; and how came it to
pass that you did not effect your Restoration? It was not, says Coleman,
hindered by reason of any Aversion they had to your Person. What then? it was
because of the Dissatisfaction the Faction entertained against you. Who was
this Faction but the English Parliament, to whom you were so averse, that the
Popish Party could make no brisk Attempt on your Behalf? for the Parliament
then was very sensible that the French King's Interest was much attracted to
yours, which declared you to be no Friend to them, and engaged them to provide
for themselves against you and your cursed Party.

Again, Sir, by your leave, could any thing be plainer than the Design that
Coleman and the Jesuits had formed, and had Hopes of effecting, since they had
joined you so close to the French King's Interest? I am sure 'twas contrary to
Reason and Nature it self for them to attempt your Brother's Life, and thereby
commit the basest of all Murders for Murder-sake: and tho natural Affection
might interpose in that Design, had you been privy to it, yet the Jesuits well
knew it was impossible for you that was converted to that degree of Zeal for
the Romish Religion and French Interest, to have given ground in that Affair.
Now, Sir, I hope your Villains here will be fully satisfied that it was
possible for the Popish Party to carry on such a Design as this in opposition
to a Parliament, which is a great Proof of your Aversness to Parliaments.

But to come close to the Point, That your Nature and Temper, in relation to
your Politics, demonstrated your Aversness to English Parliaments: the Jesuits
you know were very industrious with you for the Promotion of their Religion,
which you consented to; and what did you in order to this? Did you not lay some
Foundations for Popery, in order to its being established? Were there not
Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and other Judiciary Officers of your
procuring, in order to deprave the Law of the Nation, and defile the Throne of
Justice? I pray how did the villainous Judges use even the Protestant Laws, to
open the first Gate to Slavery? and our Laws being in their Hands, did they not
use them as barbarously as they could, to the Discouragement of Virtue, and
promoting Vice? Did not your Brother's Ministers of State betray our Liberties?
What Remedy had the People? If a Session of Parliament was near, you so hated
them upon this very Principle of Arbitrary Power, that either the Session was
put off for a longer time, or else it was to be so short, that Grievances could
not be redressed: and when you got a Period put to a Session, your wicked
Judges were to play their Parts with the Laws, whilst your Ministers were
ravishing all our Liberties from us; and as for Religion, you had a Set of
Apostolical Caterpillars, who were to manage that for your Service and Interest.

These Measures of yours taken from your Popish Crew, had rendered you so out of
love to an English Parliamentary Government, that you were at one time looked
upon by Parliament the greatest Grievance of the Nation, the universal Object
of their Hate and Fear, and the Subject of their Clamours and Curses. At whose
door did all the Discontents and Murmurs lie but at yours? Were not the Murmurs
so violent against you, that they became a great part of the Complaints of good
Men to Heaven in their own and their Country's Behalf? Nay, Murmurs were so
bold, that your Brother was attackt with them? for did they not look upon you
as Jupiter's Stork amongst the Frogs? Notwithstanding all your former Glories
and Conquests, your whole Stock of Fame was lost, and buried in your Apostasy
from the Protestant Religion. How all this, and an innate Love to your Country
and its Government, could stand together, I leave to wiser Men to judge. We saw
you designed to make us submit to an Arbitrary Power: Our Magna Charta was to
have been destroyed by you and your Cutthroats; our Religion and Liberties to
have been abolished; Popery and a Despotick Power set up; the Lords and Commons
extirpated; and all to have devolved into you, when they had given the fatal
Blow, that you might have set up Idols and Molten Calves, and we have bowed
down to them. Now, Sir, consider who the Man was that took such Measures, and
laid such Designs; and if it were possible for him to love an English
Protestant Parliament, I Will be his Slave.

To conclude this Head, Did you not by these Politics of yours fet the whole
Kingdom in a Flame, and then please your self with it? When you burnt our City,
you and your Party sung Te Deum for Joy, whilst others were astonished at the
dismal Sight. Did not your unbounded Thirst for innocent Blood make the Kingdom
of England a Slaughterhouse? And might you have had your Will, you would have
made Smithfield your Original Shambles. It is well known, Sir, how you loved
humane Sacrifices; and what Measures you took from France and Rome to propagate
your Cause, is not yet forgotten, nor I hope never will.

(3.) Let us consider your Nature and Temper as to your Morals, from which we
will demonstrate your Disaffection and Aversion to Parliaments. What Morality
could we expect from you, that was and still is a Papist, and a bigoted one
too? And being so, all your Morals are but Slaves to your Zeal. Nay, had you
been Master of all the Cardinal Virtues, there is not one but must have been
used to destroy our Religion, Laws and Liberties. Your Fortitude and Courage
(if ever you had any) made you the more daring to push on Rome's Religion and
the French Interest, and to withstand the Opposition you met withal in
Parliament. Your Justice you made use of to restore the Power and Authority of
the Bishop of Rome, believing him to be Christ's lawful Vicar, and Peter's true
Successor; and the said Office including the Ecclesiastical Supremacy, you
declared it your Duty to give the Pope the same Right over the Consciences of
the People of England, as you had to succeed your Brother, tho through his
Blood. Let us consider, Sir, your Temperance, which for once I will suppose you
to be Master of too, not for the public Good, but only to testify that you
could conceal your Passions, which were great enough to do public Mischief,
for you had always a most firm Resolution to ruin these Kingdoms. As for your
Constancy, it was no more than fixed Obstinacy. But it may be your Party may
say, you were never heard to rage, or scarce seen to frown; how true that may
be, I cannot tell, for I never was your Pimp, or Admirer, and therefore cannot
pretend to that Familiarity with you that some may. Yet what was your
Temperance and Constancy but fit Pillars to support your damnable Designs
against the Religion and Government of these three Kingdoms? But, Sir, if we
should again take a view of your admirable Temperance, in its larger
Signification, that is, a Denial of worldly Desires, it was still worse and
worse: for when you voluntarily took up your Cross, and quitted your great
Employments under your Brother, you left the Management of those Offices to
Villains of a deeper dye than the rest of Mankind, who still carried on your
Design to destroy us; you only quitted the toil of the Power, and left it to
your subordinate Villains. In the last place, we will comply with your Admirers
and Flatterers, and own you had Prudence: if you had, it was the worse for us,
because that, and that alone, could be your Trump-Gard, the only leading Virtue
that managed your Conduct in all your Hellish Plots and Designs with that Care
and Art, that you made a fair Progress in effecting the Business of Rome as to
Religion, and of the French King as to Arbitrary Power, to enslave and pox us
both in Religion and Liberty. To give you your due, you ripened that mighty
Work you and Coleman had upon your Hands, to a mighty Perfection: and had it
not met with a mighty Blast, you might by your supposed Prudence have ruined
three mighty Kingdoms. Now, Sir, if we grant you were endued with these mighty
Virtues of Fortitude, Temperance and Prudence, yet we must say they were the
absolute Hinges that opened the Gates to Rome and France, where Superstition
ruled the Day. Your moral Virtues were but lesser Lights, that took their Light
from that greater Orb above: but how these moral Virtues did shine in you, your
old Friend Tom Jones (if alive) could plainly tell, for he knew your Virtues
very well, even to his dying Day.

I must mind you of one thing more, viz. your Oath of Alle^iance that you took
to your Brother as your Sovereign Lord. Did you keep that Oath to him? If you
did, surely the only Motive that prompted you was some Obligation you believed
was in the Oath. But pray tell me, did not you Apostasy to the Church of Rome
not only require a Renunciation of that Oath, but also absolve you from the
Ties of it? Therefore I ask you again, Could your Conspiracy with the French
King against our Laws and Liberties consist with that Oath? Or if you looked
upon your self released from it, pray what Security could the Government have,
when you should come to the Crown, that you would keep your Faith with an
Heretical People, that would not keep Faith and true Allegiance to your
Brother, who was of the same Religion with your self? This, Sir, was your
Morality, of which your Party so much boasted. And how the Exercise of these
Virtues, that were so used in the Drudgery of France and Rome, could be
consistent with an English Parliamentary Government, I cannot tell.

Thus, Sir, the Consideration of your Nature and Temper in all these Respects,
shows you were a Person in whom it was impossible there could be any love for
Parliaments. Let your Party say what they will, and boast of your Virtues till
doomsday, yet I must say that your Nature and Temper showed you a Man of no
good Morals, your Conscience being ready at all times to transmigrate as you
found occasion. Those near you, that understood the Pulse of your Opinion, did
not in the least doubt your Heart, which (whilst you professed to be a
Protestant) conveyed Symptoms of Inflammation against the Reformed Religion,
because it was not so ready to consume a Party of Men you hated, according to a
Maxim of your dearest Great Grandmother of notorious Memory, Mary Queen of
Scots; to which purpose you zealously promoted about the time of your Brother's
Restoration, abundance of Church-Caterpillars, that with the fiercest Wrath
might devour those of the Reformed Religion: nay, how often did you fall upon
these Vermin, as not zealous enough in persecuting those that differed from
them only in a few rascally Ceremonies, not worthy of wiping a Porter's Breech?
by which means those base Creatures ruined several thousands of Families in the
space of twenty odd Years, and brought them to great want. And for all the
Pretenses you ever made for Liberty of Conscience, you used to discover to your
Brother the Ardency of your Zeal against poor dissenting Protestants, and the
Moderate Churchmen, that they were the greatest Enemies against his
Government; and for no other Reason, but because they would not part with their
Religion as Christians, nor their Liberties as Englishmen, but preserve both
chaste and inviolable, that they might approve themselves Men of Uprightness
before God and Man.

2. Your Inclinations published you an Enemy of all Parliaments, from your
Usage of that very Parliament in which you had such a Band of Pensioners. One
would think you should never have parted with such a Parliament, where you and
your Villains had purchased such an Interest: truly some of them were so fond
to aid and abet the Destruction of the Nation, that the Charges in their
Elections were defrayed, whatever they amounted to; any some of them were so
profligate, that as they had no Estates, so they had neither Conscience nor
Honor, but were such as you picked out as necessary Men, whose Votes you most
relied upon. You procured Tables for many of them at Whitehall and Westminster,
and had them for their great Loyalty in their Votes received into Pension. What
vast Sums did they give? a great part of which was by you obtained to carry on
your wicked Designs and Purposes: And what Sums did you obtain to carry on your
first wicked War against the Dutch, and to supply your extraordinary Occasions
in the second? How well they supplied the Necessities of the Court-Whores,
Pimps and Bawds, is well known. You no sooner demanded, but they complied; so
that your Brother and you once thought your selves exceeding happy in a House
of Commons: notwithstanding the Exchequer was shut up, and by a Proclamation
that you procured, the Crown was published a Ba^krupt in the midst of so many
Aids and Revenues given by them. Yet what humble Slaves were these to you and
your Interest, that when you ought to have shared in the Public Justice of the
Nation due to Traitors, they not only passed by all your Miscarriages, but
stood by you as far as they durst: and tho your Sins cried aloud, yet nothing
moved them to call you to an account for them. If your Brother asked, they
gave, till even they themselves were near the point of becoming useless, and
their Pensions too in danger. In recompense of this you aimed at their
Dissolution; and how you branded them in a certain Declaration drawn up by
Coleman by your Privity, (which your Brother had promised to sign, but not
being a Slave to his Word, did not) is yet remembered.

In that Declaration you charge the House of Commons (that had given your
Brother such Testimonies of their Loyalty and Bounty) with misconstruing all
his Endeavors to preserve the Nation in Ease and Prosperity, and against all
Reason and Evidence represented them to the Nation as Arguments of Fear and
Disquiet; and that under pretense of securing Property and Religion, they had
demanded unreasonable things from the Crown, to bring those Men that had so
well served your Brother and you, out of all Esteem with the Protestant
Dissenters. You declared them Enemies to Liberty of Conscience, and to the
Proceedings of the Government; and that they made seditious Constructions of
the same, and many other Charges of a very high Nature, especially for opposing
your Match with Mrs. Modena your Italian Comrade. Nay, you charged them for
being Enemies to the Church of England, and therefore you labored to the
utmost to have them dissolved, tho you well knew that if these poor Dogs were
not in a Parliament, they must be in a Prison. If this were your usage of a
Parliament, in which you were so happy, if we may believe the King's Message to
the Commons, Feb. 28. 1663. what can any Man judge from hence but this, that if
this Parliament could not please you, none could? This I think sufficiently
demonstrates what Inclination you had for any Parliament; for certain you nor
your rascally Party could never expect to see a Parliament more ready to assist
you in all your wicked Designs.

3. Your Inclination to Parliaments was seen by the Notions and Practices of
your Party in relation to Parliaments, especially from those of them that knew
you best. Were not Coleman, Beddingfield, Whitebread, Strange, Nevil, and
several other Villains, of your Privy Council at St. James's? and did not these
study to find out your Inclinations, and to imitate you exactly? And how these
and the rest of your villainous Crew stood affected to Parliaments in general,
is not yet forgotten by some that knew them. Was it not their common discourse,
that they hoped there would be no more need of Parliaments? did not your Popish
Priests and Jesuits go from Coffee-house to Coffee-house, and ridicule
Parliaments? Alas, Sir, this was but the Copy which your Villains took from
your own Words; who sometimes, when they wanted a Supply for their
extraordinary Occasions, would be seemingly content that a Parliament should
meet and sit to raise such a Supply, but never to redress Grievances: nay, some
of them have said that a King's Proclamation ought to be sufficient to raise
Money, and that it would never be well with us till the whole Government was
reduced to the Model of that of France.

4. Your Inclinations to a Parliament were seen in your daily Breaches upon the
Laws and Customs of the Kingdom. You knew the Parliament had made an Act of
Uniformity, and several Laws against Dissenters in 1663, and several Laws were
made against Papists in former Kings Reigns; yet to oblige the Popish Party,
you broke in upon all these Laws at once, and procured your Brother in the said
Year to put forth an Indulgence for tender Consciences, not for the
Encouragement of Protestant Dissenters, but the Increase and Growth of Popery.
And as a necessary thing to usher in your second wicked War against the Dutch,
you put your Brother upon issuing forth another Declaration of Indulgence in
1671. Many other Instances I could give of this Matter, but this shall suffice.
Now how this could consist with an innate Love to English Parliaments, I must
leave to better Judgments.

5. Your Inclinations to Parliaments were seen in your Unwillingness to let
that Parliament meet and sit, in which you had so great a Band of Pensioners.
To my certain Knowledge Messenger after Messenger has been sent to France with
begging Letters, to get Money from the French King to put off the Sitting of
the Parliament. Give your Brother his due, he never cared for their Sitting,
unless it was to get a Supply, that he might exercise his Talent you know
where, without Molestation, which he could not well do at a Session of
Parliament. Sir, when the Parliament was by Prorogation to have met in Feb.
1672/3, O what Interest was used to put it off till October following? and it
had been done, if your Party had brought in a Million as they promised; but
bringing in but 356000 l. there was no help but a Parliament must meet; who I
think made up the Defect in the Supply you expected from the Popish Party. You
know the Parliament was put off from October. 1670, till Feb. 1672/3. by which
long Interval you had a competent Scope for the mighty Work you had upon your
Hands, that you and the rest of the Architects of our Ruin might be so long
free from their odious and busy Inspection, till it were finished. A drinking
Companion of your Brother's telling you that the Session of Parliament drew
near, and asking you what you thought of the Humor the Parliament Men would be
in at next Session? you answered, you trusted there might be no Occasion for
their meeting any more, for you had hopes to bring the Cause to bear without a
Parliament; and took it as a great Affront that the Question was asked. You
know the old Squire your Brother laughed at you for that Capricio of yours, tho
your Jesuits thought it a piece of Impudence in that Gentleman so much as to
mention the name of a Parliament in your Presence, he knowing your Opinion as
to that way of Government. I must conclude that Man to be at a perpetual War
with Mankind, that will not admit of the sight of either Friends or Enemies.
If, Sir, you could not bear the Congress of your Friends that had been so loyal
and bountiful, you must certainly be averse to the meeting of a Parliament,
that would call you and your wicked Party to account for your many traitorous
Designs against our Laws and Liberties.

6. And lastly, Your Inclination to Parliaments was seen in your Opinion of the
Affection which your Band of Pensioners did bear to you and your Cause. You
know, Sir, you had put your self under the Protection of the French King, and
therefore it was scarce possible for you to engage any more in a Parliamentary
way, for all English Parliaments are haters of the French Interest. Your Friend
Coleman in his Letter to La Chaise, Sept. 29. says, That in Father Ferier 's
time he had inculcated the great danger the Catholic Religion and the Interest
of his most Christian Majesty would be in at the next Session of Parliament,
which was to be in Oct, 1673. at which I fore saw that the King my Master would
be forced to do somewhat in Prejudice to his Alliance with his most Christian
Majesty; which I saw so evidently, and particularly that we should make Peace
with Holland, that I urged all the Arguments I could, which to me were
Demonstrations to convince your Court of that Mischief, and pressed all I could
to persuade his most Christian Majesty to use his utmost Endeavors to prevent
that Session of our Parliament. Again, you find him pressing him for the
Dissolution of the Parliament, in order to bring the Confederates to a Peace
upon the French King's Terms. Then he plainly tells you, That the Parliament,
as it was managed by the then Ministry, was both unuseful to England and
France, and the Catholic Religion. In another Part he tells you, That
Prorogations were but loss of time, and a means to strengthen those who opposed
the Crown; and therefore still presses for a Dissolution, which would give the
Protestant Religion the greatest Blow that ever it received since its first
Birth. So that we may see by your Servant Coleman what Opinion you had of the
then Parliament. But that we may rivet the Matter, I pray, Sir, take but a Note
or two of your own Letter to La Chaise, wherein you express your self extremely
pleased, That the French King was satisfied of the unusefulness of the
Parliament in order to the Service of the King your Brother, and his most
Christian Majesty. In another place you say, that his Christian Majesty was of
Opinion that the Parliament was neither in his Interest nor yours. Pray let me
know what Parliament would be in your Interest joined to that of the French
King: Show me such a Parliament, and I will then say I can show you one that
you would have a good Opinion of: and since you could retain no good Opinion of
your Band of Pensioners, you can certainly have none of those that are for
preserving the English Protestant Interest. So that I think I have sufficiently
showed your Inclinations, and by them your Enmity to Parliaments.

Secondly; I now come to show what those Parliaments were to which you were so
averse, and which you procured to be dissolved, whereby your hatred to
Parliaments, and that way of Government, did appear. Were they Men of
Common-wealth-Principles, or did they aim at the Promotion of their own
Ambition and Greatness? did you or your Rogues know of such Persons? why then
did you not discover them? The Nation would have charged the Account to
themselves, and have made your Party some recompense for so signal a Piece of
Service to the Public. Nay, if your Crew had brought these People to light,
and let the Parliament sat to have tossed them in a Blanket, they would have
found a little severer quarter, than the Mayor of Scarborough did from one of
your Apostles, whom you sent to plant a Colony of Red-coat-Christians in that
Place. But, Sir, in plain English your Common-wealth-Christians we found were a
number of Men that were in a most zealous manner devoted to the public Good
and common Service of their Country, who believed Kings were instituted for the
Good of their People, and Government ordained for the sake of the Governed, and
therefore complained or were grieved when it was used to contrary ends. Every
wife and honest Man would then and still be proud to be of that Rank and
Number. And if Commonwealth signifies Common Good, in which sense it has been
taken in all Ages by most good Authors; as Bodin, speaking of the Government of
France, calls it a Commonwealth, as do our own Authors (the Mirror of
Justice, Bracton, Fleta, Fortescue, etc.) in former times, as well as those of
later Years, particularly Sir Thomas Smith in the time of Q. Elizabeth; and not
only several Statutes use the word Commonwealth, but K. James your Grandfather
in his first Speech to an English Parliament owned himself the Servant of the
Commonwealth; and K. Charles I. your dearest Father of famous Memory, both
before and in the time of the War, never expressed himself otherwise: to be fond
then of such Commonwealth Principles becomes every good English Man, and the
whole Kingdom were glad to find they had sent such Men to Parliament. But, Sir,
your Villains used to call those Parliaments, which you procured to be
dissolved, Persons conspiring to set up a Democratical Power in opposition to
Monarchy, that would overthrow the Government both in Church and State, tho it
was that which you and your Rogues designed in that villainous Alliance you made
with France to destroy the King and the Protestant Religion. The Nation saw it
was not those they had sent up to Parliament, but you that had a Design to
overthrow the Government; for you were so fond of your beloved Arbitrary Power,
and therefore resolved to subvert our legal Monarchy instituted for the Benefit
of the Commonwealth, by destroying the Honor and Reputation of our English
Parliaments.

I pray, Sir, call to mind the Band of Pensioners you had in that Parliament
which your Brother kept so long; yet you could not bear with their Proceedings
against your Party, when your Designs were laid open before them, and so
plainly proved, that they could not withhold Justice from being executed upon
several of your Case-hardned Traitors. When they were dissolved, it is manifest
that three greater Parliaments were never known in England since the time of
William I: than what succeeded them, viz. those two that met at Westminster,
and that at Oxford; they were, I dare say, the Flower of the whole Kingdom, and
might with all Justice be termed the Wisdom of the Nation: their Debates and
Votes which were printed and published, showed them to be Gentlemen of very
great Ability and Integrity; those that sent them knew them to be Persons of
great Estates, not beggarly Rascals, such as were in your Pensionary
Parliament, that had betrayed us to you and your Party in a great measure:
these did not please you, because they would not perpetrate so great a Piece of
Villainy; how then could those please you that met together afterward, and
approved themselves Well-wishers to the Protestant Religion, and duly
considered the State of the Nation, and the many Dangers to which it was
exposed by you and your Villains? Therefore, Sir, if any one can inform me how
all this does not prove you an Enemy to the Constitution of Parliaments, let
him come forth, and he shall be heard; or let us know what sort of Men you are
inclined to, for I believe if you could obtain 513 Papists, that were not of
the French Interest, to establish Popery separate from Arbitrary Power, even
such could not please you, but would soon be exposed as others have been: and
if you should have met with 513 Men, that could have complied with you in both,
you must have met with such as would have destroyed their own Constitution, and
put a Period to all Parliaments. Now if any of your Party can say, this would
be a Demonstration of your Affection to Parliaments, and prove^t, Erit mihi
magnus Apollo.

Thirdly; Remember what Arts and Methods you and your Party used to expose the
three last Parliaments your Brother held in 1679, 1680, 1681. It is worth your
considering that when you had a great desire to have the long Parliament
dissolved, some objected, that if that was dissolved, the Crown was in danger,
because a new one was to be called. But those that made the Objection, did not
consider a new one must be chosen; which if they did, yet they did not consider
what the Men were that would in all probability be chosen: and those new
Parliaments, if they might have been suffered to redress Grievances, would have
stuck at nothing to have rendered themselves acceptable both to Prince and
People: for it was, first, the best way your Brother took to become acquainted
with the Nation, to dissolve that Parliament that had so long continued.
Secondly, the King might, if he would have let his Parliaments sat, obtained a
great Sum of Money for Payment of his Debts; nay, they would have given it him
as a Pledge of Endearment between him and the People; they resolved to give
freely, and hoped he would receive as graciously: in truth, Sir, they would
have been generous even to your self, for they would have excluded you from
being King, that you might enjoy the greater Security of your Person and Estate
as a Subject, which if you would have believed, you had not at this day been
rattling your Beads at St. Germains: the People would have been free under
their King, as the King would have been happy in his People; and both secured
by frequent Parliaments, which therefore could never endanger your Brother's
Crown. Mistake not your self, nor think that we could be cheated with that
Nonsense; for nothing could endanger his Crown but your advancing the Religion
of Rome, and the Arbitrary Power of France in England. It was these things
endangered your Brother's Government, nothing else could: but, good Gentleman,
he was engaged with you in these things beyond recovery, to the ruin of
himself, and the endangering of all our Laws and Liberties.

The Devil's Brokers did not join with you in dissolving the Long Parliament,
but cried out, if that Parliament was dissolved, the Church would fall: but,
Sir, I will say that for you, you had as little regard for the Church as you
could, considering how the Rogues had espoused your Quarrel, and thought that
Passive-Obedience, Nonresistance, and the Divine Right of Succession would have
been admirable Orv^etans against the Plague of Rebellion. But why must this
Church fall with the Pensioners? Alas, alas, the poor distressed Church, and
the poor distressed Band of Pensioners! For the latter, they were a Parcel of
matchless Villains, and she Whore enough not to be in the Nation's Interest:
but dissolved they were, and what escaped the Jail, were secured by the Friars;
those who had stood by the Interest of their Country, were sent again, and such
a Set of Gentlemen as no King would have sent home in so ignominious a manner
but your Brother at your procurement; and being sent home, you and your Party
made it your Business to expose them.

1. You had them exposed on your Stages, in your rascally Play Houses, by a
Parcel of mercenary Rogues and Whores, who you and your villainous Party set up
to debauch the Nation, and to ridicule the essential Parts of the Government,
as if the Votes and Debates of that August Assembly were to be ridiculed by
such Vermin, who were Tools you made use of in some part to do your Drudgery.
But stay, it is not fit the Whores that are Stage Players should be reflected
on, left there should be a more severe Act made for cutting of Noses; for a
Parliament Man, you know, had his Nose cut for speaking against that sort of
Vermin: but I will not be afraid to mention their contemptuous reproaching of
Parliaments.

2. You had Monsieur Barillon, who managed the Intrigue of charging the
principal leading Members of both Houses of those three Parliaments with being
in a Conspiracy against your Brother and your self; and this he, and your
Jesuits, Priests, and other Vermin contrived by Subornation and Perjury, a
Proceeding not unusual to some Persons and Courts: all the Mischiefs,
Poisonings and Villainies in all the European Courts, were owing chiefly to his
and his Master's most Christian Politics: he was used as a main Agent fit to
expose three as great Parliaments as England ever knew, to all the Courts of
Christendom, as a Confederacy of Men in a Plot to destroy the King and your
self, and as Enemies to Monarchy. And what was this but to render Parliaments
odious to all the Princes of Europe?

3. Notwithstanding those three Parliaments had nothing before them but to
secure the Government against the Depredations that Popery and Arbitrary Power
would have made upon it; and notwithstanding their great Duty to the King, yet
what a scandalous Declaration was emitted, wherein the said Parliaments were
most villanously treated, as if they had aimed at nothing but the change of the
Government? This Declaration may be supposed to be drawn by that Villain, the
French Ambassador, in his own Mother Tongue, because tho it was turned into
English, yet the French way of wording it shows there was a French Counselor
in the case, which could be none but he, who was the chief Counselor your
Brother and you used in the management of your Conspiracy; yet it is but the
Copy of your Grandfather's and Father's way of Proceeding, which your Brother
and you thought fit to use to asperse Parliaments; you were all Friends alike
to that Constitution of the English Government.

4. It is very remarkable, that your villainous Judges were instructed in their
Circuits to spit their Venom against the Proceedings of the said Parliaments;
and in their respective Stations they were to let their Grand Juries know what
reason the King had to dissolve them: and how they recommended the King's most
Gracious Declaration to their Consideration, and what Converts they made, I was
never curious to inquire; for I could not suppose but the Country knew the Men,
and their Character, and under what necessity they lay to be Villains, from the
tenor of their illegal Commissions, and that they must prostitute themselves
to the Will of the Court, or be dismissed from their Employments: but they
chose rather to be Scandals to the Bench, than to appear as so many Reproaches
to their Professions at the Bar. Upon all which Considerations I cannot believe
they ever made any farther Profelytes against the English Parliaments, than a
paltry Sheriff of a County, or a villainous Grand Jury, packed on purpose to
draw up an Address of Thanks for the Court's attempting to ruin the Government
as established by Law.

5. Since, Sir, the City of London could not be debauched, but the eminent
Merchants and Traders in it stood firm to their Laws and Liberties, and to the
Government of England by Parliaments, so that you could not influence the
Masters, you took an unheard of Course to debauch the Servants and Apprentices
in their Morals, and procured a Day of Feasting for them, wh^re they were
encouraged to huzza it away against Parliaments, and to reproach the Senators
as a Herd of Men set upon the Destruction of the Government both in Church and
State: but it pleased God to open the Eyes of several of those young Gentlemen,
to see that this Feasting and Rioting was carried on by ill Men, and that the
dissolving of Parliaments was only to screen some public Offenders from
Justice; and by degrees quitting themselves of that scandalous Congress, in a
year or two their Feasting fell to the ground.

6. You employed old Hodg, your Buffoon in ordinary, to write against the
Proceedings of those Parliaments: the Rogue by his Lies, Equivocations and
Prevarications, did much Mischief, having called in a parcel of little Priests,
who engaged themselves to rail at Parliaments, and admire the Loyalty of old
Hodg their Guide, whose Observators were the Subjects of their Discourses every
Lord's day; nay, they would scarce look upon a Sacramental Discourse, the first
Sunday in the Month, to be well dish'd up, unless some of Roger's Frippery was
mingled with it: so that the old Villain was not unsuccessful in his traitorous
Papers which he published several times a week, till God in his Mercy opened
the Eyes of some of our Passive-Obedience-Puppies, and let them see the Villain
was aiming at Popery, and destroying the Church of England, notwithstanding his
specious Pretenses to defend it.

7. You had your spiritual Myrmidons throughout the Kingdom, roaring from their
Pulpits against the Proceedings of those Parliaments, by the Instruction of
some of their Superiors: this by the help of new Matter the Court instructed
them in, lasted several years; so that they were rather Court-Agents to carry
on some design, than Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God.
But alas, when the Tithe-pig began to squeak, they turned their Discourses
another way. Truly, Sir, to give the pious Herd of your Ecclesiastical Swine
their due, they will do any thing to serve you, if they can but enjoy their
Swill and Grains; poor Wretches, I never met with any of them that would lose a
Meal to save either King or Kingdom.

8. You had your Rascals in the most public Coffee-houses, who spent their
time chiefly in railing at Parliaments, that they were unuseful, and were
bringing 40 and 41 again upon the Stage; that they had a Design to ruin the
King by giving no Money, and starving his Servants: nay, Sir, they were so
insolent as to offer all Indignity to those Gentlemen that had served in any of
those Parliaments; for doing of which they were not only encouraged by your
Grace and Favor in your Smiles, but were also well rewarded. The Particulars
might be set down, but I leave them to reply upon those that shall pretend to
answer this or any part of it, provided they put their Names to their Answer,
as I have done to this my Memorial, otherwise I shall not take notice of any
Scribler in your Party. You have your Friend Sherridan, one of your Devil's
Brokers in Ireland, and honest Togra Smith another excellent Partisan of yours;
nay, you have a Set of Case-hardned Villains, that would if they durst be
barking at the Government; the Rogues stand still for want of Business: I pray
give them orders to disprove any part of the truth of what I now write; if you
do, you have a notorious Rogue, the Quondam Bp. of Kilmore, that walks in your
Quondam Park of St. James's; he is still a Malignant, and hates our English
Government: you would do well to send for him, for he would be a main Champion
with you in the Case of governing by Parliaments. The Sum of all which is this:
You may reflect upon the various ways you and your Party took to expose three
Parliaments, by which you showed your self an Enemy of all English Parliaments;
and therefore we could not but judge who were the Men that would poison the
People, and change the Government, even the Enemies of the Constitution, and of
those who endeavored to preserve the old English Government.

Fourthly; The unreasonableness of the ill usage of those Parliaments, shows
you an Enemy to Parliaments in general. You cannot but remember what ama^^ment
seized every good Man, to see two of the greatest Parliaments England ever knew
dissolved within the space of three Months. I confess the Kings of England have
in a great measure been entrusted by the Kingdom with appointing the times of
the Sitting and Dissolving of Parliaments: but lest through defect of Age,
Experience, or Understanding, they should forget or mistake our Constitution,
or by Passion, private Interest, or the Influence of evil Counselors be so far
misled, as not to assemble Parliaments when the public Affairs require it, or
should declare them dissolved before the Ends of their Meeting were
accomplished, the Wisdom of our Forefathers has provided diverse Laws both for
holding Parliaments annually, and oftener if need be, and that they should not
be put off till all the Bills were passed, all Petitions answered, and
Grievances ^edressed. But to be more particular with you, I will ask you a few
Questions; which if any of your Teagues can answer me on your behalf, they
shall be my Counselors I assure you, if ever I come to be Duke of Modena.

1. What Precedent can be produced for such a Dissolution amongst our ancient
Records in Parliament, held in the times of our ancient English Kings? We are
taught by the Writ of Summons that Parliaments are never called without the
Advice of the Council; and the usage of all Ages has never been to send them
away without the same Advice. Now if these Methods of calling and dismissing
Parliaments were safe, then not to pursue them, was to expose the King to the
Censures and Reflections of the whole Nation for an Action not only illegal and
uncustomary, but also very ungrateful to the People.

2. Have not the Laws of the Land taken great care to make the King always dear
to the People, and to preserve his Person sacred in their Esteem, by wisely
preventing his appearing in any Action that may be unacceptable to them? Now
was the Dissolution of three Parliaments, nay four in the compass of 26 Months,
acceptable to the People? Ought you not then to have used your Interest with
him to have acted according to the Laws and Customs of Parliaments, which would
have rendered you both acceptable to the People? And had he given himself
leisure to have had this debated in Council, because then his Counselors must
have answered for their Advice, you and your Brother had remained Honorable in
the Eyes of the Nation, and not have been judged guilty of such Orders as were
not only irregular, but also very illegal.

3. Suppose you should say, the King commanded it to be done, and his Ministers
were bound to obey, and therefore are justified: yet, Sir, let me tell you that
the Ministers that advised and assisted in the Administration of Affairs, could
not justify an unlawful Action under Color of the King's Commands, since all
his Commands contrary to Law were in themselves void; which is the true reason
of that old Maxim in the Law, That the King can do no wrong; a Maxim not only
true in self, but safe for a Prince and Subject too: for certainly it was
Nonsense in your Brother's Favorites to think of excusing their many
Enormities under pretense of their Master's Command. The truth is, it was so
unreasonable, that the Privy Council was ignorant of the thing, and surprised
at it, not being worthy to be trusted with it: but the French Whore near St.
James's House had the News of the Parliament's being to be dissolved two days
before we knew of it at Oxford; so that it was a Work of darkness concerted
between Barillon and Portsmouth, and the King resolved upon it by their Advice.

4. Would it not have been unreasonable in your Brother and you to have
dismissed the 12 Judges from sitting in Term-time, and from going the several
Circuits, that Justice and Judgment might not be done? Now that Parliaments
should meet and sit for Redress of Grievances, and making good and wholesome
Laws, by the same Sacred Tie whereby at his Coronation he obliged himself to
let his Judges sit to distribute Justice every Term, and in both the Seasons of
the Year in their Circuits, and to preserve inviolably all the Rights and
Liberties of the People, is very evident. Therefore, Sir, abruptly to dissolve
Parliaments, when nothing but the Legislative and united Wisdom of the Kingdom
could relieve the Protestant Party from their just Fears, or secure their
Religion from its certain Dangers, is very inconsistent with the great Trust
reposed in your Brother, and seems to express but little of that Love and
Tenderness which the People of England might justly have expected from him.

5. Would not the Constitution of Parliament, as by the Laws and Customs of
England established, have been equally imperfect, and destructive of it self,
had it been left to the Arbitrary Will of a wicked King, whether he would
summons a Parliament, or had it been put into his Power to dismiss them at his
pleasure, or at the Pleasure of two rascally French Whores, or a little
scoundrel French Ambassador? And therefore was not your Brother's dissolving
the Parliaments at Westminster and Oxford, by your procurement, a most
unreasonable thing?

6. Was not the Kingdom so alarmed at the Wickedness of your Brother in
dissolving those Parliaments, that Men began to be exceedingly concerned, not
knowing where it would end; insomuch that your Brother was necessitated in a
sneaking Declaration to let the Nation see he was conscious to himself that his
Dissolution of those Parliaments stood in need of an Apology; so that it was
but at the best an Appeal from his Parliament to the People of England? And if
your Brother and you could not justify your Usage of these Parliaments, because
so destructive to the Liberty of the Subject, what assurance did your two
French Whores Portsmouth and Mazarine, and Barillon give you and the rest of
your Party, that your Brother's Declaration, showing Reasons for such a
Violation to our English Government, would make the Nation in love with such
Treatments of their Representatives? For, Sir, could you think in your
Conscience that the People of England did not see themselves hereby exposed to
the restless Malice of their Enemies, and resented it highly, since they could
not but be sensible of the languishing Condition of the three Kingdoms, and
that nothing but a Parliament could cure the Distempers with which we were
infected by you and your Party, both as to Religion and Morals? And had they
not with great Charge and Difficulty chosen three Parliaments, on whom they
placed their Hopes? And those being suddenly dissolved, could they believe your
Brother or you designed any thing less than a total Subversion of the
Government? Come, Sir, sit down, put on your Irish considering Cap, and judge
why since Ned Coleman's Protestant Declaration was so unhappily published
before its time, the Nation should not be as much alarmed at Barillon's
Declaration in April 1681, as they were at Coleman's in 1678. And could you and
your Irish Teagues imagine that one French Declaration should so soon succeed
another? nay, could you, without being confounded, see your Servant Coleman's
Original (fairly drawn by the Advice of the French King's Confessor, to bring
in Popery and Slavery) so much outdone by Barillon's Copy, since you judged it
could never be outdone by any Man whatever? And since the former exposed you
and your Brother as the worst of Men, how could you expect the latter should
not have the same effect upon the English Nation, and put them into such a
Ferment, as to deal by you and your Party just as we did in 1688?

7. Did not your Brother, April 20. 1679, not only in Council, but Parliament,
declare how sensible he was of the ill Posture of his Affairs, and the great
Jealousies and Dissatisfaction of his good Subjects, whereby the Crown and
Government was become too weak to preserve it self; which proceeded from his
use of a single Ministry, and of private Advices; and therefore professed his
Resolution to lay them wholly aside for the future, and to be advised by those
able and worthy Persons whom he had chosen for his Council in all his weighty
and important Affairs? Now, Sir, consider, was it not most unreasonable in you
and your French Vermin to put the King upon such a manifest Violation of his
Royal Word and Promise to the Nation? But to put the Matter out of dispute, Did
not your Brother, on that Choice of his Council, tell the Parliament of his
Resolution of meeting his People often in Parliament? And who was it that
changed his mind, and made him alter those Gracious Purposes, but you and your
wicked Party? Would you make us believe that your Brother could so soon forget
his Promises, or that upon the meeting of these Parliaments there were no
weighty Matters to be debated?

8. Did not you and your Party, in prevailing with the King, show the World,
that your Cunning kept not pace with your Malice, since by this wicked usage of
our Representatives in those Parliaments you and your Cutthroats made your
selves known, tho you had secretly and cautiously given that wicked Advice to
your Brother, only to be protected from the public Justice of the Nation? But
in time you discovered your selves, and told your own Names, when Case-hardned
enough to pull off the Mask, and let us see what you would be at. But what
Offense did you take at those Parliaments? Surely it was because the repeated
Treasons and traitorous Designs of you and your Conspirators rendered you
obnoxious to them. And did you not put the King upon dissolving those
Parliaments, thinking thereby not to have been judged the Authors of that
villainous Counsel? Alas, good Sir, you have so exposed your self in that
Matter, that you left your self and Party not only without Justification, but
without all pretense hereafter; but thanks be to God, I lived to see the
Justice of the Nation take place upon you, and some of your Party. There are
some yet lurking, and basking themselves in good Employments; but I hope our
King will rid himself of the Vermin in time. I am confident, Sir, you may
reflect upon these Considerations, and pronounce your self guilty of this
unreasonable Usage of three as great Parliaments as ever England saw. Now how
can we conclude otherwise, than that you then was, and still continue an Enemy
to Parliaments?

Fifthly; The ill Consequences attending the Dissolution of those three
Parliaments are worthy your Consideration: and that I may be brief herein, take
notice;

1. What Divisions you and your Party caused amongst the People of England
thereby: you made such Breaches in Families, that I fear are not made up to
this day, unless Death has reconciled them; this you did by the Advice of your
Priests, Jesuits, and Popish Council at St. James's, and the wicked Ministry at
White Hall, who, rather than the People should not be divided, took their
several Copies by your Original, and came in a most comfortable manner to your
Assistance, hoping to make the People rebel. These Differences you nourished
with all the Industry imaginable, to the great Hazard of the whole Kingdom.
But, Sir, this was to betray us into the Hands of our Popish Adversaries, which
they could not do but by inflaming the Differences between the Conforming and
Nonconforming Protestants, that we might not unite our Forces against the
Common Enemy.

2. You and your Party by this means weakened the Protestant Interest. There
can be nothing more plain than this: for upon the Dissolution of the Oxford
Parliament, Swarms of Priests and Popish Conspirators returned home, and fell
to work, to pervert the People to the Obedience and Communion of the Sea of
Rome. What Pensions then you got for some, and Employments for others; and with
what care you maintained their Interest, and defended their Cause and Quarrel
against those that pursued them for their many Treasons against the Government,
we all saw to our great Sorrow. And what help was there, since you and your
Party had so much countenance from your Brother, who was engaged with you in
the whole Popish Conspiracy, saving that of his own Life?

3. You procured a severe Persecution against Protestant Dissenters which you
nor none of your rascally Crew durst do during the Session of Parliament; but
immediately upon their Dissolution you fell upon them, either because they had
occasioned the sending of good Men to Parliament, or because they were zealous
Assertors of the Protestant Religion against Popery, and of our English
Liberties against Slavery: these were indeed high Crimes, for which you and
your Villains made them smart, to the ruin of several thousand Families; and
had you continued somewhat longer in that glorious Adventure, you might have
made poor England a howling Wilderness, tho when your Brother and you came
home, you found it a Land flowing with Milk and Honey. Nay, you had rather all
should have run into Confusion, than the Dissenters should not be ruined,
because they could not comply with a few Ceremonies, for which your Party had
no other Authority than a few Acts of Parliaments.

4. You advanced Arbitrary Proceedings in Westminster Hall, where you had a Set
of rognish Judges exactly of a size for that turn, who had as much Impudence
for the Court, as they had had Dread of being called to Account in Parliament
for all their Villainies. And tho it was a standing Constitution, that if any
Man stood impeached by the Commons of England before the Lords in Parliament,
no inferior Court could take Cognizance of that Cause, or try him for that
Treason in Westminster Hall, for which he stood impeached in Parliament, (which
upon the Dissolution of the Oxford-Parliament, was Fitz-Harris his Case) yet
for all this, you found out your Pemberton, your Jones, and your Raymond, that
had Impudence enough to try the said Fitz-Harris, and condemn him; for, alas,
good Men, they were not to lose their Places for every small Peccadillo, if it
were to serve the Government, especially to do a Job for you and your Crew.

5. Upon the Dissolution of the 3 last Parliaments, to alienate the King from
his People, you and your Party did industriously revive the Memory of the late
unhappy Civil War between your Father and the Parliament; which was your
Brother's Interest as well as the Nation's to have buried in oblivion: the
mentioning that unhappy War served only to put us in mind of the sudden
Dissolution of 3 Parliaments, and the 12 years want of one, and what the
Villains had done in your Father's Reign: and the better to color your
procuring the Dissolution of those three Parliaments, you had your Parties
abroad to asperse and brand the Members, as being of the same Complexion with
those that met Nov. 3. 1640; but none of your Cutthroats did ever mention the
bloody Massacre in 1641, because begun and carried on by your Father's Command,
and for his Service.

But, Sir, let me tell you, that none lived more peaceably under your Brother's
Government than they who were engaged in that War on the Parliament's side:
therefore I cannot tell by what prudent Topic you went, when you discouraged
those Men in their obedient living by such villainous Reflections, and upbraided
them with what the Law had pardoned, and they had expiated by their Loyalty
since, supposing they had been Criminals, which yet I think they were not. But
this is plain beyond all dispute, that the Parliament that restored your
Brother to his Throne, and you to be a constant Plague to this Nation, made an
Act of Indemnity, wherein many things were enacted, which they judged necessary
for the Settlement of the Nation; they prohibited, under a Penalty, one Man's
reproaching another with being concerned in that War, for the space of three
years after the Date of the said Act: sure then they never intended Men should
afterward take the liberty to upbraid one another with it.

6. Another ill Consequence of dissolving those three Parliaments was, that by
this means you made a way to succeed your Brother in the Government. If those
Parliaments had sat, and their Counsels not been defeated by their unexpected
Dissolutions, you must have been disabled from ever inheriting the Imperial
Crown of these Realms: and it was plain, those Whores and other Traitors that
procured the Dissolution of those Parliaments, aimed at your coming to the
Throne. But, Sir, I think your Party should have shown so much Ingenuity and
Candor, as to have owned that all the People of England, particularly those
that were for your Exclusion, were as zealous for Monarchy, even in the Royal
Line, as any of your clamorous Bullies durst for their Ears be. I am sure,
nothing so much endangered the legal Monarchy of England as your coming to the
Crown, which the Wisdom of the Nation foresaw; and therefore, that it might be
preserved, resolved to pass you by, and let it descend to another Heir. Nay,
Sir, if you had continued James Duke of York, I am sure you might have lived
with more Honor and Comfort than you can propose by putting your Feet under
the French King's Table: but God having ordained you to be a Plague to us for
our Sins, I think you let us see what you aimed at in your four Years Tyranny.
There are some blind Puppies, whose Eyes are not yet opened; I could wish you
had their Company at St. Germains, being confident you would soon lick them
open.

7. Another Consequence of the Dissolution of those three Parliaments, was the
possessing the King of a Design carried on by the dissenting Party for his
Destruction, and to introduce a Democratical Power, which they called a
Commonwealth: nay, that you might hasten the Dissolution of the
Oxford-Parliament, you made use of this Lie for an Argument, which your Brother
was willing to believe, that he might have some Pretense for quitting that way
of Government. There were two sorts of Persons charged: (1.) The Parliaments
themselves. (2.) Those who steadfastly asserted the Power and Privileges of
Parliaments, the Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the People, in
opposition to Popery and Slavery.

(1.) These Parliaments were charged with a Design against his Majesty's Person
and Government. Now, Sir, let us know what ground you had to raise such a foul
Report and Slander upon so considerable a part of the Legislative Power. I
confess I can give no other name to these Proceedings of yours, than a
Conspiracy to destroy the use of Parliaments: therefore had your Brother called
another upon the Dissolution of the Oxford Parliament, all English Protestants
would have joined as one Man in humble Applications to that Assembly, that you
and your infamous Crew might have a due Punishment for such scandalous
Reflections, and false Accusations of those Parliaments.

It is well known, Sir, notwithstanding your said usage of these Parliaments,
that many of those honorable Persons, sent up to serve as Members of those
Assemblies, had ventured their Lives, and lost their Estates in endeavoring to
restore the Monarchy, in opposition to that very thing you charged them withal:
Nay, they were all Lovers of Monarchy, not only upon true English Principles,
but from their own Inclinations; for deceive not your self, they had too sad
experience of a Commonwealth, to be in love with that way of Government, which
they well knew was inconsistent with the Genius of this Nation, and that
nothing more agreed with the Peoples Temper than a well-regulated Monarchy, as
ours is by the fundamental Laws of the Realm; and if your Brother had but
considered the Point, he could not have believed otherwise, than that they were
not, nor could be true to the Monarchy, that joined with you and your
Conspirators to subvert the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments.

(2.) The Parliaments not only lay under this filthy Calumny, but your Party
did also traduce those brave Men that steadfastly asserted the Power and
Privileges of Parliament, the Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of the
People, as being in a Conspiracy against the King and Government: but it is
plain that you knew not one Soul engaged in any such Conspiracy; if you did,
why did you not (according to your Duty and Allegiance) discover them, that
they might have been brought to Justice? If not, why was all that noise made of
a Conspiracy against the King's Person and Government? But I believe you were
afraid that your Folly as well as Knavery would have been manifested to the
World, and your Malice too into the Bargain. Nay, Sir, let me tell you, that
upon the Intimation given by your Devil's Bro^ers, and the special Direction of
old Hodg the Fiddler to your little Parasitical Clerks, the Pulpits rung with
the noise of a Presbyterian Plot, in order to betray us into Popery and
Arbitrary Power: for many, if not all, but especially those who made some sort
of Figure in the Country, hung their Tongues, and set the tune of their
Preaching to the humor of the Times, and like the Devil's Messengers, being
instigated by your High Priests, all they preached was against the Dissenters,
charging them with a Design to bring in a Commonwealth and Confusion.

But why was all this noise about a Prebyterian Plot? Come, I Will tell you the
Reason: You may remember that your Popish Party were by me and others charged
with a Hellish Conspiracy against the Person of the King, our Religion and
Government, and the Lives of all the Protestants in England, and this proved
against them to the satisfaction of all sober Men, as well by their own Papers
as the Testimonies of several Witnesses; and finding all your devilish Arts and
Practices could not bring your selves off from the Reproach you justly lay
under, or the Punishment you must have suffered, had a Parliament been
permitted to sit, you made this noise of a Dissenters Plot as your last Refuge,
which you and your Crew said was against the Monarchy under pretense of
prosecuting a Popish Conspiracy: And therefore with what Application did you
form the Intrigue of the Meal-tub, and also those Shams of Sir Edmund Bury
Godfrey's murdering himself, and Lord Howard's penning Fitz-Harris's Libel? all
which discovered your Purposes, as well as your Disappointments at once.

Surely, Sir, your Party never considered what a notorious Scandal they
endeavored to fasten not only upon the most considerable People of England,
but the whole Kingdom, which you caused to suffer much in its Reputation
abroad, as broken and divided against it self, and relapsing into Confusion and
Anarchy. Nay, let me tell you, that you and your Party hereby brought your
Brother, and his Government and Prudence under the greatest Disreputation: for
must not our Neighbors stand amazed to see a King (restored by unanimous
Consent, to the great Joy of the Nation) in so few Years lose that Esteem,
Honor and Reverence for so great a number of his Subjects as you had caused to
be accused? What Nation would maintain an Alliance with such a King, who had so
much sunk his Interest? How could they expect he should be able to support and
answer the ends of such an Alliance? Your great Ally the French King could not
but laugh in his Sleeve, to see the Nation in such a Posture. Nay further, what
Jealousies did you create in the Peoples Minds, so that the Popish Party were
strengthened to destroy both Conformists and Nonconformists, who were both
Heretics to them? Hereby also that Impudent Tyrant the French King was
emboldned to proceed in his Ravages upon his Neighbors Countries; and if your
Brother should have had the least Inclination to put a stop to this Nimrod,
what a Condition would he have been in, since you and your French Pensioners
had created such Feuds amongst us?

8. Another Evil happening upon the Dissolution of those Parliaments, was your
Endeavors to persuade the People that they were in a secure State, with
relation to their Religion, Laws and Liberties, that so the Nation might be a
Prey to your Popish Crew. Now, Sir, how can your Party answer the so doing,
when we were in the midst of so many notorious Dangers? Do you not remember
that four Parliaments had represented the manifold Dangers the Nation was
threatened with? And has it not been one of the greatest Difficulties that ever
a Nation groaned under, to preserve it self from your Popish Rage and Fury?
Nay, all thinking Men judged it impossible: but God, with whom all things are
possible, did the Work his own way, you know well enough, to your woeful
experience. I remember your Conspirators used to wipe their Mouths, and mimp
them up with a maidenly God damme, the Nation was in no danger from the Popish
Party, tho the King in several Proclamations had signified the same: and if
your Rascals had not the manners to believe the Parliament, they might have
believed the King, since he not only published his Proclamations to let the
Nation know its danger, but also in diverse Speeches to both Houses of
Parliament acquainted them therewith; and upon the whole not only required
their Advice and Counsel, but proposed that some effectual Laws might be made
to prevent those Dangers and Mischiefs that then attended the Nation.

But, Sir, you and your Party may say, What danger could there be, since the
Laws of the Land were the Rule of his Government? To which I answer:

(1.) Suppose K. Charles had all his days governed according to the Laws of the
Land; was his having governed according to the Laws already, sufficient to
discourage you and your Villains from plotting to destroy us? And when your
Conspiracy was detected, did the King's governing according to Law remove the
Fears we had of the Popish Party?

Object. But you will say, We had an ill Opinion of your Brother and his
Government, and thence came our pretended Fears and Jealousies.

Answ. Alas, Sir, you are mistaken, our Fears did not proceed so much from our
ill Opinion of him, as from the sense we had of the implacable Hatred you and
your villainous Popish Party had to him, and your Resolution to destroy him,
because he made not such ha^^^ to destroy us as you would have had him. But
suppose we had entertained all evil Opinion of the King, we had just Cause for
it, he having left us in the hands of such as were so far from protecting the
Nation, that not one Law made to preserve the Protestant Religion was put in
execution: and you had so filled the Courts of Westminster Hall with a Set of
Rogues, that perverted the Law to the hazard of the whole Nation, that your
Traitors escaped those Punishments due to them for their many Treasons.

(2.) Could the Laws we then had (without some additional Provision) contribute
to our safety, since you were to succeed him? Were not you and your Party then
the worst of Men to declare to the World, that we were in no danger,
notwithstanding your vigorous Application to extirpate the Northern Heresy,
which you were in a more effectual way to effect than ever? Hence may appear
the Malice of your Party in preaching Peace, when they were preparing to make
War upon us.

I might enumerate other Evils that happened on Dissolving those Parliaments,
but these at present shall serve, and therefore I come to the last Particular
of the third Head of this Article, viz.

Sixthly; The foolish Pretenses you and your Party made for procuring these 3
Parliaments to be dissolved in so reproachful a manner; all which prove you an
Enemy to Parliaments, and that way of Governing. I pray, Sir, let me put you in
mind that your Brother hated Parliaments mortally, which appears by his Letter
to the French King in June 1676. to this purpose, That if he could be assured
of his Pension, that it might continue, he should not continue that way of
Governing, (viz. by frequent Parliaments) which at the best was but a clamorous
Rabble, that took upon them to direct Kings: but as he was resolved to be like
his Neighbors in Riches and Grandeur, so he was resolved to be like them in
Religion too. Thus it seems at the long-run you were both of a mind, except
that he was not so hardy in observing his own word, to ruin the Nation all at
once, as you were: and what your goodly Pretenses were for Dissolving three
Parliaments to effect the same, you have laid before you in these following
Particulars.

1st. The first Pretense was their too vigorous prosecuting the Popish Plot.
Now with what color could you charge this upon them? for as I told you before,
so I must again, that those Parliaments were composed of Men of as good Sense
and Quality as any in the whole Kingdom, who proceeded and managed their
debates with as great Moderation and Gravity as became their Place; if they
went too far in any thing relating to that cursed Design, you might have
instanced in the Particular, and not have suffered your Hell-born Crew to
censure their whole Proceeding in it. But let me tell you, they were so far
from going too far, that your Brother and you suffered 'em not to sit till they
could do any thing considerable in any part of the Discovery. Now, Sir, let me
ask you one Question; Why did not you and your Party rather fall upon the King
and his Ministers for those Speeches and Declarations he made concerning the
Popish Plot, of which you shall have your full in its proper place? But pray
observe.

(1.) Your Brother did frequently recommend the Prosecution of the Popish Plot
to them with a strict and impartial Inquiry: and can you think that a
Parliament, consisting of so many worthy Patriots, would be such Traitors to
their King and Country, as not to comply in ^ome measure with his Commands,
especially since in his Speech, October. 21. 1680. he used that prevailing
Argument, That he neither thought himself nor them safe, till the Matter was
gone through with. Was not the King's Person nor Government safe; and would you
not have them zealous in inquiry into the said Plot, to prevent the threatening
Dangers?

(2.) Did not your Brother in his Speech to his Parliament, April 30. 1679.
assure them of his constant Care to secure our Religion for the future in all
Events, and that in all things which concerned the public Security, he would
no^ follow their Zeal, but lead it? Therefore, Sir, you may see that by making
this a Pretense for dissolving three Parliaments, you did fly in the very Face
of the King and his leading Zeal to have that Plot discovered, and the
Criminals brought to public Justice.

2ly. A second Pretense you and your Banditti had for dissolving the three last
Parliaments was, because they would give no Money for supporting the Alliance
your Brother had made for preserving Christendom in Peace, and the keeping of
Tangier: by which the Nation might see the true Reason for which those
Parliaments were called. The truth is, Sir, you had almost persuaded the King
not to use that Parliament which sat down October. 21. 1680. and in order to that
you made Application to the French King for a Sum of 300000 l. Sterling, and
promised if your Brother was supplied with it, the Parliament should not meet.
The French King agreed, and the Money was to be paid at two Paiments. Upon this
the Parliament newly chosen in August 1679, was prorogued till November
following; and your great Ally assuring your Brother of the Payment of the
Money, the Parliament was further prorogued till October 21. 1680. so that we
had no Parliament sitting from May 1679, till October 1680. but the Duke of
Buckingham, getting Intelligence of this Contrivance, and being in danger of
his Life by the Subornation of a Villain, to whom he had given Bread, as also
to his whole rascally Family, finding his Head must fly for it if a Parliament
did not meet, makes a Journey over to France, and so prevailed with the French
King, that the Money promised was not transmitted; so that of Necessity (not of
Choice) you permitted your good Brother that one time to meet his People in
Parliament.

Well then, Supplies were demanded to maintain the Alliance made for the
Support of the General Peace of Christendom, the Preservation of Tangier, and
for the Payment of your Brother's Debts; and the Parliament would give no
Money. Come, Sir, a word or two to the point in general, and then I will
descend to some Particulars.

1. What, would not the Parliament give Money to support the Alliances? I Will
assure you they were a parcel of naughty Boys indeed to be so refractory. I
pray, Sir, with whom were those Alliances made? with the Duchess of Cleveland?
Alas, pious chaste Lady, she had been a Cast-whore for several Years; the
triple League between your Brother, her Grace, and Mother Knight, had been
broke for many Years, and she had made a new Alliance with her good Confessor
the Archbishop of Paris, and had given him all she had for a Guaranty. What
Alliances then were they? Were they new ones with the Duchess of Portsmouth
and Nell Waal? Truly your Band of Pensioners had so often supplied their
extraordinary Occasions, that one would think they should not have asked any
more; and if they knew not when they had enough, the Nation could tell them
they had too much, and wanted nothing but an Apartment at a convenient
Mansion House in Tuttle-fields, and the civil Usage of that House once a Week
or so, as the Ladies of their Profession use to be served, as a just Reward of
their Diligence in their Calling. It may be, Sir, there were Alliances of
another nature (as with Barillon your old Friend) that were to be supported:
Alas the Parliament knew full well that your Brother and you could not want a
Supply for such Alliances; and that rather than fail, you might have got a new
Bill to have passed, Entitled, An Act to enter into an actual War with France,
with which you might have begged Money of the French King, as you did in 1678.

It may be you will say, They were Alliances your Brother had made for
Preservation of the General Peace of Christendom. You say well; and it is a
wonder, since your Brother was graciously pleased to demand Money, that he was
not as graciously pleased to tell the Parliament what those Alliances were.
Surely, Sir, you did not expect a blind Obedience from that Eagle-ey'd
Parliament, to contribute to the Support of what they were wholly ignorant of;
or if they had had some Hints from the Court, it would not have been amiss to
have used them as civilly as your Band of Pensioners were, and to have had
those Alliances laid before them: those humble Curs never parted with Money for
the support of Leagues, till acquainted with the Nature and Tendency of them.
And if the Alliances were not designed for the end pretended, you might have
asked Money with as good Success for the two Whores at the lower end of the
matted Gallery, both Mistress and Woman, as for those Alliances.

Let me, good Sir, ask you one fair Question; Did your Brother expect Money for
these Alliances, and nothing else? and for once we will suppose Portsmouth and
her Woman not to have had one Great, no nor Fitz-Harrris so much as a Sop in
the Pan, tho he had a hopeful Plot upon the Stocks that deserved two, but that
it should be applied only for Alliances made to preserve the General Peace of
Christendom: truly then, ought not the Parliament to consider well of the
General Peace it self, and its Influence upon our Affairs, before they came to
any Resolution, or so much as to debate about it, since you had a Tool in the
Ministry that told us, it was more fit for Meditation than Discourse; nay, he
impudently said the Peace was but the effect of Despair, and I think he was not
much out in it; but he might have been so honest as to have told us the true
Cause of that Despair: yet for all his Worship's Rhetoric, the Nation learned
by whose means they were reduced to so low a Thought of their Condition; nay,
if that Loggerhead were alive, I could tell him what Price you and your Brother
demanded of the Fr. King for that noble and most Christian piece of Service.

In a word, Sir, we had no reason to simper upon the Business, unless with the
wrong side of our Mouths; for we could not sing any Tune but that lamentable
one of a bad Market: we all knew the effect of this General Peace of
Chistendom, that it was the Dissolving the Confederacy against the French King,
the Enlarging his Dominions, and his gaining time to refresh his Soldiers
almost harassed out of their Lives by long Service, the settling and composing
the Minds of his Vassals at home, increasing his Fleet, and filling his
Exchequer for new and greater Designs: but your Rogues, that were Pensioners to
the French King, grew impudent upon it, and expected he might have a spare hour
or so to assist you in ruining the Religion, Laws and Liberties of England, and
to have fairly laid aside the use of Parliaments, and broke them up, as you
would have done a Field-meeting in Scotland, or a private Conventicle in
England, and treated them like Traitors and Villains, and not like the great
Assembly and Wisdom of the Nation.

Was it the Alliance your Brother had made with the States General? Truly your
Band of Pensioners had so stigmatized that, that neither the first Westminster
nor the Oxford-Parliament would foul their Fingers with it, much less give any
Money toward the Support of it; for the Pensioners, speaking modestly, could
not believe it tended to the safety of the Nation. Truly I must look again, and
see what this new Alliance was; and, good Sir, I beg your pardon, it was a new
Alliance with Spain: and would they not give Money to support this? Well, let
us then see how the Case stood in relation to it.

I confess Alliances to a Parliament make a very pretty noise, and may be as
diverting as ever old Hodg's Fiddle was to any of his Tory Gang. Indeed old
England stood in need of some new Friends, being so beset with Enemies abroad,
and with Pensioners to those Enemies at home: but what shall I say to this
Point? When I view the Speech at the opening of that Parliament that sat down
October. 21. 1680. there is nothing said of any new Ally, except the poor
Spaniard, whose Affairs at that time, through the Defects of his own Government,
and the villainous falseness of our Ministers, were reduced to such Extremities,
that he might sooner have been a Burden to the Nation than a Help; unless you
let us judge that this Name of a new League was necessary to recommend our
Ministers to a new Parliament, and bubble our honest Country Gentlemen out of
their Money: for by it we were like to have trouble enough, being to espouse,
without any Limitation, all the Quarrels of the Spaniards, tho in the
Philippina Islands and the West Indies, or that he had drawn upon himself by
any of his Barbarities there or elsewhere; nay, his difference with the Elector
of Brandenburgh was not excepted, tho all that Elector had done in Reprisals
upon the Spanish Ships for a just Debt often demanded in vain, was according to
the Law of Nations, and the Rules of Justice: nay, Sir, we might have been
engaged in his Quarrel with old Kate's native Country, which we ought to have
had special regard of for the Blessing they sent us in 1662. And pray what was
the Quarrel? Truly nothing but a treacherous seizing the Island of St. Gabriel,
which the Portuguese had peaceably enjoyed several Years; upon which you know
Jack the Portuguese invaded some part of the Spanish Country. Also by virtue of
this Alliance we were even obliged to assist the Spaniard, in case of any
disturbance in his own Dominions. You and your Brother were admirable good at
secret Articles, and in one of those it is plainly expressed we were to furnish
him 8000 Men for 3 Months; so that if he inclined to make his Subjects as great
Slaves to the Crown as they are to the Church, our good King was to assist him
in so good a Work.

Truly, Sir, when I reflect on Philip the Second's Barbarity to the People of
the Low Countries, whom our Ancestors thought fit to succor, I could not but
think this Alliance now under debate was for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Good of the Nation, because my Lord Hallifax and old
Lauderdale told me so; and therefore (as the Stars would have it) it was not
fit the League should be laid before the Parliament, lest they should think so
too, and find a blind side or two in it; and think it would contribute but
little to the Good of the Nation, or securing the Peace of poor Flanders. Well,
Sir, your Cake proved Dough that bout, for there was Death in the Pot, a
standing Army aimed at in England, that would not down with us at that time, of
which you were to have been General, that would have done more good Business
upon Hounslow-Heath than in Flanders, for they were not to help the Spaniard
till the French had invaded them three Months, and it is well known he could
then have been Master of a considerable part of that Country. But yet no Money
came, nor can I help it if I should cry my Eyes out; let me therefore be a
little more particular with you, and ask two or three Questions; it may be we
may find some Expedient they might have used to allay the matter on your side.
Now supposing this League the best that ever could be made, yet,

(1.) Had not the Parliament just Cause to be very jealous of your Brother's
Sincerity in this Alliance, and the more because he would not declare what it
was, nor suffer it to be laid before them? Therefore had it been the best in
Christendom, nay as good as that between him, and Cleveland, and Mother Knight
the Bawd, which he had broken for several years, or that that was then in being
between Mrs. Portsmouth and her Woman Nell Waall; yet what could they say to
such a League, or what Security could they have that it should be kept more
than the Triple League, or that with the Prince of Orange, or that with the
States General, which were all broken almost as soon as made?

(2.) The Parliaments of England had been ill used by you and your Banditti,
and therefore you must allow this not to meet with that Temper you desired; who
after they had heard of this Alliance, were not suffered so much as to have it
laid before them to consider of, tho it had been before your Council at St.
James's, and Barillon the French Ambassador had perused it, and was privy to
the secret Article in it, and had (not like a Man of Truth) given a Copy of it
to one that let some have a sight of it. Surely, Sir, you and your Party could
not but provoke a Parliament by these Carriages; and how then could you expect
Money to support this new Alliance?

(3.) I pray, Sir, how was it possible any good could come to Christendom in
general, or to these Nations in particular, by this new Alliance? It is plain
that all Christendom after the separate Peace with the Dutch, could not
preserve Spain and the Spanish Netherlands from falling under the Dominion of
the French King; how then could your Brother by this new Alliance be in a
Condition to support them, without the Dutch, since by the help of you and your
Traitors he brought this Nation into a distracted and deplorable Condition?
Nay, Sir, one word more; What good could these Kingdoms expect by this
Alliance, since thereby all the Hardships imaginable were put upon our Traders
both to Spain and the West Indies? and had that King been as able as willing,
he would have let you known it 'ere this time.

(4.) Was it not unreasonable to ask Money for the support of this League, tho
we suppose it the best that ever was made? Your Brother was the first King that
ever asked Money to support Alliances. I have read of Kings, when by the Advice
of Parliament they have made War upon any of their Neighbors, they have called
for Money to carry it on with Vigor; but I never find any of our Kings that
ever called for Money to support Alliances, especially when they were justly
ashamed to declare what they were.

(5.) Again; Your Crew, I confess, at that time made a horrid noise about the
Spanish Alliance, and wondered the Parliament would give no Money to maintain
it: Alas, Sir, there was never yet an Alliance made with any State in
Christendom, (if a good one) but would earn its own living, and therefore
needed no Money to support it; if it were a bad one, I am sure it deserved none.

(6.) Once more, and I Will conclude this Point: since your Party made such a
noise about the Spanish Alliance, pray, Sir, how was it kept? If my Memory
fails not, it was not over-well observed: for I think in 1682. your Ally the
French King blocked up Luxemburgh; and in the year my Lord Russel was murdered,
took Courtray, one of the six Towns delivered up by the French to the Spaniard,
and keeps it to this Day, as he does Luxemburgh which he took by force in 1684.
Now I do not find your Brother ever assisted this Confederate of his according
to the tenor of the Alliance, or as he was Guarantee in the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle, which in his excellent Declaration of War against the Dutch he
declared he would maintain. Upon the whole, I see no reason why the Parliament
should have given any Money to support this Alliance.

2. As the Parliament would give no Money for the support of this Alliance, so
neither for the support of Tangier: this stuck mightily in your Stomach, and in
the Maws of all your Party. Now, Sir, Tangier being most valiantly deserted, it
deserves not to be mentioned; but because it so highly offended your Friends,
who to this day mention it with reluctance, I will say a word or two to it. It
is some years since that the Commons of England (to the best of my remembrance
'twas in 1680) gave it a due Consideration; nay, they were so candid as to
represent to the King how that important Place came to be in so miserable a
Condition, after so vast a Treasure consumed to make it useful; and that
nothing better could be expected of it, since it consisted most of Papists, and
such as were Enemies to the Religion, Laws and Liberties of England. These
Inconveniences might have been redressed by your Brother, had he so pleased;
and truly the Parliament advised him to it: nay, Sir, you may put on your
Spectacles, and read the Address of Parliament November 1680, wherein they
promised to assist him in the Defense of that Place, if they might have a
tolerable Security that any Supply for it should not be applied to augment the
Strength of our Popish Adversaries, and to increase our Dangers at home from
that villainous Faction: and could you with any reason blame them, since they
had to their Sorrow seen Money employed contrary to those Ends, for which given
by your Band of Pensioners? But above all, the Popish Party's Insolences, and
the Impudence of those that espoused the French Interest, threatened the Nation
with total Ruin at home; and therefore they judged it not prudence to leave
the Consideration of England, to provide for Tangier, it looking like securing
one single Cabin, whilst the whole Ship was on fire. Therefore to conclude this
Head, let me ask you these plain Questions:

(1.) Whether it could be judged consistent with the Wisdom of a Parliament,
that had seen the dismal Consequences of the Encouragement your Popish Party
had received from your Brother and you, to give Money to supply a Garrison,
which was used to augment their Strength, and increase the danger of the
Nation? and whether you would not have laughed as much at them for such a
Compliance, as you did at your Band of Pensioners for giving 1250000 l. for the
King's extraordinary Occasions in 1673, or for that vast Sum they gave for a
War with France in 1678?

(2.) Had you not several Regiments in pay, besides the Guards, in England,
which might be transported and maintained as cheap there as here? and would it
not have been more honorable for them to have been sent to Tangier, to have
beaten the Moors, than to stay at home to beat their Landlords and Landladies
in their Quarters?

(3.) Had you not a Company of Popish Gentlemen's Sons to be employed in that
Service, whose Fathers were undone by the Supply they gave for maintaining
Liberty of Conscience, and the Dutch War, in order to destroy the Protestant
Religion all over Europe? And could you and your Teagues think, on any rational
ground, that ever a Protestant Parliament would give Money to preserve that
Place, which was nothing else but a Nursery of Popish Officers and Soldiers? I
believe your Popish young Gentlemen might want the Charity of those
Employments; but the Parliament had a foresight of the fatal Consequences that
would attend the placing their Bounty upon such Vermin, who would have been
ready to return home for those ends designed by you and your Council at St.
James's.

3. The Parliament would not part with Money for Payment of the Debt of the
Exchequer to the Bankers, which your Crew urged did put your Brother out of a
Possibility of supporting the Government: This is the Charge, and a heavy one
too. Now what was this Government that was to be supported, but a parcel of
nasty Whores, Pimps, Bawds, Informers, Suborners of Perjury, Murderers, and
Thieves? This was your Government in your Brother's days, was it not? Nay, did
he not consume more Money upon such Vermin in one year, than would serve the
Government of England ten? Did the Credit of the Crown both at home and abroad
depend upon Portsmouth's having 52000 l. Sterling a Year, and Nel Waal, for
being Bawd in ordinary, getting 30 or 40000 l. in Money, and other Cattle of
the same Profession being maintained in all manner of Luxury, for no other
merit but having had a hand in the ruin of the Nation? No, Sir, the Credit of
the Government did not depend thereupon; the Parliaments did not settle
Revenues, nor give Taxes for such Ends: but your Brother and you had advanced
the Credit of the Government, if you had sent such Vermin to Bridewel, to have
been set to work for their living, as Whores ought to be, and to have the
Correction of the House, all Titles of Honor to the contrary notwithstanding.
Come, Sir, to be plain with you, the Honors of England are entrusted with the
King, but were never designed for such Vermin as Portsmouth, that was but the
Daughter of a poor French Fellow, or a Bastard of some Body, I name not who,
nor to have whole Families advanced for providing or pimping another Man's Wife
to be a Whore Royal, that has had no less (to speak modestly) than 20 Stallions
to attend her, besides your dear Brother of blessed Memory.

Sir, it is certain, notwithstanding the noise your Party made of your
Brother's being (through the Parliaments refusing to give Money) put out of a
Possibility to pay his Debts, that he never would pay them, which was his
Resolution: and therefore what Faith could be given to his Promises, tho he
knew the Honor of the Nation would suffer highly in his taking up his Brother
of France's Custom of not being a Slave to his Word? The truth is, had the
People always been to pay his Debts, there might have been Taxes without end:
this, Sir, your Band of Pensioners well knew, who therefore, as mercenary as
they were, would never pay the Debt due to the Bankers: and the last
Westminster Parliament, having so fair and fresh an Instance before their Eyes,
and their Ears filled with the daily Cries of the Widows and Orphans, were
obliged in duty to give a public Caution to the People not to run again into
the same Error, because they judged all Securities of that Nature absolutely
void, and that no future Parliament could without breach of Trust repay that
Money that was at first borrowed to prevent the sitting of a Parliament. Thus I
have gone through all the Particulars of the second Pretense, that is, that the
Parliament would not supply your Brother with Money to support the Spanish
Alliance, preserve Tangier, and to pay his Debts.

3ly. You had another Pretense for procuring those three Parliaments to be
dissolved, viz. two Votes that passed the Commons Jan. 7. 1680. 1. That
whosoever should lend, or cause to be lent by way of Advance, any Money upon
the Branches of the King's Revenue arising by way of Customs, Excise and
Hearthmoney, shall be adjudged the hinderer of the sitting of Parliaments, and
be responsible for the same. 2. That whosoever should accept or buy any Tally,
or Anticipation upon any part of the King's Revenue, or shall pay such Tally
hereafter to be struck, shall be adjudged to hinder the sitting of Parliaments,
and be responsible therefore in Parliament.

Notwithstanding these Votes, you had a Rogue that rose from a Kitchin-boy to
possess (as some say) 14000 l. per annum, of which he wronged the Nation,
having had the Opportunity to cheat three Governments, and suck their Blood, to
whom the City of London ows much of her Misery; he, I say, furnished your
Brother with Money in contempt of these Votes: but he has wiped his Mouth, and
hugs himself, as if not one of the greatest Villains that ever England bore: I
leave him, he was a Friend of yours, and you have reason to remember him. I
remember the Votes very well, and certainly they were justifiable to the whole
Kingdom: for consider a little, did you take the Revenue to be disposed of at
your Brother's pleasure? Was it for his private use, or the public Good? Sir,
the Revenue the Parliament had fixed was a public, not a private one: your
Brother was trusted with the disposing of part only, and that not without the
Advice of some of his great Ministers of State, as a Secretary of State, and
the Lord Privy Seal, for smaller Sums; and for all great Paiments, the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Commissioners of the Great Seal, were to have been
added: the other part of the Revenue was assigned to other Uses; the Customs to
the maintenance of the Navy. The Maintenance of the Household, the Tables at
Court, and Wages of the King's Servants, were in our former Kings Reigns so
established by Parliament, that the Cofferer had his Money paid him out of the
Exchequer, under great Penalties to be inflicted for the neglect thereof; and
the House of Lords judged it a great part of their immediate Care: It
maintained the Dignity and Honor of the Government, and contributed much to
Love and good Understanding between the King and People; no Country Farmer had
Business at Court, but he found those who bad him welcome, and so had all
Degrees; therefore the King's Servants had justly the same Return wherever they
came: the outward Rooms of the House did not smell of Match, nor was the
Language of the Court, Who goes there? there used to be the Smell of better
Hospitality: this was plain even in your Father's time.

Besides, Sir, it is well known, that by the evil Counsel and Course your
Brother and you took, you made the Bankers of London and elsewhere become the
very Bane of the Nation; not only to the Gentleman and Farmer, but I doubt to
the Merchant too, they raised and kept up the Interest of Money; they drained
the Country, and bought Warrants, so that your Brother paid 25 per Cent. for
all his Expenses. You know the Revenue was in many of its Branches
appropriated, and provision made that they should not be alienated: and if
rascally Fellows that had decoyed into their Custody the ready Moneys of
Merchants, Gentlemen and others, did by the Strength of their Cash anticipate
the Revenues of the Government, who could have provided for the Nation? Could
any but a Parliament do it? Now, Sir, it plainly follows, that if your Brother
had found out another way to supply his Wants than by Parliament, the great
hinge on which the Government turned was lost: therefore what ground you and
your Party had to make this a Pretense to put off those Parliaments, especially
the last Westminster-Parliament, I cannot tell; and how you could make them
Criminals for these two Votes, I leave to the Judgment even of your ragged
Ministry at St. Germains.

4ly. A 4th Pretense you had for dissolving the Parliaments aforesaid, was a
Vote concerning Protestant Dissenters, That the Prosecution of Protestant
Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subject, a
weakening the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to
the Peace of the Kingdom. This was the Vote of the Commons in the last
Westminster-Parliament: Truly, Sir, they could not but pass the Vote as their
Opinion, since they judged themselves invited to it by your Brother himself,
who had often wished, whilst his Band of Pensioners sat, that he might be able
to exercise a Power of Dispensation in reference to Protestants, who through the
tenderness of a misguided Conscience did not conform to the Ceremonies,
Discipline and Government of the Church; and promised he would make it his
special Care to incline the Wisdom of the Parliament to concur with him in
making an Act to that purpose. But, Sir, I know your Party usually said, that
these Inclinations of the King lasted no longer than he had a Prospect of
giving the Papists an equal Benefit of Toleration also: I doubt it was too
true, and that they had that honorable Notion of the King from your sweet
self; but whether true or no, I will not insist here, but shall only mind you,
that your Brother after he parted with you, did on the 6th of March, in his
Speech to the first Westminster-Parliament (after the disbanding your small
Officers) express his Zeal not only for the Protestant Religion in general, but
for a Union amongst all sorts of Protestants: and did he not command the then
Tool of a Chancellor at the very same time to tell them, that it was necessary
to distinguish between Protestant and other Recusants, between them that would
destroy the whole Flock, and those that wander from it? I am much disposed to
believe, and that on good ground, that your Brother was not sincere in the
thing; yet whatever his Heart was in the Case, the following Parliament might
justly encourage that Vote from the aforesaid Declarations.

You and your wicked Party, especially your Church-Bums, did attacque that last
Westminster-Parliament, as if that Vote relating to Protestant Dissenters, was
to show that the Commons had in themselves a Power of suspending the Penal Laws
established by the three States of the Realm, who yet said it was a Power not
to be allowed in the King, and caused to be cancelled all that he had done in
relation to the ease of Dissenters from the Church of England: and if the King
had not Power to suspend the execution of the Penal Laws, then had not they. To
this I answer:

1. A few Years before that Parliament sat, your wicked Ministers did remember
that the whole Nation was justly alarmed upon the King's assuming to himself by
their Advice an arbitrary Power of suspending the Penal Laws; upon this they
thought it very popular to charge the House of Commons with an Usurpation on
that Attempt. Now, Sir, if they did by a Vote declare the Inconvenience of
prosecuting Protestant Dissenters at that time, or at any time hereafter, I
cannot see where the Crime was, or of what Usurpation they stood guilty, since
they made the Vote for the very same Reason which your Brother had for
expressing himself as he did in his foresaid Speech, supposing his Heart had
kept pace with his Tongue: they had with great Trouble of Soul perceived that
the Design of the Popish Party was not against any one Sort of Protestants, but
against all; they were sensible what Advantages your Popish Crew had made of
our Divisions, and observed with what Subtlety they had escaped Prosecution by
the Laws in force against them, by fomenting our Jealousies: they saw the
Strength and Greatness of the French King, and how his Interest had been
advanced by your Brother and you, and judged of his Inclinations by his bloody
Usage of his own Protestant Subjects: they considered the Number of the Irish
Papists, and their bloody Principles and Practices, and what Conspiracies were
formed in that Kingdom, and were ripe for Execution; and that Scotland was in
the Hands of you and your Villains; and that you was the Head of the Popish and
Popishly affected Party in the three Kingdoms: they had with Grief observed
that all the Places of Trust both Civil and Military were in the Hands of the
avowed Enemies of the Laws and Liberties of England; and notwithstanding all
the humble Addresses made to the King, and all his Proclamations for a strict
Execution of the Penal Laws against Papists, yet your villainous Faction evaded
those Laws, and went scotfree, and only the poor Protestant Dissenters smarted
under their Severity.

The Case being thus, certainly that House of Commons had as much Reason to
think of an Union amongst Protestants in 1680, as your Brother had (if ever he
spoke Truth) in 1679. And can you think they had any just Ground to believe
that the Protestant Dissenters, whilst under such Pressures and Provocations,
should cheerfully and courageously undertake the Defense of their Country,
since by it they had been, and then were so ill treated? Experience taught them
it was in vain to force us to be of one Opinion, and therefore the Commons took
a very probable way to unite us in Affection.

2. It is true, they made this Vote, not to arrogate to themselves a suspending
Power, but to show they had a repealing Power: They well knew that your busy
Rascals would be striking whilst there were Weapons at hand; and therefore
(that the Land might be in Peace) they designed to take away all Occasions of
Provocation from each other, and resolved to take away those Penal Laws that
occasioned them, and accordingly began with a Vote, declaring the Necessity of
it; to which (if I am not much mistaken) there was not one Negative in the
House: and a Vote of this nature did but precede the bringing in a Bill for the
Repeal of that, or those Laws they had voted grievous and inconvenient. With
what Face could you or your Party revile a Parliament for so regular a
Proceeding, according to the Custom and Usage of Parliaments? How could you
call the voting of a Law or Laws grievous and inconvenient, a suspending of
Acts of Parliament, and charge them with Contempt of the Law established?

3. We will suppose the Commons did not intend to bring in a Bill to repeal the
Laws then in force against Dissenters; for the Vote was not made to assume a
Power of suspending Acts of Parliament; neither did they require the Judges to
forbear the Execution of them, who were bound to see them performed; but they
only delivered their Opinion as a Matter of great Concern in that Juncture: and
notwithstanding the Noise your Cattle made, it was wise and pious Counsel; and
tho it could neither command nor secure the Judges or Justices from doing their
Duties, if required, yet we might have justly expected those that had the
Management of Affairs to have hearkened in so plain a Case to the Voice of the
Nation, or given them or other Parliaments a Measure how to confide in them:
and the Judges and Justices, had they not received Direction from your Brother
and you, were in Discretion and Conscience as much obliged to omit the
Execution of those Laws, as that of Bows and Arrows, and several other
Statutes, then, if not still in force, but out of Use.

If our Ceremony-mongers had but given themselves leave to think, and their
Romish Zeal would have let them remembered they were obliged to put on Bowels of
Compassion, they would have found their Proceedings against their Protestant
Brethren could not be justified either by Scripture, or the Practice of the
Primitive Church, where nothing was so common as different Rites and
Ceremonies, nay Doctrines amongst them, and yet the Band of Charity and Love
maintained; and Christians never learnt to persecute, till Wealth and Secular
Power did attend Religion, and the Prince and Church made use of each other to
enslave the World.

4. Had not the Parliament reason to make that Vote (charge them with what
Usurpation you please) since it was your constant Practice to inflame the
Differences you had made, thereby to betray us into the Religion of Rome, and
the Government of the French King? therefore the united Strength of all
Protestants was little enough to withstand you. I pray let me ask you one
Question, why might not a Parliament attempt to make Abatements in the Terms of
Conformity, or dispense with the Ceremonies of the Church, when those
Ceremonies, the Form of Worship, and the very Hierarchy it self could plead no
other Authority by which they are enjoined than some Acts of Parliament? Nay
Sir, the Commons saw there was a Necessity of passing this Vote, for your
Popish Crew had poxt a Number of Men that pretended to be so zealous for the
Protestant Religion, that nothing could serve the turn for its Preservation but
a Popish Head; and tho the sorry Rogues were a Disgrace to any Religion, yet
they were so dangerously infected, that they thought the Dissenters were
equally, if not more dangerous than the Papists to the Government, tho they
well knew the Dissenters had never sworn to any foreign Jurisdiction or Power.
The Parliament therefore seeing such a Division made in order to weaken our
Hands, and make us a Prey to your Teeth, made this Vote in order to strengthen
the Protestant Interest, by which they manifested a Resolution of repealing
those Laws that were used as Scorpions by our Clergymen and scoundrel Justices
to destroy their quiet and peaceable Neighbors.

5. A fifth Pretense starts up in your Vindication, and pricks up its Ears; one
would have thought some Country Vicar in his Study over the Oven had contrived
and sent it up to you sweetly dressed; and it struts so daintily, that I must not
let it go without its due Consideration: What is it then? truly the House of
Commons issued out Arbitrary Orders for taking Persons into Custody for Matters
that related not to Privileges of Parliament: Truly this is a pretty sort of
Pretense, surely the Parson's Wife or Daughter had a Hand in finding this
Business out; but it shall have its due Weight, and therefore I shall say these
three things.

1. We will suppose they did issue forth Orders for taking Men into Custody for
Matters that had no relation to Privileges of Parliament; yet that House of
Commons might have had this to say for themselves, that they had erred with
their Fathers; the Power of that House concerning taking Men into Custody had
not then, nor to this Day has received an exact Adjustment, and therefore wants
not Precedents of the like Nature; and if they were Arbitrary Orders, they were
such as had been executed by Parliaments many a fair Year before your Sires of
the ancient Kingdom of Scotland were born: and since Orders of the same nature
had been made by Parliaments in the times of our ancient Kings, these Orders
might have been passed by, and not branded with the reproachful Name of being
Arbitrary.

2. Tho we have supposed that the Commons might issue out those Orders, yet
they took none into Custody by such Orders but what might well be supposed
guilty of Breaches of Privilege in the highest Degree: the Truth is, when
Parliaments met annually, or at least frequently, we find few or no Complaints;
but when they were not frequent, but there were long Intervals of Parliament
(the Consequence of which was long sitting, which began within these two
hundred Years) there were some Complaints of the Breaches of Privilege, as in
the time of Hen. 8. the 4th of Edw. 6. and in the time of Q. Eliz. when the
Justice of the Commons has been applauded by our former Kings for asserting
their Privileges, and not stigmatized for exerting an Arbitrary Power. It Is
true, the most notorious thing that could be fixed upon that House, was the
Fees extorted by the Sergeant of the House, who tho he attends the House of
Commons, yet he ought to have considered that he was the King's Officer, and by
Law no Officer of the King's shall take any Fee or Reward for doing his Office
but what he receives from the King, upon Penalty of returning double to the
Plaintiff, and being further punished at the Will of the King; but of this you
and your Party took no notice, because the then Sergeant was a Creature of your
own, tho I think he smarted for it, and your Brother laughed at his Calamity in
the Case of an Undersheriff of Norfolk. Therefore I say, that to assert that
their Orders that were made for the taking Men into Custody were for Matters
that had no relation to Privileges of Parliament, was an impudent Lie; for
there were a Number of Men, who to distinguish themselves from the rest of
their Country, had basely given their Hands for Abhorrences of Parliaments,
and of those who most humbly petitioned for their sitting in a time of such
extreme Necessity: their Names I will give, that you may put a Mark of Favor
upon those of them that are alive, whenever they shall have occasion to meet
you at St. Germains. You may remember that House did fall upon such as had
countenanced the Popish Plot, and were Abhorrers of petitioning for the sitting
of Parliaments, and voted that it was and ever had been the undoubted Right of
the Subjects to petition the King for the Calling and Sitting of Parliaments,
and Redress of Grievances; and that to traduce such Petitioning as a Violation
of Duty, and to represent it to his Majesty as tumultuous and seditious, is to
betray the Liberty of the Subject, and contributes to the subverting the
ancient and legal Constitution of this Kingdom, and introducing Arbitrary
Power. The first that fell under these Votes was Withens, that was knighted for
his Abhorring, and after made a Judge; he was expelled the House, and voted a
Betrayer of the undoubted Rights of the Subjects of England, and received his
Sentence at the Bar of the House; he is yet alive: I suppose he and his Brother
Jenner may set up at St. Germains for Expounders of our Law in good time. The
next was Sir George Jefferies, then Recorder of London, against whom they voted
an Address to the King to remove him out of all public Offices, and that the
Members which served for the City should communicate the Vote to the Court of
Aldermen. There were several others that upon the same Account were taken into
Custody, as Sir Giles Phillips, Mr. Coleman, Capt. William Castle, Mr. John
Hutchinson, Mr. Henry Walrond, Mr. William Stawel, Mr. Thomas Herbert, Mr.
Sheridon, and Parson Thompson of Bristol. And because Sir Francis North the
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, advised and assisted in drawing up a
Proclamation against petitioning for the sitting of the Parliament, the Commons
voted it a sufficient Ground to proceed against him for high Crimes and
Misdemeanors: the like Vote passed against Sir Thomas Jones one of the Judges
of the King's Bench; and upon Sir Richard Weston one of the Barons of the
Exchequer: but they went higher with Scroggs, for they impeached him of High
Treason for discharging the Grand Jury of Middlesex before they had finished
their Presentiments, and for the Order made in the King's Bench against Care's
Packet of Advice from Rome, That it should be no more printed or published by
any Person.

Well, Sir, what say you now to these Vermin? Those now alive are still the
same Rogues, and your very humble Servants and Admirers; and I could wish you
had them with you at St. Germains, being pretty Company, and worthy of your
Favor: indeed to give them their Due, they have been pretty false in their
Oaths to King William, whom some of your Party style Prince of Orange. These
were the Men that House of Commons did censure: I pray, Sir, on with your
Spectacles, and see whether the Crimes they were guilty of had no Relation to
Privileges of Parliaments; surely your Friends, when they charged the House of
Commons with this Crime, were not in good earnest; if they were, they shall
have a Rowland for their Oliver; I Will be in good earnest too, and let them
know, that if the Privileges of Parliament be concerned when an Injury is done
to a particular Member, how much more when they strike at Parliaments
themselves, and endeavor to wound the very Constitution? Nay in the Case of
Sheridon, who afterward troubled the Nation with a Litter of scandalous
Pamphlets upon that Account, it is plain that his Commitment was only in order
to examine him about the Popish Plot, and his Endeavors to stifle it. Do not
you know that Sheridon? Say you never did; yet let me tell you it was you
instructed him how he should behave himself to the House; whose Behavior
indeed was with as much Contempt and Insolency, as if you or your Father had
been demanding some of the Members; and therefore they had reason surely to
commit him. Thompson you know him too very well, he was zealous in diverse
Breaches of Privilege to serve you and the Popish Party, witness his Usage of
poor Bedlow and the rest of the Discoverers of the Popish Plot; yet his
Commitment was only in order to an Impeachment; and as soon as they had gone
through with his Examination, he was set at Liberty, giving Security to answer
the Impeachment they had voted against him. But,

3. What if the Matters upon which the House of Commons did commit Men were not
relating to the Privilege of Parliament, and had been without Precedent, yet
you and your Crew carrying on a Design to root out the Protestant Religion, in
which you had engaged your Brother, which was a Plot without Precedent, why
might not the House of Commons proceed against the Abettors of it without
Precedent? Other Parliaments, before you were born, had made Precedents for
particular Offenders, and why might not that Parliament without asking your
Leave? If it be in the Power of one Parliament to make Precedents, why not in
another? I am sure there was as much Occasion for new Precedents in that House
of Commons as ever in any. Your mealy-mouthed Cattle used to wipe their Mouths,
and say, they were as great Lovers of Parliaments as any Men, but thought it
strange that the Commons should be so zealous against Arbitrary Power in the
King, and take such a Latitude to themselves. These Hogs-heads have their Buts,
a Parcel of Coxcombs that would not consider under what Circumstances the then
House of Commons lay: there was a Plot laid before them for the bringing in of
Popery and Arbitrary Power, and to kill the King; and that it was a Plot, and a
villainous one, none yet could with any Sense or Reason deny, but such Rogues as
were either in it, or Well-wishers to it. When the Commons came to consider of
this devilish Conspiracy, they found Criminals that had been by a side-Wind
Abettors of it, and others that had been Sinners above the common rate;
therefore they were forced to take a Latitude in their Dealings with them, that
the Nation might not be undone by them: and where there were Criminals of this
Standard, certainly a House of Commons, if they could not find Precedents how
to manage such unruly Monsters, might make some, in order to tame them. Sir, I
could give Instances of such Precedents made by former Parliaments; and if that
House of Commons made new Precedents, they did but follow the Steps of their
Predecessors, who made Precedents as the Necessity of Affairs required; and if
the House of Commons had not taken such Courses, they had betrayed their Trust,
if by those Precedents (whether new or old) they had not asserted the Rights of
those that sent them thither. Now what becomes of this your Pretense of illegal
and arbitrary Orders in Matters not relating to Privileges of Parliament, for
which you procured their Dissolution?

6ly. A sixth Pretense for dissolving that Parliament, was for their Addresses
to the King, which I am sure were with all the Duty and Humility that could be;
nevertheless to allenate the King from them, you and your Party called them
Remonstrances rather than dutiful Answers to those Messages sent them by the
King. Surely, Sir, it was a strange Age in which that Parliament sat; and they
could not but judge themselves under very unhappy Circumstances, when
notwithstanding their extreme Caution and Prudence, yet all was under an ill
Construction at Court. Now if the Commons had returned Answers to his Majesty's
Messages, without showing on what Grounds they proceeded, they had been (and
that justly too) accused as Men proceeding peremptorily and without Reason; but
when they expressed with all becoming Modesty the Reasons of their Resolutions,
they were accused of Remonstrating. But what if we should give your Ministers
at St. James's, and your Brother's at White Hall this Word, and so I will for
once, if those of them that are alive will but tell me what they understoood by
that Word, and with what Crime they would charge that House of Commons; for my
part I am at a Loss in the Point: perhaps Portsmouth and Barillon that
understood French might have given you the Meaning of the Word Remonstrance,
and it may be told you there was some pernicious thing in it, as the Carnegey,
or some Pox like it, and therefore it might prejudice your Brother, as it had
done you, you know when; take it so, and much good may it do you: but if by
Remonstrance you mean a declaring the Causes and Reasons of what they were
doing, where was the Fault that was so unworthily imputed to them, since it was
a way they learned from your own Brother in his Messages to his former
Parliaments? This is another Pretense much of the same Value with the rest, and
so let them go together.

7ly. A seventh Pretense you had for dissolving that Parliament, was the
falling foul upon several of your Friends, and giving them their due Character;
the Ministers at White Hall would never forgive the last Westminster Parliament
for the Vote passed upon some Men then much in fashion at yours and your
Brother's Courts, which galled you to the Heart and Soul: truly I would not
have you think this a Character the House of Commons only had fixed upon them;
no, every honest Man had done it long before, the whole Current of their Lives,
Practices and Counsels, being a full Proof of that Charge: Therefore why did
your Paltroons call these Votes illegal? Was it illegal for that Parliament to
impeach Persons that were Enemies to the King and Kingdom, or to determine by a
Vote who were wicked Counselors, and did deserve to be impeached, so to find
out the Sense of the House?

But since you are my old Friend, my never-failing Friend, and upon that
Consideration I have an old Kindness for you and your Party, I will with you
suppose the Votes that passed against those Beasts of Prey, were not in order
to an Impeachment; yet still there was nothing of Illegality in them, nor
nothing extraordinary: for the Commons in Parliament have always had two Ways
of delivering the Country from such Vermin, either to bring them to a public
Trial, that they may have public Justice done upon them, or give the Rogues an
ill Name in an Address to the King, that the Court and Council may not be
plagued with such Rubbish; and hereby the Country will know them again, and
treat them accordingly. You were very tender of the Lives and Liberties of
these Favorites, and so was your Brother; but I conceive their Lives and
Liberties were never in danger till they had forfeited them, and the Forfeiture
could not appear till they had received a fair Trial: Now, Sir, it is plain they
durst not stand one, unless it were a Trial of Skill whether the Parliament
should sit and see Justice done, or be dissolved and the Nation undone: this
was the Trial they were in danger of, and no other; for that was concluded on
by the King and Barillon in the Lodgings at the lower end of the matted
Gallery. But suppose their Lives and Liberties had been in danger by an
Impeachment, there was just Cause for the Parliament's proceeding that way with
those Traitors; and if they had been but endowed with Courage to have stood
Trial, there would have been legal Evidence to have proved the Matter of Fact
upon them, that they were Enemies to the King and Kingdom; but if there was not
Evidence, truly then they had been acquitted with more Honor to themselves and
Families than they acquired by sending home that Parliament. Again, Sir, do but
consider a little, and set your own Mother-Wit at work, and you will find that
a Parliament may act as the great Council of the King, and the Wisdom of the
Nation (I use your Brother's own Phrase) and when they saw Affairs ill
administered, and their Advice rejected, the Course of Justice perverted, the
King's Counsels betrayed, Grievances multiplied, and the Government it self
managed in a most weak and disorderly Manner, who should they have charged? the
King? No, you will say he could do no Wrong: Who then should they accuse, but
those that had the Administration of Affairs, that had the King's Ear, as the
villainous Authors of those Evils that hung over our Heads? And ought they not
to have applied themselves to the King by humble Addresses to remove such
Persons from his Presence and Councils for ever? You may say they had no
Testimony against them; you know to the contrary: but suppose they had not
legal Proof, yet you know to your woeful Experience there were many things plain
and evident even beyond the Testimony of Witnesses; so that it was impossible
as well as unnecessary to have had legal Proof. What if it was your Brother's
Pleasure to hear those Villains? was it therefore unlawful for the Commons to
conclude that all the Evils the Nation groaned under came from their wicked
Advice and Counsel? and then might they not represent those things to the
Nation, that it might appear they had not been negligent in making Inquisition
after those Men, who had been for several Years carrying on their wicked
Designs with you and your Popish Party? They imagined to secure themselves by
whispering in the King's Ear: What then? must not a Parliament inquire into the
Names of these Whisperers? and tho they had not legal Proof to make these Men
public Examples, yet they had so much Certainty of the Matter of Fact, as was
Ground enough to stigmatize them as Promoters of the French Interest, and
Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Come, Sir, to be plain with you, the People of England were highly interested
in all those great Officers of State; and as they were your Brother's Servants,
so they were Servants to the whole Kingdom: therefore who should have detected
the Treachery and Villainy of those Servants but their Representatives in
Parliament, whose Business it was to represent all the Nation's Grievances to
the King? Certainly such a Representation ought to have been esteemed by him
worthy of Consideration, and not to have treated them as having made illegal
Votes: but this you and your Brother made a Pretense for dissolving that
Parliament, and preferred your secret Counsels before the public Council of
the Kingdom. In a word therefore, to conclude this Head, let me tell you in all
Faithfulness, that those Votes your Party was pleased to term strange and
illegal, were not so strange as honest, and not illegal, but very righteous:
The House of Commons had before addressed the King for their removal from his
Person and Councils, but he was graciously pleased to take no notice of their
Addresses, tho made with all Humility and Duty; nay, Sir, he was so far from
that, that it was observed even by that House of Commons, and many other sober
Men, that an Address from the Commons against any evil Man at Court, was a
forerunner of his being preferred to a Place of greater Profit or Honor, if
not both; it proved so thrice to that old Traitor Lauderdale: and on the other
hand, if those three Parliaments had addressed on behalf of any Man, he was
sure to receive no Favor, and came off very well if he was not marked out for
some Vengeance. Now I think it no Crime to tell you, that your Brother ought
not to have entertained any of those Vermin after they had a Blast of angry
Breath from that or any other House of Commons: for certainly if a House of
Commons declared any number of Men, Persons that put the King upon Arbitrary
Counsels, or Betrayers of the Interest of the Nation, there needed no Process
of Law and Legal Proof against them before they are dismissed, tho it was but
reasonable if they had proceeded against them, in order to fine, imprison, or
put them to death: but to remove them from the King, certainly the Advice and
Opinion of the Nation by their Representatives was enough; if not, you would
have allowed them time to act their Villainy to the Hazard of the Government it
self: and till this was done, with what face could your Brother expect Supplies
from the Parliament? Your Cattle at St. Germains can tell you, there are some
things so reasonable, that they are above any written Law, and will at all
times have their Effect in despite of all Power on Earth, whereof this was one:
so that from the whole Matter, this Pretense of yours falls to the Ground with
the others before named.

8ly. Your eighth Pretense was the Parliament's Behavior in the Case of
Fitz-Harris; and this was rendered a very hanious Crime, and just Cause hereby
was given to your Brother and you to send that Parliament packing, which
accordingly after 8 days sitting was dissolved for no other reason, but because
the House of Commons impeached him of High Treason. Truly, Sir, I Will appeal to
Jack Caryl, or any of your ragged and outlawed Crew at St. Germains, whether
that House of Commons had not reason to judge the Treasons of that wretched Man
of such a nature as to deserve Examination in full Parliament; and the reason
was as plain as the Sun at noonday, if you but remember that this Fitz-Harris
was one of your own dear Religion, and an Irish Teague, and appeared to the
House of Commons, as made use of by you know who, to set up a Counterfeit
Protestant Conspiracy, in order to stifle the Popish Plot, and to destroy those
worthy Patriots who had kept their Consciences chaste, and had not bowed the
Knee to Rome and France, and betrayed the Interest of their Country for
Preferments at Court. There had been many such polite Designs on foot before (a
Particular of which you shall have in its proper place) but they proved
abortive; but your principal Conspirators avoided the Discovery, as others had
the Punishment, in what manner, and by whose assistance, the Nation was then
very sensible: but your Villains being warned by their ill Success in former
Shams, grew more cautious; and therefore, that this damnable Treason might not
look like a Popish Design, your Tools by your Appointment composed a Libel full
of the most bitter Invectives against Popery and your sweet self; this Libel
carried as much Zeal for the Protestant Religion as ever your Declaration,
penned by your quondam Servant St. Coleman, did; and had as much concern for
our Laws and Liberties, as Portsmouth, Nell Waal, or Barillon could have for
their Lives. Notwithstanding all this, you may remember how it inveighed
against the King with all the bitterness imaginable, and incited all Men to
rebel against him, in order to destroy his Person and yours. This Paper, as
villainous as it was against the King, was by him, Portsmouth, and her Bawd
Nell, and Barillon, ordered to be conveyed into the Pockets and Lodgings of
several Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, that (when they were seized, and this
found upon them) they should be charged with Treason and Rebellion, and the
finding of this upon them should be a Proof of the same. The Tool that was to
carry on this Roguery was Fitz-Harris, who was to be one of the Witnesses to
swear this Conspiracy designed by the Protestants: and your Conspirators had
prepared the Business to be laid in Oxfordshire, Buckingham-shire, and
Bark-shire, that this Villainy might not miscarry, but be believed by the Juries
that should be packed in those Counties, in order to a speedy Justice upon the
pretended Criminals. But, Sir, as well laid as this Design was, it proved to be
a Brat of Popish Extraction, and the Midwives were that Whore Portsmouth and
trusty Nell her Bawd, with whom you would have engaged in Person, had not the
Catholic Cause called for your Presence in Scotland: but I suppose, let who
will believe it that you know nothing of the Business, I shall prove you in it
in its proper place.

Well then, the nature of the Crime, and the King your Brother, Barillon, and
the two Strumpets aforenam'd being engaged in this piece of Villainy, and
several great Persons being to be destroyed, surely deserved an Inquiry, which
an Oxford-Jury neither could or would ever make; for they, it may be, in the
Multitude of their Mercies, would have dealt with other Protestants as they did
by poor College, whom they basely murdered, to please your Brother and you.
That House of Commons, as if endowed with a Prophetic Spirit, unanimously
agreed that none but the Parliament was capable of looking into the bottom of
this Affair, both in its Original and Tendency; and the more zealous they were
for that, the more they saw the Zeal of the Judges, and the inferior Courts in
Westminster Hall, abated in relation to the Popish Plot, and its Discovery, but
heightened for you and your Party against the Protestants; and that those
Bloodhounds thirsted after their Blood, that asserted the Laws and Liberties
of England. Truly, to speak the best I can of those Judges, they were much
changed for the worse, as appeared in the Trials of Wakeman, Gascoyne, and
others that were in the Popish Conspiracy; and in good truth, Sir, the Oxford
House of Commons were the more jealous: and could you blame them? for when this
Fitz-Harris was sensible of his Crime, or at least of his Danger, and had begun
to tell Tales, he was removed out of the Legal Custody of the Sheriffs, and
illegally committed close Prisoner to the Tower, to the great astonishment of
all sober Men. That Parliament therefore had no other way to have the
Prosecution effectual, and the Judgment according to the Laws of the Land, and
that Fitz-Harris should not lie under any hopes, but by impeaching him; for
they well knew that no Pardon could stop their Sail, tho it might the King's.
Now, Sir, consider how this Pretense of yours could justify the Dissolution of
that Parliament.

9thly. The last Pretense I shall mention which you had for dissolving the
three last Parliaments, was their bringing in a Bill to exclude you, and to
render you incapable of inheriting the Imperial Crown of this Realm. This was
the best Pretense you and your Party could make for doing so wicked a thing, so
pernicious to the Peace of the Kingdom: but if I destroy this Goliath, I trust
you will quit it, and let it take its fate with the others. There were many of
your Party that used several Arguments against that Bill, which I shall take
notice of.

1. The Conspirators did impudently assert, that the Bill of Exclusion was
unlawful, and therefore in it self null and void, especially since the King had
declared against it. Some of them were pretended Protestants, and had been for
some time educated in the University under a Parcel of High-church-Loggerheads;
they, even they were tainted with this Notion, that was fit for none but such
as believed Transubstantiation. Now, Sir, if it were against Law, it must be
against a written or an unwritten Law: if it were against a written Law, your
Party should have named it; which when they had done, they should have named
that Parliament that ever was bound up by any written Law, if we take them in
their Legislative Capacity, as we must do in this Case: and to declare that a
Parliament is bound up by written Laws in their Legislative Capacity, is both
destructive and absurd.

(1.) It was destructive; the Parliament being the fundamental Court and Law of
the Kingdom, and ordained to make Laws, and see them executed, or to supply
their Deficiency according to the present Exigency, for Preservation of the
Peace and Safety of the People, which is universally in them, but not so in
particular Laws and Statutes, which cannot provide against future Exigencies as
the Law of Parliaments does, and therefore were not Limits to those
Parliaments: and it would have been farther destructive, by depriving those
Parliaments of half their Power at once, whenever they should be circumscribed
by written Laws in their Legislative Capacity, which is a peculiar Property
belonging only to inferior Courts of Law and Justice, but not to the
Parliament of England, which is the Supreme Court, but must have ceased to be
so, and have divested it self of that inherent and uncircumscribed Power, which
the Safety of the People comprehends and requires.

(2.) It was absurd in the Conspirators to urge that the Bill of Exclusion was
against Law, and therefore null and void of it self: for the Legislative Power
of Parliament is to give Laws to England, and not to receive any, saving from
the Nature and End of their own Constitution; which as they give Parliaments a
Being, so the Parliaments make Laws for Preservation of themselves, and the
whole Kingdom they represent.

As for your unwritten Law, it is to me like your unwritten Verities in the
Church of Rome, and the paltry Ceremonies of a Church, that cannot be proved
lawful either from the Command of Christ, or the Practice of his Apostles: if
therefore by unwritten Law, you mean Custom of Inheritance, that is against your
Party by the Practices that have been both at home and abroad; or if you mean
the Equity of the thing, then the Parliament in their Legislative Capacity were
Judges of that; or if you mean Prudence, the Parliament being the Wisdom of the
Nation, are certainly Judges of that also.

From all which it undoubtedly follows, that the Proposal of a Bill to exclude
you from inheriting the Crown of this Realm was in it self lawful, because of
the uncircumscribed Power of Parliaments in judging what is lawful, and what is
necessary for the Safety of the People, by whom they are sent to Parliament for
redress of Grievances; which no written Law could provide against in an
universal way. So then it being lawful in it self to propose a Bill to exclude
you from the Crown, the doing it after your Brother had signified his Pleasure
against the Bill, could not make it against Law: for I remember no Law written
or unwritten, that ever constituted him Lord of the Articles upon the
Parliament, which they were to debate and propose, or not: But what was his
Will and Pleasure, or the Pleasure of two or three Villains and Whores that
joined with him in usurping such a Power, altogether strange to our English
Constitution of Parliament? And I must tell you, your Brother's intolerable
Stiffness in that Particular I cannot think was out of Kindness to you, or from
any suspicion he had of the Danger of the English Monarchy by such a Law, but
from the Influence of some ill Men engaged in the Conspiracy with you to
destroy that Constitution; who knowing your Brother's Inclination in that
Particular as well as yours, made it their Business to nourish in your Absence
a Misunderstanding between him and the People, whom you and he mortally hated,
justly fearing if he should ever have come to the due Temper of an English
Monarch, and to have a Sense of the Peoples Affection to him as the Father of
the Kingdom, he would have delivered up you and your Rogues, who had infected
him with that deadly Notion, that the Interest of an English Parliament was not
only distinct from, but opposite to his Interest and Designs.

2. Your Conspirators used to urge another Argument against the Bill of
Exclusion (no doubt your own first, or they would never have presumed to use it
so long till it was become thredbare) viz. that the King could not comply with
the House of Commons in it, tho the Interest as well as the Desire of the
People of England, because it so nearly concerned him in point of Honor,
Justice and Conscience. Your Brother and you were both Men of Honor,
Conscience and Justice, of which you both made this Nation sensible. Well,
since it was so, let me argue upon the Topics of Honor, Justice, and
Conscience with you: Had it not been honorable in your Brother to be true and
faithful to his Word and Oath, to keep and maintain the Religion and Laws
established? Nay, Sir, could any Man have thought it dishonorable in him to
have loved the Safety and Welfare of his People, and the true Religion
established amongst them, above the temporal Greatness of his Relations? Was it
not just, in conjunction with his Parliament for his Peoples Safety, to make
use of a Power warranted by our English Laws, and the Examples of former Ages?
Or where was his Justice, that was the Father of his Country, to expose his
Children to ruin, out of Fondness to a perverse Brother; and to abandon the
Religion, Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms, which he was sworn to maintain,
and expose them to the Rage of you and your traitorous Jesuits, who thought
your selves in Conscience bound to subvert them? Your Brother by his own, might
have remembered your Religion; and what your Brother's Conscience was in
relation to your Succession, a cunning Man could scarce find out: but if he had
been a Protestant, I might have asked, what Conscience obliged him to ascend
the Throne to overthrow the Protestant, and set up the Popish Religion? ^ir,
since your Brother insisted so much upon Honor, Justice and Conscience, I Will
say of him, as I ought, that he was a Papist; yet I am sure he was bound in
Honor, Justice and Conscience, to have preserved to the People of England
their Religion, Laws and Liberties, and in conjunction with this Parliament to
have secured them from being subverted by you and your Followers, since with^^
much Duty and Affection they recalled him from a miserable Banishment, attended
with Poverty and Dishonor, and cheerfully placed him upon the Throne, and
enlarged his Revenue above what any of his Predecessors had enjoyed, and gave
him vaster Sums in 20 Years than had been given to all the Kings since William
the Norman. Where then was his Honor, Conscience and Justice, in leaving them
to be destroyed by you? It cannot be said he had therein more regard to the
Government than to the Person that succeeded him, seeing if he had passed the
Bill of Exclusion, he had no ways prejudiced the legal Monarchy, which he did
enjoy with all those Rights, Prerogatives and Powers which his Ancestors did
ever claim, besides what he usurped against Law, which yet the People quietly
submitted to.

3. A third Argument your Party used, was, That it was a hard Case that a Man
should lose his Inheritance because of this or that Persuasion in Matters of
Religion. Truly, Sir, had your Case been only so, I should have thought your
Argument pretty strong: but alas, Popery was not in you and your Conspirators,
an innocent Persuasion of Men differing from others in religious Matters, but a
real Conspiracy against Christianity it self; nor was this Inheritance your
Cattle used to mention, a bare Inheritance of a private Person, without the
Consideration of an O^^^ce annexed to it, which required you to be Par Officio.
I pray what did your Logger-heads mean, when they made such a Noise about an
Inheritance? nothing less than a Government of three Kingdoms, the Protection
of several Nations, the making of War and Peace for them, the Preservation of
their Religion, the disposal of all public Places and Revenues, the Execution
of all Laws, with many other things of the greatest Importance. Truly, Sir,
these inconsiderate Persons were mightily out in their Claim: for the three
Parliaments had reason to look about them, when they had reflected upon the
Bloody Tenets of the Church of Rome, and more particularly upon the hellish
Conspiracy then discovered, and at that Time carrying on with Vigor by your
Popish and Popishly affected Traitors: and finding you to be the avowed Head of
this devilish Party, could you with any Justice think they should not prevent
as much as in them lay your being a Shepherd, since you had declared your self
a Wolf? And since you were a Papist, how could they believe you would ever
appear in the Defense of the Protestant Religion? I think this may suffice for
this Argument.

4. A fourth Argument against the Bill of Exclusion was the Oath of Allegiance
taken to your Brother by the Parliament of England. Truly I never heard the
Argument from any but an Irish Man, not but we had then Fools enough to invent
such an Argument, as we have at this Day to attempt your Restoration. But their
Arguments were as silly as their Plots; and this is one of the most foolish
Arguments could be used against such great and wise Assemblies as those
Parliaments were composed of. Give me leave, Sir, to put this Question to you:
Suppose you had been found guilty of Treason by your Peers in Parliament, or in
any Court of Peers, and the Case so plain, that you had been condemned and
executed for that Treason; whether or no that Parliament or Court of Peers that
had condemned you, had been guilty of a Breach of their Allegiance, and Murder?
This you cannot say: then I must tell you, that since whilst you were Duke of
York, you had made your self obnoxious to the Government in a lower degree, why
might not the same Authority proportion the Punishment, and leave you your
Life, and debar you of the Succession? This is to show the Absurdity your Crew
were guilty of in this Argument.

Now I will speak one Word by way of Answer: Whereas your Conspirators did say
the Bill of Exclusion was diametrically opposite to the Oath of Allegiance
taken to your Brother and his Heirs; no Man could bear Allegiance to two
Persons at once, nor could Allegiance be due to a Subject: the Word Heirs
obliges no Man till the Heir is in Possession of the Crown, then the Obligation
is fixed by virtue of the Oath made to his Predecessor. Now, Sir, do but
consider what Mischief your Party did to the Succession it self for the next
Heir by their way of prating: for by it they let loose your self from all the
Restrictions and Penalties of human Laws; so that you had no other Ties upon
you not to snatch the Crown from off your Brother's Head, than purely those of
your own Conscience; and what they were, the Nation quickly saw.

5. A fifth Argument you and your Conspirators used against the Bill of
Exclusion, was, That it argued a Distrust of the Providence of God. Now, Sir,
was our Care to preserve the Protestant Religion a Mistrust of God's
Providence? and must those that were thus zealous, be judged Men of little
Faith? God forbid. It Is true, I cannot allow the least Evil to be done, that
Good may come of it; but the Bill against you was justifiable by the Laws of
God, and the Constitution of the Government: for, Sir, look back and consider
how the Protestant Religion was first established here in England; it was
indeed by the mighty Hand of God influencing the public Counsels of the
Nation, so that all imaginable Care was taken both by Prince and People to
rescue themselves from the Romish Yoke, and accordingly most excellent Laws
were made against the Usurpation and Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome; our noble
Ancestors in those Days did not manifest a want of Zeal for their Religion,
with a lazy Pretense of trusting God's Providence, but together with their
Prayers to, and Affiance in the great Jehovah, joined the Acts of their own
Duty, without which they well knew they had no reason to expect a Blessing. And
a young Whipper-snapper, a Friend of yours, in a certain Coffee-house had
prated at this rate till he was plentifully kicked for his Pains, which was the
best Way of answering such a Coxcomb, that was not to be answered any other way.

6. Another Argument against the Bill of Exclusion was this: A standing Force
would have been absolutely necessary to place and keep the Administration of
the Government in Protestant Hands; and the Monarchy it self would have been
destroyed by a Law, which was to have taken all sort of Power from the King,
and made him not so much as a Duke of Venice. This I have heard your Brother
talk, but it was when he was drunk; and this was the Talk of your Party, drunk
or sober: truly they had little in their Discourses but Absurdity and
Incoherence. Sometimes they would say, the Government, and Succession to the
Crown was of such Divine Right, that nothing could lessen your Right: nay, some
of them were so fulsome and nauseous as to talk of Acts of Parliament to banish
you out of your own Dominions, and to deprive you of your whole Power of
Kingship, after your being actually King: but truly this nasty Cheat appeared
so plain to the Parliament, that one of your professed Vassals, who had more
Honor than the rest of your nonsensical Parasites, was ashamed of it, and
openly renounced that self-contradicting Project, which they had been so long
contriving, and thought they had so artificially disguised; but tho it was so
well-favouredly exposed in the House, yet your Coxcombs thought the Nation
might be deceived, and therefore blushed not to offer it in their common
Discourses in all Places and Companies: but who they converted to the Cause, I
never was curious to inquire.

But, Sir, was a standing Force so necessary in case of your being excluded?
suppose it was: nay, I will go farther; suppose a War had been necessary, yet
would it not have been a War justified by the Authority of Law, and against a
banished excluded Pretender? There would have been no fear of its Consequence;
no true English Men could have joined with you, or countenanced your Usurpation
after such an Act; and as for your Popish and French Adherents, they would
neither have been more angry nor more strong by the passing that Bill.

Truly, Sir, I must be plain, and tell you, that your being excluded when Duke
of York, would by no Means have necessitated a standing Army for the
Preservation of the Government and Peace of the Kingdom; the whole People of
England would have been an Army for that Purpose, and every Heart and Hand
would have been prepared to maintain that so necessary and much desired Law,
for which those three Parliaments were so earnest with your Brother, not only
in pursuance of their own Judgments, but by the Directions of those that sent
them, to remove so great a Grievance from the Nation, as you then was, and
continued to be till you were graciously pleased to let us know that one pair
of Heels was worth two pair of Hands. Your notorious great Grandmother was
excluded by Act of Parliament, yet Queen Elizabeth enjoyed the Crown with much
Comfort and Peace for 44 Years, and needed no standing Force to secure her from
that pretty conditioned Gentlewoman's pretended Right.

Again, a Word more to this standing Army: I wonder that you and your Party
should be so afraid of what you so eagerly desired; nay, some of them almost
ventured a hanging to get one established: If I am not much mistaken, I have
seen two Armies raised for no other Design than to bring in Popery and Slavery,
as was proved to the Shame of him that raised them; and the first was as
shamefully disbanded, as it was impudently and against Law raised: but the last
Army you procured to be raised, you and your Party were so unwilling to part
with, that two Acts were passed before we could get them disbanded. And after
your Brother had thrown off the use of Parliaments at your Instance, he so
increased the Number of his Guards, that they became formidable to the People
of England; who being a free People, hated such a standing Force. Now why your
dissembling Rascals should use this as an Argument, I am yet to learn.

And as for that Objection, that it would have destroyed the Monarchy by a Law,
and taken all sort of Power from the King, and made him less than a Duke of
Venice; this was as false as could be: for, as I have said before, so I must
again, that it is evident beyond Contradiction, that the Bill of Exclusion
could not prejudice the legal Monarchy, which your Brother did enjoy, with all
the Rights and Powers that his Ancestors ever claimed, because many Acts of
like nature have passed not only in England, but in your quondam ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, without danger of diversting the Monarchs of their legal
Power. The Preservation of a Government consists in, and depends upon an exact
Adherence to its Principles on which it was founded: and the essential
Principle of the English Monarchy being that well-proportioned Distribution of
Powers, whereby the Law at once provides for the Greatness of the Sovereign,
and the Safety of the People, for this Reason our Ancestors have been more
careful to preserve inviolable the Government, than to favor any personal
Pretenses. And in your Case we followed the Examples of other Nations; I meet
with none in Story so slavishly addicted to any Person or Family, as to admit
of a Prince who openly professed a Religion contrary to that established
amongst them: it would be easy to produce a Multitude of Examples of those who
have rejected Princes for Reasons of far less Weight than the Difference of
Religion, and this without endangering the Monarch's Power, or the Subject's
Right: therefore your Party talked like Fools when they said the Bill of
Exclusion would have divested the King of his Power; nothing could have made a
King of England so much look like a Duke of Venice as one of the lowsy
Expedients your Party proposed to the Houses of Parliament.

7. Another Argument against the Bill of Exclusion, was, That it would have led
the Parliament to attempt other great and considerable Changes, and thereby
endangered the whole Government, and the Peace of the Nation. Now what your
Villains would have had the Nation to understand by this Change, is worthy of
Consideration: Therefore, first, if by a Change they meant a Change of the
Constitution of the Government, let me tell you that Hell could never have
forged a more villainous Lie than those wicked Wretches did, that they might in
conjunction with you instill such Thoughts into the Mind of the King, as might
effectually alienate his Soul from the Use of Parliaments. It is evident even
to these Hell-born Wretches, that there was no Vote or Proposition in either of
those Parliaments that could give any Ground for such a malicious Reflection;
and therefore in this Matter we that were Lookers-on might reasonably charge
your Brother and you, and your whole Party, with a malicious Design against all
Parliaments, in thus arraigning the whole Body of the Nation upon those ill
grounded and malicious Suggestions. I am sure this did not become the Grandeur
and Justice of Princes, nor was agreeable to the Measures of Prudence and
Wisdom, by which you should have governed yourselves. And now, Sir, I will give
the true Reason why you thus delighted in these Men, viz. your hating
Parliaments, being afraid they should have called you and them to account for
your high Crimes and Misdemeanors: by this Means, together with the
Inclinations of your dear Brother, you so swayed him, that you could never want
Grounds to dissolve not only three such Parliaments, but threescore, if there
had been Occasion.

In the second Place, Sir, If you and your Admirers had understood by
attempting great and important Changes, that the Parliament would have besought
the King, that you might no longer have the Government in your Hands; that your
villainous Conspirators should no longer preside in his Councils, nor possess
all the great Offices of Trust in the Kingdom; that our Ports, Garrisons and
Fleet should no longer be governed by those that were at your Devotion; that
Marks of Favor, and Characters of Honor should no more be placed upon such as
the Wisdom of the Nation had adjudged Favorers of Popery, or Pensioners to the
French King; these, I confess, were great and important Changes, such as became
English Protestants to believe were designed by those Parliaments, and would
have been by any other Parliament your Brother should have called in his time,
and such as the People of England would have prayed for, and left the Success
to Almighty God, who governs the Hearts of Kings and Princes. Truly without
these Changes, the Bill of Exclusion would have signified little; it might have
provoked, but not disabled your wicked Party: Nay, the Money the Nation must
have paid for it, would have been used to hasten your Return upon us.

8. Another Argument used against the Bill of Exclusion, was your great Grace
and Favor for your Country, and the Excellency of your Temper and Virtue.
Surely, Sir, if you had heard these Men magnify you for your excellent personal
Qualifications, you would have spit in their Faces, and told them they lied;
for the Violence of your natural Temper was sufficiently known, and your
Vehemence in exalting the Prerogative in your Brother's Reign beyond its due
Bounds; and the Principles of your cursed Religion, which carried you to all
imaginable Excesses of Cruelty, convinced all Mankind that there was a
Necessity of excluding you, rather than to leave you the Name, and place the
Power in a Protector: for in good truth, they must have looked upon it as the
greatest Folly to have made such a Change in the Government, which would have
been a Means to destroy, and not preserve the Government. Sir, they saw your
Temper, that you, who was bred up in such Principles of Politics as made you
in love with Arbitrary Power, and bigoted to that Religion which always
propagates it self by Blood, could never bear with such Shackles as would even
disgust a Prince of the meekest Disposition: this was your Temper; and how it
is amended since you placed your self at St. Germains, I suppose your Followers
can tell better than I.

But what Regard and Favor you have born to this Nation, was well seen from
your first Return to England in 1660, to your leaving it in 1688. You engaged
it in two wicked Wars with the Dutch, and a third with France. I would not have
your Cattle low too much of your Grace and Favor: but truly if you had any for
this Nation, you was pleased to conceal it, except in two things, in which you
did England the most signal Service that ever Man did; the one was destroying
your Brother, and the other your running away: and if you will keep on the
other Side of the small River that parts France from us, we will forgive you
all the Faults of your Life. But notwithstanding all the Noise your Party have
made about your Exclusion, I think they are now fully satisfied, or at least
may be, that those three Parliaments that did proceed to exclude you, had just
Grounds for it; so that all your Pretenses stand convict as foolish and
impertinent. Now these things being thus, can any Man judge you otherwise than
an Enemy to Parliaments, and that way of English Government, which made you and
your Traitors so much inveigh against their most just Proceedings?

I must confess I intended to have made an end this time with you, but there is
so much yet behind, that I must have another Touch with you before I leave you:
for you know a Picture that is not to all Intents and Purposes perfect, is but
a silly Business, and not worth the viewing; and what Faults there are in your
Picture, your worthy Ally will seek to have mended. Old Hodg I hear, as old as
he is, swears rather than you shall not sit again, he will (now the Trade of
Observatoring is out of doors) turn Fiddler again in Ordinary to you, he may
help you to many a penny worth of Farthings by doing a Job at a Country
Wedding for your Neighbors at St. Germains; who, tho poor, yet are much
affected with fidling: I pray send for him, for I question not but he is Rogue
enough to be employed by you in that excellent Function.

Another thing I request is, When your humble Servant the broken Soldier bauls
against me about Perjury, and Perjury upon Record, that you would advise him to
put in a civil Word about forging the Seal; you know it is not unusual to lay
the Hare's Head to the Goose-giblets: they say he can dance better than he can
talk; let him attend his old Friend Hodg; we can spare him, Sir, to serve you
when you shall command him, for I think he is lewd enough for you to make what
you please of him: his three Cousins were once in hold, and it vexes him to the
Heart that he cannot get them again to engage in a fresh Plot, no not so much
as to make a Swear that the Seal was a good Seal, if his Life lay on it: good
Man, I pity his Misfortune; I am afraid the scarlet Cloak must once more go to
pawn at some Pawdy-House or other, but it can procure no great Sum, for it is
as thredbare as my old Gown; and how to help my self I know not, till our King
shall be pleased to do me right.

There is your other Friend, that would have been a Lord in your Brother's
Reign and yours, or the Lord knows what; he used to walk with Sir J. Fenwick in
the Mall; and tho Sir J. is decently sent out of the World, yet he is a constant
Advocate to bless his Memory, either for fear or for love, with his good word,
by defending whose villainous Cause he pleaded his own. You know he was a
dutiful Child to his old Dad, and let him have 400 l. per Annum to drink Ale
withal in his elder Days; the old Gentleman could have dispensed with a Bottle
of Claret if his dutiful Child would have let him enjoyed his own: you would do
well to move your Brother of France to make him a French Count, or some such
Business; for I am afraid if he should wait till Doomsday in the Afternoon, he
will not get any Title here, unless that of a Case-hardened impudent Knave.
Upon my Word, if you would have his Company, I do not think any of our
East-land Merchants would mourn for him, except in Sack and Claret. When he was
in play, he was such a false Card, that a whole Pack of them was laid aside;
and ever since he bellows and roars like a Town-Bull, that the Children here
cannot sleep for the direful Noise he makes: he has had his old Friend Hodg,
with some of the inferior Clergy, to give him Ghostly Counsel; but he swears
and damns, that nothing can do his Business, or give him any Content like being
made a Lord, therefore what to do for him I know not; the poor Man is in a
great Distress, and it is high time you give him some ease, before yo^ gang over
the Alps, for I understand you must amble to Rome, there to end your wicked
Life.

Be not in a heat, but let me tell you of another humble Servant of yours, that
wants your good Company, and that is Dr. Grains, a very sweet-fac'd honest
Priest as ever broke up a Church; his Father was a poor honest Hoy-man, and
gave the Rogue a little Learning, and in time he ascended the Pulpit, and made
some Earnings; he has a small Concern in Wales, where he brews now and then a
little Ale to refresh his wicked Soul: but the Man is extraordinary wary in his
way, and sells his Grains to the Poor, in propria Persona, at a Halfpenny and
a Penny per Bowl. I conceive he got more by his incomparable Warehouse, he
knows where, than by the Merchandise before mentioned: the Man was popular, and
the Neighborhood where he once lived, brought him with great Honor to a
certain Place where he was well known, and better trusted than with his
Gardener, whose Pockets he would have picked of sixteen Shillings; but the
Gardener was as jealous of his Honesty, as all honest Men that know him are of
his Truth and Sincerity to the Government and the Protestant Religion, and
therefore secured his Money, and disappointed the poor Priest of his Design. I
once had hopes, that since you was so gracious as to send him into Wales, you
would have had his Company with you, for you used to say he was Company for any
King in Christendom: it is therefore much he should be left behind, having been
a mighty Tool for you in your time; and therefore Sarsfield, and a certain
other Person of some Quality, did give him all the countenance they could, and
procured an Opportunity for him to breathe in Wales sometimes for the Health of
his sweet Countenance. The Man is humble, and therefore refused not to lie in a
Friend's House of yours, tho he was but poorish, he being a hearty Rogue that
has ventured hanging for you, as may be testified in due time.

I once happened into the Company of this Northern Welsh Priest, and he gave
account to some Ladies of the good Company he had at his House when in the
height of his Glory, and complained of a prodigious Quantity of Damask Linen he
lost, all made up by his own Mother, and marked with the Crest of his Family. I
am not to question the Veracity of this goodly Parson, for his Father was an
honest Hoy-man, and his Mother was a Pudding-wright in the Town he was born,
and now and then brewed a Bushel of Malt against a good Time; and whether she
sold her Grains or no I cannot tell: but as for Damask Linen, whether she ever
saw any in her Life, I must leave that to your Friends to believe if they
please; but this I know, he never deserved so great a Favor at her Hands, for
I remember when he was ashamed both of Father and Mother. But let him go as he
is, I could wish you had him with you, as also that logger-headed Priest, who
for his Learning, Parts and Honesty, might have been Fenwick's Chaplain in
Extremis, he having been so deeply engaged with him in that glorious Design,
for which he has justly suffered Death as an abominable Traitor to God, his
King and Country. This Priest lives and wipes his Lockrum-jaws, as the Whore in
the Proverbs; and like an impudent Rogue says, he has done no Wickedness. I do
not question, Sir, as infirm as I am through your Grace and Favor, but to live
to see an end of his supposed endless War, and a happy Determination of his
disp^^ed Titles; for the Villain, notwithstanding his black mouthed Sermon, may
be made to know that the Election of the People of England is the best Title
most of our Kings ever had: if he cannot be convinced with rational Arguments,
a Halter may chance to be his Portion, which is oftener the Reward of a Traitor
than a Laurel. I am of opinion that his Plotting against the Government has
been more his Masterpiece than any Sermon he ever preached. I conceive him so
well fixed here, that I doubt you will not have his Company, tho I do not find
him a Fellow of any great use to his Party, unless to lead a Mob to disturb an
Election of Parliament Men in Westminster; but notwithstanding the Bustle he
made in the last, he could do you no great Service.

But to return to the Matter of Fact, with which you and your Brother and
villainous Party stand charged to the end of the 29th Article, I ask you, What
you think of all these things, and how could your Party behold the Face of the
English Nation, or your Scots Villains their Country, which they have so basely
abused and betrayed? Come, Sir, what say you to all this? Was not the Prince of
Orange right in those few Passages of his Declaration, that more particularly
related to your Personal Virtues? Truly had he said nothing, yet these Articles
are sufficient, which are so fully proved, that I defy your old Observator to
confute any one thing mentioned, or your Scottish Scribler that is become a
hearty Rogue in your Cause; he has ventured hanging for you, and I hope will
in due time meet with his long-deserved Reward for all his Villainies. Dr.
Wilkinson's Lady, notwithstanding his great Care of her Husband's Library, will
not put in a Petition against it.

If you are not satisfied, we hold four Campagns in a Year at Westminster Hall,
and six or eight at the Old Baily, Hixes-Hall, and Guildhall, where are very
notable Combatants, who use to be too many for those they engaged in former
times: I pray come and try your Skill and Fortune, it may turn to some account
to you in time. Poor Pilgarlick fought two Days together at one of the Campagns
that you opened, and came off by the lee, tho he had a good Sword, and fenced
as well as any Man in Christendom: but you may fare better than many an honest
Man; and I conceive my old Landlady will be content that you should rather
retain your old Name, than be guilty of such a Piece of Rashness; she may come
and act your part for you, unless the Virago Part in her Ladyship be decayed
for want of its due Exercise, and may win more Credit than ever you had. But do
what you will, it is all one to me, I am ad arma paratus, I dare try a touch
with you and your Party at any time. I would have you know I do not tell you
this now you are at such a distance, for you and your Villains have had several
Trials of Skill with me, and in seven or eight Fights I never lost the day but
twice, notwithstanding all the Efforts you and your Rogues by their Perjuries
and Subornations of Perjury made against me: and let me tell you, that as ill
as you have used me, I may live to see a day wherein our King and his
Government will do me right, tho I confess I have waited a long time for the
Benefit of the Justice of the Nation, due to those Men that have served and
saved their Country.

It may be you will knock under board, and grant that you have been guilty so
far as you have been charged hitherto; truly it is well you are so honest: then
I pray be not offended if I have another fling at your ^^cket as soon as
possible, that I may do you Right; and when that is done, I pray let me desire
you, that if you leave another Letter at St. Germains, as you did at Rochester,
not to say that the Prince of Orange endeavored to make you as black as Hell,
but confess the Truth, and say, that it was you your self, instigated by the
Devil himself, and all his wicked Angels and Instruments, that had done it to
his Hand many Years before, more effectually than he could have done it, had he
had the Advice even of those honest Gentlemen that drew up the third
Declaration in his Name, which was dated from Sherborn Castle; that was a
Tickler I Will assure you, and did your Business as effectually as Cromwell did
your Brother's at Worcester Fight; it sent you packing in the Devil's Name, and
half such a one in France would send you over the Alps, without the Help of a
strong Guard, unless it were to keep you from being torn in pieces by the
French Mob, who if they were not three quarters starved, would have as much a
Mind to it as ever the English Nation had, and I am sure you deserved it many a
Year before you wore the Crown.

I cannot ye^ take my leave of you, for you are sensible that my hearty
Affection to you and your Cause, intitles me to do you all the Service I can;
therefore I will give you the best Information I can how your Party stand
affected. Your Friend Robin was no sooner out of Pound, but he made an
Elopement to the loyal Club at the Pope's Head in Cornbil, and it is supposed
did give but a melancholy Account of his Confinement, but a far better than he
gave of the Lady Wilkinson's Books, or of the Widow's Bond of a hundred Pounds,
which in a most Christian manner he forsware, hoping to have paid her with a
false Oath the whole Sum he was entrusted with. The Villain once set up for a
Saint, and then your Villains hated him to the same Degree that God and all
good Men do at this time. I suppose he hopes that if you should make your Abode
in Partibus Transmarinis, you may procure him to be made a Popish Bishop or so,
which is the least you can do for him, for I assure you he is Rogue enough to
wear the Title of an Archbishop, tho it be of Bell-Isle, Vshant, or some such
Place: he is yours, dear Sir; I pray take him to you, and if he has any Hairs
growing on the Palms of his Hands, you may safely swear by the Lady of
Loretto's old cast Smock, that he is an honest Scot, and as fit for your turn
as the Deel can make him.

I have much wondered he did not face about in your Brother's time; he might and
would have served to join with old Maple-face in the Trade of Book-cutting, and
have given you a Scots Palm for a tickling Sum, and that in a more decent way
than the Irish Bogtrotter did: but the Truth of it is, he was as one born out
of due time, for he came not into your Villainous Cause till Hanging came in
fashion on your side, and so he was forced for a time to take up his Quarters
at the old College: he has been an eminent Confessor, but has not yet arrived
at Martyrdom, but in good time the Gallows may have its Due, and then good
night poor Robin, the most excellent Manager of my Lady Wilkinson's Books.

I sometimes see Tumbledown Dick, that is a pretty Fellow I assure you, and
very well shaped, for he is almost as thick as he is long, and very acceptable
to your villainous Party, and understands something of Heraldry, as he pretends:
you put him into a pretty Employment, and made him a Colonel, and he would have
been Governor of a certain Place, but was prevented by a seasonable
Imprisonment, tho the Rascal never understood any thing of military Discipline
but what he learned from a certain Bookseller's Boy, with whom he would have
been very familiar, but the Boy escaped his Love; so that my Gentleman had not
the Understanding requisite for a good Soldier. He was once a Professor of a
great deal of English Truth; but your Brother and you had a cogent way of
bringing over such Cattle to your Cause and Interest. There was a Gentleman he
would have been sweet upon, but he courteously refused the Compliment,
notwithstanding the Offer of a good Place in the Band of Pensioners, and the
Enjoyment of his Wife into the Bargain. I see him rump along the Court of
Requests, and straddle like a Pair of Compasses over a Map, but looks as if he
could not say bough to a Goose. He has sworn to this Government, but you know
that is nothing to him that could turn a Rogue, get a good Place, and had
turned Papist to hold it, had he not been prevented by the coming of our
Protestant King, for he can turn any thing: nay, I question not but if he could
regain his lost Place, he would be a true Williamite, and would not for the
best Jack of small Beer Whitehall can afford him, quit it, tho your Life, and
the ^^ar Life of the Bookseller's Boy lay upon it. I once called upon him for
his Testimony to the Truth of Fact; but the Villain having without reason
abandoned it, forswore himself, and so let him go like a Rogue as he is; for he
that once espoused an honest Cause without a Principle, might quit it without a
Reason: Tho he has sworn to this Government, as several have done, he is as
much your humble Servant as the best of 'em all, and looks very sorrowfully to
see his Friends hang so decently, and not yet see the desired Effect of so
hopeful a Plot. But old Nick and John of Kent can never make him leave his old
Conundrums, unless the Bookseller's Boy, now he is somewhat mannish, do buffet
him to some purpose; this may chance to lay the Devil, that has been sometimes
very unruly. He is something older than when you left him, but his long Face is
just where it was, and would be as ready to sneer upon you as ever. I pray,
Sir, send for him, and let him have the Blessing of your Company.

I understand that when our honest Feversham-men met with you in your intended
Passage to France, they did not only make you show your Shapes, but compelled
you to part with your Gold: in this lamentable Adventure, your Friends say you
lost your Crucifix, which had in it a Piece of the Wood of the Cross on which
our Savior suffered: truly I am mighty sorry for your Loss; it seems you are
more sensible of the Loss of that Relick than of the three Crowns you for a
short time usurped. Alas, good Man, what shall we do to make up this great Loss
to you? for a Piece of that Cross may easily be worth thirteen Crowns for ought
I know. But you may see what a trusty Card you had of Odescalchi, that he did
not furnish you with a Cross, since for his Religion and the French. Interest
you parted with your Crown. But now I think on it, I can tell how you may be
supplied; I understand you are going to Rome, and if you repair to St. John of
Lateran, that was dedicated to St. Silvester, a Pope God wot, there is a good
Gobbet of Christ's Cross, where you may have a good Sliver for one of your
Irish Crown Pieces; and if the Rogues should be saucy, and refuse your Money
because it is Brass, then I pray repair to the Church of St. Eustathius, and
there you may be fitted with a Piece to your Heart's Content, where is a
considerable Quantity, and very good Penny worths may be had: but those Rogues
it may be may be stubborn, and not make you as welcome as you made them, the
you had old Hodg with you to fiddle them into a good Humor. But rather than
you should want a good Piece of Wood, what think you if we sent a Piece of
Tyburn Tree, or a Piece of the Pillory I stood upon in ^our time? Or if that
will not do, what think you of a Piece of your Father's Scaffold, or of Sir
John Fenwick's? Come, come, if you cannot meet with what you would, you must
take what you can. If you would send Scotch Robin, he might as easily rob some
Church or other for the Good of yours or his own Soul, as he cheated Madam
Wilkinson of her Books. If you once get to Rome, you may be furnished with
Crosses enough: but where you will find a Crown, God knows, unless it be one of
Thorns, and there you may meet with good Store.

It may be honest Robin may be afraid to steal; then I think you may send him
to beg a Piece ^^ this Cross you make such a Stir about: I could be content you
had a House full of Crosses, so we were certainly shear'd clear of you, and
your Villains. But what need you make such a Stir for a little Cross, when you
have my old Landlady so near you? If that good Lady has not been a great Cross
to you, the Devil's in the Dice: but in my poor Judgment you had more need get
clear of these Articles if you can, and get a good Name if possible, than go
whining about for a lowzy Cross. I have offered you my Thoughts upon the
matter; and if you cannot be satisfied but you must have a Cross, I have told
you the way: you may do what you please; and if all I have said will not do,
then I pray write to honest Robin, who may find you out some Scots Trick or
another, that may do your Business more effectually: but if the Villain should
not be as good at stealing as he has been at lying, cheating, and plotting,
then he that broke up your Brother's Closet and yours, may have a good Hand at
breaking up a Church or so for your Service; I pray, Sir, do not let him lie
here, for certainly his Hand will be out of use: the Rogue has got a good
Estate by these Courses, therefore I advise you to send for him over, that he
may be an absolute Master of his Trade, there may be many a Penny got; and were
it not for hanging, I believe the Villain could like the Trade better than if
he were to continue in his Secretary's Place, he knows where well enough, and
where he meets with many a hearty Curse.

If my old Landlady wants a female Servant, I can more easily help her than I
can you to your Crucifix: she is a worthy Person I assure you, and a Woman of
an excellent Reputation; she knows how to plant behind the Hangings as well as
you can for your Heart's Blood, and has given as good Proof of her Dexterity in
that Piece of Service upon a Relation of hers, as she has of her Reputation for
many Years last past, notwithstanding the wicked Aspersions thrown upon her,
good Woman. I pray be pleased to admit her into my Gammar Sweetapple's Service;
I believe you are all so much alike in Virtue, Honor and Truth, that it is
pity she should be a Minute from you, tho her quondam Gallant should cry his
Eyes out. Your old Eves-dropper shall attend her, and you may take him as Paper
and Packthred into the Bargain, and the rather because he is a French Man, and
stood behind the Hangings to serve you and your Brother's wicked Designs upon
an honest French Protestant, that applied himself to him and you (not knowing
you to be a Papist) for the Security of the Protestant Interest in France. Now
I rather propose this, because you your self were planted behind the Hangings
or Wainscot with old Coventry and your old Chemist, to hear what passed between
your Brother and my self, when there was some Discourse to be in relation to
your sweet self, and old Kate of Lisbon. What Advantage you got by your
Evesdropping, I know not; if you got any, much good may it do you: but upon the
whole Matter, I think I have made you a pretty Proposal, and should be glad if
it takes, for I would fain have you easy and comfortable in your Company; for
you know the old Proverb, like to like, as the Devil said to the Collier. Now
for all this Piece of Good Will, I desire nothing of you but a Coat the Virgin
Mary made for her Son, which is at present in the Church of St. Martinellus;
for my Coat is very thredbare, and I have been told it is as fresh as when it
was first made: now such a Coat that will never be old, would do my Business,
for I cannot tell when I shall have a new one. When you come to Rome, you will
be ambling from Church to Church; I pray call in there, and beg it for me;
since I have been such a Friend to Rome's Chair and your self, they will not
deny me that Favor, being sensible of the great Value I have for you for the
many gracious Obligations you have laid upon me in particular, as well as upon
this Nation in general, for whose Honor you have fought many a bloody Battle;
but old Hodg swears and damns too by his Treble and Base Viols, that he cannot
tell the Time when, or the Place where you entered upon these noble Adventures,
except it were between a Pair of Sheets with Jenny Roberts, or some of those
noble Fireships that were rigged at White Hall or St. James's: and if by any of
those noble Adventures you did the Nation any Honor, you have met with a
competent Return of our Gratitude, especially since you were so great a
Sufferer by one of them, for whose sake you wear a Me^^^andum to this day, you
know what I mean, and a Word to the Wise is enough.

Now, Sir, I have but one thing more to say, and then you may go and dry the
Clouts whilst my Landlady gets the Welsh Tiler to Bed, and that is this: Does
it not appear as plain as the Sun at noonday, how you have not only in
conjunction with your Brother shamed the Nation, but been also shamed by your
Priests and Rogues, and by your Pope and French King, and your
Passive-Obedience and Non-resistance-Rogues here in England? For the former,
that is your Popish Priests and Jesuits, how were you fooled with their lying
Fables? And had you not been blessed with an Irish Understanding, you might have
seen they were Forgeries and mere Fopperies: they told you of their Houses
being the Houses of Cloe, and their Households the Households of Onesiphorus; but
alas, they were but the Sons of Sodom, and villainous Offspring of cursed
Gomorrah; and take them from their Uncleanness, what they study is nothing but
imposture and Legerdemain. These were the Men you countenanced: Beddingfield
your Jesuit was a Pimp, a Drunkard, a Whoremonger, and a Sodomite; yet you used
to say he was a holy, humble Man. What say you to your Sabran, that was a
Reproach to Sodom, and the Scandal of Gomorrah? or to your trusty Ned Petre,
and his Brother Charles, two notorious Villains, one famous for his Ignorance,
and the other for his Impudence, Drunkenness, and Blasphemy against God and his
Word? What say you to your four ignorant Popish Bishops you procured to be
made? these were your Counselors. As to your Religion, I pray what have your
Popish Crew done for you in your Distress? Nay, how did your old Odescalchi
leave you in the lurch? it is true he told Porter you should have his Prayers;
but if they had been worth a Groat, or half the Money, you must have gone
without them; half the Money would have persuaded him to have given you a
Ma^nday Curse. What Subsidies have you had from St. O^^irs and Liege, and from
your Popish Party? Alas, like Rats, they forsake a falling-House, or a sinking
Ship.

But I pray in the next place, what is become of your mighty Ally, Lewis the
Great? How stands his Friendship with you? What use have you of his Purse and
Assistance against your Enemies? how fares it with your inseparable Interests?
Come, come, tell me plainly, how is the Pension paid, that you and my good
Landlady may chew the Cud comfortably together? If it be no better paid than
mine, you may ^ang your self for ought I know, and no body be the wiser or
better for it. ^^ray how do the Funds hold out? for ours have fallen so short,
that I have lost above three Parts in five of mine, and cannot tell how to help
it for my Life. But I suppose the Purse his most Christian Majesty offered you
the use of in 1675, is not yet drawn dry; if it be, the Lord have mercy upon
you, you have no other way but to try whether the Officers of the Treasury in
France can with old Maple-face fall to the Trade of Book-cutting, and cheat the
French King of a good Sum: for if Begging will not do, Cheating must; and it is
all one between you and the French King, since your Interests are the same. I
pray how is my Landlady's Interest? Is hers and the French King's the same too?
If it be, old Boy, you have no reason to fear but she will get her Living and
yours too, not by the Sweat of her Brows, for that is too mean for an adopted
Daughter of France, but in a ^^^re cleanly way I assure you: be of good Cheer,
Man, for you have two strings to your Bow, two such Interests, your Pug's and
your own; and if the old Villain should at last leave you, we will have him
cursed by Bell, Book and Candle. Yet now I think on it, Pug is somewhat stricken
in Years; therefore I must ^ell you he will sham you off, or play the Rogue
with you and send you upon the ^^^ble, and so good night Nicholas the Leather
weaver. What must we do then? Do you rely upon the Loyalty of your Party here
in England? Come over a little, and behold what a Set of Rogues you depended
upon.

Here is old ^mkin the Hen-groper swears by his Pen, Ink and Paper, he turned
Papist on purpose to betray you, and mimps up his Mouth as if he had acted the
Part of a very honest Fellow: but those that hear him, tho your Enemies, count
him a Villain for his Pains. I see him sometimes, and he mimps up his
Lockrum-Jaws as if he had never been of any Religion in his Life but that of
Mother Church: truly to give the Villain his due, you ought to have hanged him
rather than employed him; he wears the Wages of his Unrighteousness, but you
must thank your self, for he was one of your Household Gods: If you trust him
now, you trust on a broken Reed. And what think you of old Sir John
Greazy-guts, he that had the most comfortable Opportunity of cheating your
Brother and your self? he is in his old Post; but if you should trust in him,
all Mankind must say you are at your last Prayers. Old Stiff Jaws he got into
Preferment with all the Speed he could. And truly there is not one of your old
Friends, but if he can get into a good Place, would in a decent manner cut your
Throat to keep in. Nay, I am confident, Mr. Wind and Stink, the Warden of All
Souls, would help keep you out by the same Power you forced him into that
Employment: That Fellow has given the best account of your Father's Virtues of
any of the Devil's Brokers I know; for he told his Auditory upon May 29th ^696,
that the Virtues of your Father were more resplendent, and did shine forth more
eminently in your Brother than in your Father. Truly I have heard of many of
your Father's good Qualifications, but I could not tell what they were till
this Logger head of a Warden gave us such Information, and directed us to view
the Virtues of your Brother: now you will give me leave to tell you that I was
pretty well acquainted with Old Pious his Virtues; and so by the Pai^s of this
Sermon-spoiling and nonfensical Blockhead of a Warden, we may clearly see the
excellent Virtues of Old Blessed Memory. I pray return the Booby your Thanks,
especially for not blazoning yours into the Bargain, no, nor so much as taking
notice of the great Virtues of the Troop that fix^^ him against all Law in the
Possession of his Place. I understand the Coxcomb quits his Post very often for
hearsay: he is a Debtor to the Jew and the Greek, to the Wise and Unwise, to
the Bond and the Free. When he will be otherwise, I cannot tell: but let him go
like a Blockhead as he is; we can never expect a Horse ^^ s^ite Oats till he
has eat some. He made bold with me, but was laughed at for his Pains; and in
good truth I have learned to despise such Scoundrel Vermin. There are more of
his Stamp; but you may as soon trust the Devil or the Pope as any of them, for
they all bid you farewell, and so they did your Father before you, except a few
that were hanged for his Cause; and so thanks be to God have some for yours,
tho it was a long while first. I hope you have canonized them by this time, for
the Rogues were in earnest to have you home again; and if their Actions had
been suitable to their Words, they might have done Wonders: but now your Cause
is lost here, without the least Hopes of Recovery.

I should have detained you somewhat longer, but the young Cu^ will how I for
his Pap, and I doubt you begin to smell in your Harness: nay Landlady will open
her Mouth if you do not assist her in getting ready his Whittles, that he may
quietly be put into his Crib. But do not break your Heart, for you shall with
all convenient speed consider of what I have here offered to your View; and
what Lines are wanting in this, shall be supplied in my next, which I reckon
will be by Trinity-Term: by that time you will see whether or no you are not
apretty black Spark. I pray recommend to my old Acquaintance the Business you
have given a new Name to; I forget his old one: he was once in Limbo for the
same Cause you are now at St. (...). Le^ (...) be forgo^^ (...) old Mistress
and the young Welsh Gentleman; and let him know that Will. (...) my Landlady's
Page of Honor, if he says true, has told us a formal Story of his Mother
Mrs. Mary Gray: how true or false it is you know best, it is all one to me, I
have nothing to say to the Point, but only shall pray you to instruct him in
his old Uncle's Virtues, that he may be the better able to judge of those that
were in his Grandfather: if you cannot do it your self, I pray send for Mr.
Warden's Worship, and he will tell him what they were, and where they did
shine. And so farewell till you hear from me again.

FINIS.
BOOKS published by Thomas Percival, Author of Ludlow's Letters.
1. REasons humbly ^^ered for the Liberty of Unlicens'd Printing. To which is
subjoined. The just and the Character of Edmund Bohun, the Licenser of the
Press.

2. A Collection of some memorable and weighty Transactions in Parliament, in
the Year 1678; and afterward, In relation to the Impeachment of the Earl of
Danby.

3. A Collection of the Debates and Proceedings in Parliament, 1694, and 1695,
upon the Inquiry into the Late Briberies and Corrupt Practices. 1695.

4. A Supplement to it.

5. A New Year's Gift for Dr. Birch; or a Mirror discovering the diff^rent
Opinions of some Doctors in relation to the present Government, as laid down in
Dr. Birch's Sermon before the Commons, Jan. 3^. 1693/4 Dr. Hayley's Fast-sermon
Dec. 11. 1695. before the Commons; and Mr. Als^p's Thanksgiving-sermon at
Westminster, Sept. 8. 1695.

6. The Rye-house Travestie; or the History of the late Jacobite Plot. In a
Letter to the Bishop of ^^chester.

7. A Tragedy, called The Popish Plot, revived: Detecting the secret League
between the Late (...) James and the French King; the Popish Conspi^acy to
murder his present Majesty K. William; And the wicked Contri^ance for Adultor
(...) the Coin of this Kingdom; With many other Hellish Practices. Dedicated to
Sir Roger L' Estra^ge, the Fellows of St. John's College in Cambridg ((...) and
the rest of the Jacobite Crew.

Wherein is contained (besides sides some general Account of the Popish (...)
Abstract of Dr. ^^tes's Narrative, etc.) the Doctor's Second (...) drew up just
before his Sufferings, with his Letters to K. (...) and some. Great Ministers
both in Church and State, which were (...) made public.


